213 M. Zuccarello et al. (eds.), Cerebral Vasospasm: Neurovascular Events After Subarachnoid Hemorrhage, 
Acta Neurochirurgica Supplementum, Vol. 115, DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1192-5_39, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2013
  Abstract Introduction : Matricellular protein (MCP) is a 
class of nonstructural and secreted extracellular matrix proteins
that exert diverse functions, but its role in vascular 
smooth muscle contraction has not been investigated. 
Material and Methods : First, rat subarachnoid hemorrhage
(SAH) models were produced by endovascular perforation
and examined for tenascin-C (TNC) and osteopontin 
(OPN) induction (representatives of MCPs) in vasospastic 
cerebral arteries using immunostaining. Second, recombinant
TNC (r-TNC), recombinant OPN (r-OPN), or both were 
injected into a cisterna magna in healthy rats, and the effects 
on the diameter of basilar arteries were determined using 
India ink angiography. 
Results : In SAH rats, TNC immunoreactivity was markedly 
induced in the smooth muscle cell layers of spastic cerebral 
arteries on day 1 but not in control animals. The TNC immunoreactivity
decreased on day 3 as vasospasm improved: OPN 
immunoreactivity, on the other hand, was more induced in the 
arterial wall on day 3. r-TNC injections caused prolonged contractions
of rat basilar arteries, which were reversed by r-OPN, 
although r-OPN itself had no effect on the vessel diameter. 
Conclusions : MCPs, including TNC and OPN, may contribute
to the pathophysiology of cerebral vasospasm and 
provide a novel therapeutic approach against it.  
  Keywords   Cerebral vasospasm  •  Extracellular matrix  • 
 Matricellular  protein   •   Subarachnoid  hemorrhage    
   Introduction 
 The term  matricellular proteins  was introduced to explain 
the unusual diversity of functions that were beginning to be 
recognized in proteins such as thrombospondin 1 in 1995 
 [  1  ] , and the number of matricellular proteins is still increasing.
Matricellular proteins are a class of secreted extracellular
matrix (ECM) proteins that exert diverse functions 
through direct binding to cell surface receptors, other matrix 
proteins, and soluble extracellular factors such as growth 
factors and cytokines  [  4  ] . Matricellular proteins do not contribute
directly to the structural organization of the ECM, but 
rather modulate cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions  [  4  ] . 
Their levels are generally low in steady-state condition in 
adult tissues, but they are readily upregulated in conditions 
that activate an in flammatory response  [  2  ] .  Matricellular 
proteins are considered to be key mediators of some 
in flammatory  diseases   [  2  ] . 
 Osteopontin (OPN) and tenascin-C (TNC) are representative
of matricellular proteins. We have already reported that 
recombinant OPN (r-OPN) induced mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) phosphatase 1, an endogenous MAPK 
inhibitor, in the spastic cerebral arteries via binding to  l -arginyl-glycyl-l -aspartate-dependent integrin receptors and prevented
cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(SAH) in rats  [  9  ] . In a clinical setting, in addition, multivariate
analyses demonstrated that higher TNC levels in the cerebrospinal
 fluid were an independent predictor of symptomatic 
cerebral vasospasm occurrence  [  11  ] . Here, we show some 
new  findings, leading to one conclusion: that TNC and OPN 
are new players in cerebral vasospasm after SAH.  
   Materials  and  Methods 
 All procedures were approved by the Animal Ethics Review 
Committee of Mie University and were in accordance with 
the institution’s Guidelines for Animal Experiments. 
      Matricellular Protein: A New Player in Cerebral Vasospasm Following 
Subarachnoid  Hemorrhage       
      Hidenori    Suzuki       ,     Masato    Shiba    ,     Masashi    Fujimoto    ,     Kengo    Kawamura    ,     Mai    Nanpei    ,     Eriko    Tekeuchi    ,     Satoshi    Matsushima    , 
   Kenji    Kanamaru    ,     Kyoko    Imanaka-Yoshida    ,     Toshimichi    Yoshida    ,  and     Waro    Taki        
    H.    Suzuki ,   M.D.,  Ph.D.   (),     M.    Shiba ,   M.D.   ,     M.    Fujimoto ,   M.D.   , 
   K.    Kawamura ,   MS   ,     M.    Nanpei ,   MS   ,     E.    Tekeuchi ,   MS   , 
   S.    Matsushima ,   M.D.,  Ph.D.   ,  and     W.    Taki ,   M.D.,  Ph.D.    
   Department of Neurosurgery ,  Mie University Graduate School of 
Medicine ,    2-174  Edobashi ,   Tsu,  Mie    514-8507 ,   Japan   
 e-mail:   suzuki02@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp   
    K.    Kanamaru ,   M.D.,  Ph.D.    
   Department  of  Neurosurgery ,   Suzuka  Kaisei  Hospital , 
  Suzuka,  Mie ,   Japan    
    K.    Imanaka-Yoshida ,   M.D.,  Ph.D.     and     T.    Yoshida ,   M.D.,  Ph.D.    
   Department of Pathology and Matrix Biology ,  Mie University 
Graduate  School  of  Medicine ,    Tsu,  Mie ,   Japan    
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1885065065)
214 H. Suzuki et al.
   SAH Model and Study Protocol 
 The endovascular perforation model of SAH was produced 
in male adult Sprague–Dawley rats (age 8–9 weeks, 270–
320 g; SLC, Hamamatsu, Japan) as previously described  [  9  ] . 
Each animal was anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection 
of 4% chloral hydrate (10 ml/kg). A sharpened 4-0 
mono filament nylon suture was advanced rostrally into the 
left internal carotid artery from the external carotid artery 
stump to perforate the bifurcation of the left anterior and 
middle cerebral arteries. Blood pressure and blood gas were 
measured via the left femoral artery. Rectal temperature was 
kept at 37°C during surgery. Sham-operated rats underwent 
identical procedures except that the suture was withdrawn 
without puncture. 
 First, 24 rats were randomly divided into either SAH or 
sham groups, sacri ficed after neurobehavioral tests and India 
ink angiography on days 1 and 3, and examined if TNC or 
OPN was induced in post-SAH cerebral arteries using 
immunostaining. 
 Second, phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) vehicle, recombinant
TNC (r-TNC), r-OPN, or r-TNC plus r-OPN were 
injected into a cisterna magna in 66 healthy rats, and the 
effects on the diameter of basilar arteries were determined 
using India ink angiography following neurobehavioral tests 
on days 1–3.  
   Neurobehavioral  Test 
 Neurological impairments were blindly evaluated using two 
methods. Neurological scores (2–18 points) were assessed 
by summing six test scores (spontaneous activity; spontaneous
movement of four limbs; forepaw outstretching; climbing
; body proprioception; and response to whisker 
stimulation) as previously described  [  9  ] .  Beam  balance  tests 
investigated the animal’s ability to walk on a narrow wooden 
beam (2.25-cm diameter and columnar) for 60 s: 4 points, 
walking more than 20 cm; 3 points, walking more than 10 cm 
but less than 20 cm; 2 points, walking more than 10 cm but 
falling; 1 point, walking less than 10 cm; and 0 points, falling 
with walking less than 10 cm  [  9  ] . The average score of three 
consecutive trials in a 5-min interval was calculated.  
   Intracisternal  Infusion 
 Using a surgical microscope, the posterior cervical muscles 
were dissected through a suboccipital midline skin incision, 
and the atlanto-occipital membrane was exposed  [  12  ] .  The 
membrane was penetrated by a 27-gauge needle. Sterile PBS 
vehicle (100  m l), mouse r-TNC (2  m g in 100  m l; R&D Systems, 
Minneapolis, MN); mouse r-OPN (3  m g in 100  m l;  EMD 
Chemicals, La Jolla, CA); or 2  m g of r-TNC plus 1 or 3  m g  of 
r-OPN in 100  m l of PBS were infused into a cisterna magna at 
a rate of 100  m l/min irrespective of the animal’s body weight. 
The needle was removed 10 min after an infusion, and the 
pore was quickly plugged with oxidized cellulose. 
   India  Ink  Angiography 
 Gelatin-India ink solution was made by dissolving gelatin 
powder (7 g) in 100 ml PBS and mixing with 100 ml India 
ink (Kuretake Co., Nara, Japan)  [  9  ] . The ascending aorta was 
cannulated with a blunted 16-gauge needle attached to 
 flexible plastic tubing, which was connected to a pressure 
transducer (Nihon Kohden Co., Tokyo, Japan) and a syringe 
on an automatic infusion pump. After an incision was made 
in the right atrium to allow for the out flow of perfusion solutions
, 100 ml of PBS, 15 min of 10% formalin, and 10 min of 
3.5% gelatin-India ink solution were infused through the 
closed circuit. All perfusates were passed through a 0.2- m m 
pore size  filter and delivered at 60–80 mmHg  [  9  ] .  The  rat 
was refrigerated at 4°C for 24 h to allow gelatin solidi fication. 
The brains were harvested and high-resolution pictures of 
the circle of Willis and basilar arteries were taken with a 
scale before and after the removal of a subarachnoid clot. 
The brain was stored in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 
immunohistochemistry. 
 An experienced person who was unaware of the treatment 
groups measured the smallest lumen diameter within each 
vascular segment of intracranial cerebral arteries (sphenoidal 
segment of the middle cerebral artery, precommunicating 
segment of the anterior cerebral artery, intradural internal 
carotid artery, and basilar artery) three times using Image J 
software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) and 
determined a mean value per segment.  
   Immunohistochemistry 
 Immunohistochemistry on formalin- fixed, paraf fin-embedded 
sections was performed as described previously  [  13  ] .  After 
dewaxing and rehydration, the sections were treated with 3% 
hydrogen peroxide for 10 min to block endogenous peroxidase
activities, placed in 1 mmol ethylenediamine tetraacetic 
acid (pH 8.0), and heated in an autoclave at 121°C for 1 min. 
The sections were then blocked with 5% goat or horse serum 
and incubated overnight at 4°C with the mouse monoclonal 
anti-OPN (1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, 
CA) and mouse monoclonal anti-TNC (1  m g/ml,  Immuno-
( 8.0.0.2542.1278637274 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
215 Matricellular Protein: A New Player in Cerebral Vasospasm Following Subarachnoid Hemorrhage 
Biological Laboratories, Takasaki, Japan) antibodies. They 
were subsequently incubated with biotinylated antimouse 
immunoglobulin (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) for 
30 min and then with an avidin-biotin complex for 30 min at 
room temperature. Color reactions were developed in diaminobenzidine
/hydrogen peroxide solution, and the sections 
were counterstained with hematoxylin solution for light 
microscopic examination. Negative controls consisted of 
serial sections incubated with buffer alone instead of the primary
antibodies.  
   Statistics 
 Neurological and beam balance scores were expressed as 
median plus or minus the 25th–75th percentiles and were 
analyzed using Mann–Whitney  U  tests or Kruskal–Wallis 
tests, followed by Steel–Dwass multiple comparisons. Other 
values were expressed as mean plus or minus standard deviation
, and unpaired  t  tests and one-way analysis of variance 
with Tukey-Kramer post hoc tests were used as appropriate. 
We considered  p  < 0.05  signi ficant.   
   Results 
   Induction of TNC and OPN in Rat Cerebral 
Arteries After SAH 
 Three SAH rats and no sham-operated rats died before euthanasia.
The  final number of animals in the 1- and 3-day SAH 
groups therefore was 5 and 4, respectively, and that in the 
sham-operated rats was 6 in both 1- and 3-day groups. There 
were no signi ficant differences in physiological parameters 
between SAH and sham-operated rats at any time point or 
within the groups over time. The sham-operated rats showed 
no vasospasm, while signi ficant vasospasm occurred in all 
cerebral arteries, including the intradural internal carotid 
arteries in the SAH rats on day 1, associated with neurobehavioral
impairments, and began to improve on day 3. On 
day 1, when vasospasm was the most prominent, marked 
induction of TNC immunoreactivity was noted, especially in 
the smooth muscle cell layers of cerebral arteries in the SAH 
rats (Fig.  1 ). The TNC immunoreactivity decreased on day 3 
as vasospasm improved. On the other hand, OPN immunoreactivity
was detectable in the adventitia but was less apparent 
in the smooth muscle cell layers of cerebral arteries in the 
SAH rats on day 1; OPN immunoreactivity was more markedly
induced throughout the vascular wall on day 3, when 
vasospasm was improved (Fig.  1 ). Neither TNC nor OPN 
was induced in the sham-operated rats.   
   Effects of r-TNC on Basilar Arteries in Rats 
 A cisternal injection of r-TNC caused no mortality and neurobehavioral
impairments, but induced signi ficant contraction
of basilar arteries (Fig.  2a ). The contraction continued 
for 48 h compared with the PBS-injected rats (Fig.  2b ).   
   Effects of r-OPN on r-TNC-Induced Contraction 
of Basilar Arteries in Rats 
 A cisternal injection of r-OPN had no effect on the diameter 
of basilar arteries (Fig.  3 ). However, r-OPN reversed r-TNC-
induced contraction of basilar arteries in a dose-dependent 
manner (Fig.  3 ).    
TNC
OPN
Sham 24 h
SAH
72 h
  Fig.  1     Immunohistochemistry  for 
tenascin-C ( TNC ) and osteopontin 
( OPN ) in the intradural internal 
carotid artery at 24 and 72 h after 
subarachnoid hemorrhage ( SAH ) 
in rats.  Sham  sham-operated rats. 
Black stains  depict India ink 
because specimens were harvested 
after  India  ink  angiography       
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.927265383)
216 H. Suzuki et al.
PBS
p< 0.001
p< 0.01
500
a
b
PBS
PBS
r-TNC 2 µg
450
400 Diameter (µm) 350
300
250
200
24 h 48 h
Post-injection
72 h
r-TNC 2 µg
r-TNC 2 µg
  Fig.  2     Effects of a cisternal 
injection of 2  m g of recombinant 
tenascin-C ( r-TNC ) on the 
diameter of basilar arteries in rats. 
( a ) Representative India ink 
angiograms; ( b ) vessel diameter 
of basilar arteries at 24–72 h after 
a cisternal injection of r-TNC or 
phosphate-buffered saline ( PBS ) 
vehicle.  Arrow  basilar artery;  n  = 6 
per group; data, mean ± standard 
deviation;  p  values, unpaired  t
tests between r-TNC- and 
PBS-injected  rats       
500
P< 0.01
P< 0.01
P< 0.01
P< 0.05
PBS r-TNC
2µg
r-TNC
2µg
+
r-OPN
1µg
r-TNC
2µg
+
r-OPN
3µg
r-OPN
3µg
450
Diameter (µm) 400
350
300
250
200
  Fig.  3     Effects of a cisternal 
injection of recombinant 
osteopontin ( r-OPN ; 1 or 3  m g)  on 
recombinant tenascin-C ( r-TNC )-
induced contraction of rat basilar 
arteries at 24 h postinjection.  PBS
phosphate-buffered saline vehicle; 
n  = 6 per group; data, mean ± standard
deviation;  p  values, one-way 
analysis of variance with 
Tukey-Kramer  post  hoc  tests       
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1697793311)
217 Matricellular Protein: A New Player in Cerebral Vasospasm Following Subarachnoid Hemorrhage 
   Discussion 
 The components of ECM include basic structural proteins 
such as collagen and elastin and specialized proteins such as 
 fibronectin, proteoglycans, and matricellular proteins. A few 
studies have focused on the relationships between basic 
structural ECM proteins and vasospasm  [  6  ] ,  but  matricellular
proteins have not been investigated in the context of cerebral
vasospasm. The biological functions of matricellular 
proteins are highly variable and often seemingly contradictory
, depending on the biological scenario surrounding its 
induction   [  8  ] . However, in our recent studies, r-OPN has 
consistently been found to have protective effects on post-
SAH early brain injury and vasospasm  [  8, 9  ] .  On  the  other 
hand, clinical studies demonstrated that TNC, another matricellular
protein, was induced in SAH patients with symptomatic
vasospasm  [  11  ] . This study furthermore demonstrated 
that SAH induced TNC in the cerebral arterial wall associated
with the development of vasospasm, while OPN was 
induced in the artery wall associated with the resolution of 
vasospasm. A cisternal injection of r-TNC caused prolonged 
contractions of rat basilar arteries, while r-OPN prevented 
r-TNC-induced arterial contraction. These  findings suggest 
that TNC as well as OPN are important players in the 
pathophysiology of post-SAH vasospasm. 
 A previous study reported that r-OPN inactivated MAPK, 
a potential  final common pathway for the signaling transduction
during cerebral vasospasm  [  10  ] ,  and  therefore  prevented 
vasospasm after SAH, although OPN can also inhibit 
proin flammatory reactions and protein kinase C activation, 
other potential mediators of vasospasm  [  9  ] .  In  regard  to 
TNC, however, the mechanisms to induce vasospasm have 
not been investigated. Therefore, the mechanisms of how 
OPN antagonizes TNC’s effect also remain unclear; one possibility
is that OPN may inhibit TNC’s binding to its receptor 
competitively because they share some receptors  [  5, 14  ] . 
Reportedly, TNC can activate phospholipase C, protein 
kinase C, calcium/calmodulin kinase, MAPK, and some 
growth factor receptors; upregulate proin flammatory cytokines
and endothelin receptor type A; and induce cell apoptosis
  [  5  ] , all of which potentially cause cerebral vasospasm 
 [  10  ] . As TNC activates MAPK-dependent and RhoA-
dependent pathways, both of which also induce vasospasm, 
and is induced via either pathway at the transcriptional level 
in smooth muscle cells  [  3  ] , TNC signaling may positively 
feed back on upregulation of TNC itself, leading to more 
activation of the signaling transduction and the development 
of cerebral vasospasm. TNC and OPN may be ef ficient modulators
of cerebral vasospasm at several different levels. 
 There are many other matricellular proteins known  [  2, 4  ]  ,  
and they are also potentially involved in the pathophysiology 
of cerebral vasospasm because most matricellular proteins are 
known to affect potential mediators of vasospasm. For example
, thrombospondin 1 inhibits nitric oxide pathways at multiple
levels to control acute vascular tone and blood  flow and 
activates a Src kinase in vascular cells  [  15  ] ;  secreted  protein, 
acid and rich in cysteine (SPARC; also known as osteonectin) 
has  anti-in flammatory  properties   [  2  ] ;  and  connective  tissue 
growth factor (CTGF/CCN2) induces MAPK and 
in flammation and activates some growth factor signaling  [  7  ] .  
   Conclusion 
 Future studies will determine whether matricellular proteins 
other than TNC and OPN are involved in the pathophysiology
of post-SAH vasospasm. In addition, further studies are 
necessary to understand the mechanism of how each matricellular
protein orchestrates various phases of vasospasm 
and to de fine the therapeutic potential of these matricellular 
proteins  in  post-SAH  vasospasm.      
  Acknowledgements   We thank Chiduru Yamamoto (Department of 
Neurosurgery, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine) for technical
assistance. This work was supported in part by a grant-in-aid for 
scienti fic research from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science 
(22591584) and Mie Society for the Promotion of Medical Research to 
Dr. Suzuki. 
  Con flicts  of  Interest  Statement     We declare that we have no con flict of 
interest.  
   References 
     1.     Bornstein P (1995) Diversity of function is inherent in matricellular
proteins: an appraisal of thrombospondin I. J Cell Biol 
130:503–506  
     2.     Chiodoni C, Colombo MP, Sangaletti S (2010) Matricellular proteins
: from homeostasis to in flammation, cancer, and metastasis. 
Cancer Metastasis Rev 29:295–307  
    3.     Chiquet M, Gelman L, Lutz R, Maier S (2009) From mechanotransduction
to extracellular matrix gene expression in  fibroblasts. 
Biochim Biophys Acta 1793:911–920  
     4.     Matsui Y, Morimoto J, Uede T (2010) Role of matricellular proteins
in cardiac tissue remodeling after myocardial infarction. 
World J Biol Chem 1:69–80  
     5.     Midwood KS, Orend G (2009) The role of tenascin-C in tissue 
injury and tumorigenesis. J Cell Commun Signal 3:287–310  
     6.     Nakamura S, Tsubokawa T, Yoshida K, Hirasawa T, Nakano M 
(1992) Appearance of collagen  fibers in the cerebral vascular wall 
following subarachnoid hemorrhage. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo) 
32:877–882  
     7.     Shi-Wen X, Leask A, Abraham D (2008) Regulation and function 
of connective tissue growth factor/CCN2 in tissue repair, scarring 
and  fibrosis. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 19:133–144  
     8.     Suzuki H, Ayer R, Sugawara T, Chen W, Sozen T, Hasegawa Y, 
Kanamaru K, Zhang JH (2010) Protective effects of recombinant 
( 8.0.0.2542.1346421420 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
218 H. Suzuki et al.
osteopontin on early brain injury after subarachnoid hemorrhage in 
rats. Crit Care Med 38:612–618  
     9.     Suzuki H, Hasegawa Y, Chen W, Kanamaru K, Zhang JH (2010) 
Recombinant osteopontin in cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid
hemorrhage. Ann Neurol 68:650–660  
    10.     Suzuki H, Hasegawa Y, Kanamaru K, Zhang JH (2011) Mitogenactivated
protein kinases in cerebral vasospasm after subarachnoid 
hemorrhage: a review. Acta Neurochir Suppl 110:133–139  
    11.     Suzuki H, Kanamaru K, Shiba M, Fujimoto M, Imanaka-Yoshida 
K, Yoshida T, Taki W (2011) Cerebrospinal  fluid tenascin-C in 
cerebral vasospasm after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. 
J Neurosurg Anesthesiol 23:310–317  
    12.     Suzuki H, Kanamaru K, Tsunoda H, Inada H, Kuroki M, Sun H, 
Waga S, Tanaka T (1999) Heme oxygenase-1 gene induction as an 
intrinsic regulation against delayed cerebral vasospasm in rats. 
J Clin Invest 104:59–66  
    13.     Toma N, Imanaka-Yoshida K, Takeuchi T, Matsushima S, Iwata H, 
Yoshida T, Taki W (2005) Tenascin-C-coated platinum coils for 
acceleration of organization of cavities and reduction of lumen size 
in a rat aneurysm model. J Neurosurg 103:681–686  
    14.     Uede T (2011) Osteopontin, intrinsic tissue regulator of intractable 
in flammatory diseases. Pathol Int 61:265–280  
    15.     Yao M, Roberts DD, Isenberg JS (2011) Thrombospondin-1 inhibition
of vascular smooth muscle cell responses occurs via modulation
of both cAMP and cGMP. Pharmacol Res 63:13–22    
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
