Microvascular Research 97 (2015) 19–24

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Microvascular Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ymvre

Short Communication

Workﬂow for automated quantiﬁcation of cerebromicrovascular
gelatinase activity
Olli S. Mattila a,⁎,1, Ville Rantanen b,1, Jani Saksi a, Daniel Strbian c, Tero Pikkarainen a,
Sampsa Hautaniemi b, Perttu J. Lindsberg a,c
a
b
c

Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, and Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Research Programs Unit, Genome-Scale Biology, Institute of Biomedicine, Biochemistry and Developmental Biology, University of Helsinki, Finland
Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Accepted 6 August 2014
Available online 19 September 2014
Keywords:
Bioinformatics
Automated analysis
Image analysis
Gelatinases
Experimental stroke

a b s t r a c t
The gelatinase enzymes, matrix metalloproteinases -2 and -9, are central mediators of blood–brain barrier
disruption, actively studied in experimental models of neurological disease. Staining with in situ zymography
(ISZ) allows visualization of gelatinase activity directly in brain tissue sections. However, quantifying
microvascular gelatinase activity from ISZ-images is challenging and time consuming, as surrounding cell types
often show signiﬁcant confounding activity. We describe validation and performance of a workﬂow for
automated image analysis of cerebromicrovascular gelatinase activity, now released for open-access use. In
comparison to manual analysis, the automated workﬂow showed superior accuracy, was faster to execute and
allows for more detailed analysis of heterogeneity in the microvasculature. We further suggest recommendations
for quantifying and reporting this type of activity in experimental studies, focusing on ischemic stroke.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Matrix metalloproteinase enzymes (MMPs) are zinc-dependent
endopeptidases with central physiological proteolytic functions
(Rosenberg, 2009). The gelatinase enzymes, MMPs -2 and -9, are
capable of degrading vascular basal lamina, and participate in microvascular events such as angiogenesis, leukocyte inﬁltration and ischemia/
reperfusion injury. In the cerebral microvasculature, gelatinase enzymes
are central mediators of blood–brain barrier disruption in pathologies
such as ischemic stroke, cerebral hemorrhage and infections, and
remain a focus of active investigation (Rosenberg, 2009).
Enzymatic activity of gelatinases is regulated at several levels,
including expression, secretion, activation, and inhibition (by Tissue
inhibitors of metalloproteinases, TIMPs) (Ra and Parks, 2007). Because
of this, traditional methods like western blot and immunohistochemistry are largely insufﬁcient in determining the genuine local activity of
gelatinases. Likewise, gel zymography does not give spatial information,
and may not always represent true gelatinase activity, as natural
inhibitors are dissociated from gelatinases by SDS-treatment

⁎ Corresponding author at: Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum
Helsinki, Haartmaninkatu 8, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.
E-mail address: olli.s.mattila@helsinki.ﬁ (O.S. Mattila).
1
Equal contribution.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mvr.2014.08.009
0026-2862/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

(Vandooren et al., 2013). These limitations were addressed by in situ
zymography (ISZ), in which ﬂuorescently overlabeled gelatin is applied
directly on tissue sections. Active gelatinases fragment gelatin, leading
to dequenching of ﬂuorescence in gelatin fragments, and a local
ﬂuorescent signal that correlates with in situ gelatinase activity
(Vandooren et al., 2013).
Previously, we set out to determine differences in cerebromicrovascular
gelatinase activity between treatment groups in an experimental stroke
study (Mattila et al., 2011). Using ISZ, we quickly found that quantiﬁcation of microvascular gelatinase activity using traditional manual
image-analysis was time-consuming, and that in brain tissue, other
active cellular structures confounded precise selection of active microvascular structures, especially perpendicularly cut microvessels. Here,
we describe the validation and performance of our workﬂow for quantiﬁcation of microvascular gelatinase activity, including staining and
visualization of ISZ, and novel software for automated image-analysis
(which we have now made freely available for download at: http://
anduril.org/pub/anima/ISZ_activity/). Our main ﬁnding is that automated image analysis has superior accuracy and speed compared to manual
analysis in this speciﬁc setting of cerebromicrovascular research, and
allows for more detailed investigation of microvascular gelatinase
activity. We further suggest methods to unify quantiﬁcation and
reporting of changes in microvascular gelatinase activity in experimental studies. Most importantly, automated analysis is preferable, and
selection of “gelatinase active” microvessels should be based on deﬁned
levels of ISZ brightness.

20

O.S. Mattila et al. / Microvascular Research 97 (2015) 19–24

Methods
Animal model of focal cerebral ischemia
The experimental procedure has been described previously (Strbian
et al., 2006). Brieﬂy, adult male Wistar rats (n = 5), weighing 290–
340 g, were anesthetized with ketamine (i.p., 50 mg/kg, Ketalar,
Parke-Davis, Detroit, MI, USA) and medetomidine (s.c., 0.5 mg/kg,
Domitor, Orion, Espoo, Finland). Focal ipsilateral cerebral ischemia
was induced with the suture MCAO model. After 1 h of ischemia
and 3 h of reperfusion animals were sacriﬁced with pentobarbital
(60 mg/kg, Mebunat, Orion) and transcardially perfused with ice-cold
saline. Infarction was conﬁrmed with 2,3,5 triphenyltetrazolium chloride
staining as described previously (Strbian et al., 2006). A representative
1 mm coronal brain section was embedded in Tissue-tek (Sakura
Finetek Inc., Tokyo, Japan), snap-frozen with liquid nitrogen and
stored at − 80 °C. 8 µm thick sections were prepared for staining.
All experiments were approved by local authorities (ELLA animal
experiment board, Finland), and conducted in accordance with The
Finnish Act on Animal Experimentation (62/2006).

In situ zymography and immunohistochemistry
For ISZ the brain sections were air-dried for 5 min at room
temperature and washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for
5 min. DQ-gelatin (0.1 mg/ml, EnzChek® gelatinase/collagenase assay
kit, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was applied on the sections and
incubated in a humid chamber for 2 h at 37 °C. Sections were then
rinsed in PBS and dH2O. Control sections were incubated with gelatinase
inhibitors Ilomastate (500 mM, GM6001, Millipore) or TIMP-1 (500 nM,
R&D Biosystems) for 1 h before and during DQ-gelatin incubation, and
reduced ISZ-activity was seen.

After ISZ, sections were stained for detection of neurons (Neuronal
Nucleus, NeuN), astrocytes (Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein, GFAP) or
endothelial cells (von Willebrand Factor, vWF). Primary antibodies
used were: NeuN (A60 Chemicon, 0.5 μg/mL, 1 h), GFAP (G-A-5
Sigma-Aldrich, 1/1000, 1 h) and vWF (rabbit polyclonal Abcam,
19.5 μg/mL, o/n). Alexaﬂuor 594 secondary antibodies were used
(anti-mouse 10 μg/mL or anti-rabbit 5 μg/mL, 30 min, Invitrogen).
Control sections incubated with nonspeciﬁc mouse IgG1 (Dako) or
rabbit IgG (Vector labs) in equivalent concentrations showed no
speciﬁc immunostaining. We mounted sections with Prolong Gold
(Invitrogen).
Digital imaging
Imaging was performed using an Axioplan 2 epiﬂuorescent microscope (Carl Zeiss, Hallbergmoos, Germany) with a 20×-objective. Five
region of interest (ROI) images were acquired from predeﬁned sites
(three cortical and two subcortical) from both hemispheres with an
AxioCam camera, (1300 × 1030 pixels) and Axiovision software
(v3.0.6, Carl Zeiss). Image sets were acquired using constant exposure
times for all samples, and using the Zeiss Vision Image (ZVI) ﬁle format.
A sample image is shown in Fig. 1. For a schematic procedure of sample
preparation and imaging see Fig. 2a.
Automated high-throughput image analysis
We created a novel automated analysis workﬂow (Fig. 2b) for
analyzing microvascular gelatinase activity, which was implemented
using the Anduril workﬂow framework (Ovaska et al., 2010). The
pipeline utilizes Mathworks MATLAB and CRAN R and can be installed
on any modern Ubuntu operating system, and is now available for
free download in the public domain (http://anduril.org/pub/anima/
ISZ_activity/).

Ipsilateral hemisphere

ISZ

vWF

Merge + segmentaon

vWF

Merge + segmentaon

Contralateral hemisphere

ISZ

Fig. 1. Microvascular gelatinase activity in the ipsilateral and contralateral brain hemispheres after 1 h of ischemia and 3 h of reperfusion. ISZ, vWF and merged images are shown, together
with segmentation from the automated analysis workﬂow. Although some longitudinally cut vessels are noticeable in the ISZ image, active perpendicularly cut vessels can only be identiﬁed using the vWF image as reference (white arrows). Only weak microvascular activity was seen in the contralateral hemispheres. The ISZ and imaging protocols were optimized for
microvascular analysis. Scale bars = 50 μm.

O.S. Mattila et al. / Microvascular Research 97 (2015) 19–24

A

21

For comparison, active microvessels were counted manually from
the same images using only the ISZ channel. Only longitudinally cut
microvessels could be identiﬁed reliably. Counting was performed
blinded to sample identity. To validate segmentation of the automated
workﬂow, we compared results with manually outlining all
microvessels from the vWF-channels of the image set (n = 49). The
compared object selections were classiﬁed into two groups based on
location. Matched objects were found in both analyses. Non-matched
objects either matched but at a distance greater than 60 pixels, they
were not found by the automated analysis, or they were found only by
the automated analysis.
Statistics

B

Data are described as mean ± SD. A standard Student's unpaired
t-test was used to compare analysis results between brain hemispheres.
A 2-tailed p-value of b0.05 was considered signiﬁcant. Analyses were
performed using CRAN R and SPSS v.21.
Results
Automated analysis improves accuracy of quantifying cerebromicrovascular
gelatinase activity in experimental ischemic stroke
To demonstrate performance of our automated workﬂow we
compared ISZ-positive microvessels between the ischemic and healthy
hemispheres of Wistar rats that underwent transient focal ischemia.
Manual counting revealed an increased number of ISZ-positive
longitudinally cut microvessels in the ischemic hemispheres, 23.8 ±
9.55 vessels vs. 9.8 ± 5.4 contralaterally (p = 0.021, Fig. 3A).
The automated analysis, taking into account all vWF-positive
microvessels, found a greater difference between hemispheres, with
35.9 ± 9.0% of highly active vessels ipsilaterally vs. 11.8 ± 11.3%
contralaterally (p = 0.007, Fig. 3B). In addition, mean microvascular
ISZ brightness values were signiﬁcantly different between hemispheres:
1.31 ± 0.06 compared to 1.12 ± 0.12 (p = 0.02, Fig. 3B).
Accuracy and speed of analysis

Fig. 2. Structure of the workﬂow including (A) sample preparation, staining procedures
and imaging, followed by (B) automated computerized image analysis. Margination refers
to counting vessel brightness as fold change from background. Grouping information is
combined to the results after analysis so that statistical tests and graph plotting can be
performed.

The workﬂow reads native format image ﬁles using the LOCI
BioFormats [http://www.loci.wisc.edu/software/bio-formats] library
and extracts the ISZ and vWF channels. The vWF signal is subjected to
local background subtraction, and thresholded with Otsu's method
(Otsu, 1975). Large and small objects formed by image noise are ﬁltered
out with area restrictions (40 to 9200 pixel2). The thresholded vWF
mask image is used to deﬁne microvascular objects and their intensity
features are extracted from the ISZ channel. Two mean values are
extracted for data normalization; the intensities of the object and a
20-pixel-wide ring surrounding it. The relative brightness of each object
is then deﬁned as fold-change from immediate background using these
values.
Highly active microvessels were deﬁned as having a relative
brightness of one SD higher than the mean microvascular activity of
the contralateral hemisphere, and results are expressed as percent of
highly active vessels per hemisphere. The workﬂow output ﬁles include
visualizations of segmentation, also overlaid on original vWF and ISZ
channels, and data analysis with graphs and statistical tests. One outlier
image was removed due to unsuccessful staining and segmentation of
the vWF channel which left 49 images for analysis.

In vWF images, 86% of all the manually outlined objects (n = 5269)
matched with automatically segmented objects. During manual
selection, lengthwise cut microvessels were often selected as single
objects although they showed uneven staining. However, automated
analysis selected only the true areas of vWF-staining, fragmenting the
object and leading to smaller, more accurate, areas of selection. These
differences in the accuracy of outlining led to a 68% smaller total
area of selection compared to manual outlining. The widths of the
automatically segmented objects correspond with known microvessel
diameters.
Automated analysis of 49 ISZ + vWF-images took a total of 12 min
(approx. 15 s/image) with a 2.5 GHz Intel Xeon computer, including
all statistics and plot generation. In our experience manual counting
takes 1–2 min per image, depending on rater experience.
Automated quantiﬁcation enables detailed evaluation of microvessel
populations
We found that detailed measurements of microvascular properties
such as gelatinase activity and vessel morphology were not practical
to execute during manual analysis. As a solution for this, we modiﬁed
our workﬂow to register and report individual measurements of all
automatically selected vascular objects (n = 5292). Detailed analysis
of the distribution of microvascular gelatinase activities showed a
clear rightward shift and wider spread in activity histograms of the
ipsilateral hemispheres (Fig. 3C). This demonstrated that ischemia
induced microvascular gelatinase activation is heterogeneous.

22

O.S. Mattila et al. / Microvascular Research 97 (2015) 19–24

A Manual counng

B Automated image analysis
p=0.007

35
30
25
20
15
10

P

5

C

0

Ipsi

Contra

1.4

50
40
30
20
10
0

Ipsi

D

80 Ipsi

Contra

400

1.3
1.2
1.1
1

Ipsi Contra

Ipsi

<7,5 μm
7,5 – 15 μm
>15 μm

300

Number of vessels

Number of vessels

60
40
20
0
80 Contra
60
40
20
0

p=0.02

Mean ISZ acvity of vessels

40

Percent highly acve vessels

ve vessels per 5 images

p=0.021

200
100
0
400

Contra

300
200
100

.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

ISZ acvity of vessels

0

.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

ISZ acvity of vessels

Fig. 3. Results of (A) manual and (B) automated image analyses of microvascular gelatinase activity (n = 5 animals). Importantly, manual counting from ISZ images only allowed
identiﬁcation of longitudinally cut microvessels, limiting measurements to a small fraction of the microvasculature. In comparison, automated analysis identiﬁed 108 ± 36 microvessels
per image. Consequently, automated analysis showed a statistically more signiﬁcant difference between hemisphere in the percent of highly active vessels (p = 0.007). Automated
analysis also allowed measurement of ISZ brightness, which correlates with increased gelatinase activity. (C) Histograms of microvascular gelatinase activity in the ipsi- and contralateral
hemispheres of an exemplary animal demonstrate a shift in activities induced by experimental stroke. Microvessels classiﬁed as highly active are shown in dark gray. Automated
combining of morphological measurements with ISZ activities enables detailed analysis of different vessel classes. (D) Activity histograms of all ipsilateral and all contralateral microvessels
demonstrate vessels classes of different widths show equal distributions of gelatinase activity after experimental stroke (total of n = 5292 analyzed microvessels from 5 animals).

Automated combining of morphological measurements to vessel ISZ
activities allowed further itemized analysis of gelatinase activation. We
divided vascular objects into three size classes based on vessel width
(b7.5 μm, 7.5–15 μm, and N15 μm), measured as the minor axis of an
ellipsoid ﬁtted around the outlined object. In a combined analysis of
all ipsilateral and all contralateral vessels, these three size classes
showed equal distributions of gelatinase activities (Fig. 3D).
Discussion
Molecular staining techniques are a central approach in microvascular
research. Traditionally quantiﬁcation of these samples has relied on
manual evaluation, with parameters created separately for each individual situation. Problematically, the manual approach is arduous for the
researcher, involves variation between observers, and complicates
comparison of results between studies. Automated image analysis
presents as a convenient tool for solving these challenges, and together
with automated microscopy techniques can facilitate high-throughput
analysis of large sample-sets (Dragunow, 2008).
Activation of gelatinase enzymes (MMP-2/MMP-9) is a central
culminating pathway driving blood–brain barrier destruction in
ischemic stroke and several other neuropathologies. Consequently the
majority of studies investigating microvascular gelatinase activity have
centered on brain tissue. ISZ is a powerful tool in this setting, as it
demonstrates true gelatinase activity in the micromilieu of pro-forms
and gelatinase inhibitors. As a drawback, activation of other cell types
interferes with interpretation, and perpendicularly cut microvessels
can be considerably hard to identify without double staining with

vascular markers. Furthermore, it is difﬁcult to consistently deﬁne
what level of brightness entails counting a microvessel as “gelatinase
active”, leading to possible variation and compromised accuracy.
Earlier studies have used various methodologies for quantifying
microvascular ISZ activity. In studies by Sehba et al., microvascular
gelatinase activity was evaluated in rats after subarachnoid hemorrhage
using staining for ISZ and Collagen IV, with positive vessels counted
either manually or with Iplab software (Friedrich et al., 2011; Sehba
et al., 2004, 2007). Wang & Tsirka counted ISZ positive microvessels in
a mouse model of ICH manually, but don't specify whether quantiﬁcation was performed from double stained sections (Wang and Tsirka,
2005). Lee et al. performed the analysis manually from ISZ and CD-31
stained sections in a mouse model of VEGF-induced angiogenesis (Lee
et al., 2009). Finally, Louboutin et al. performed the analysis in a HIV-1
gp120-induced injury model using Image Pro Plus, but don't specify
use of double stained sections, or parameters for counting (Louboutin
et al., 2010). Surprisingly, none of these earlier studies describe what
level of ISZ-brightness deﬁnes an activated microvessel, although the
microvasculature is always heterogeneous, with a wide range of
activities (Fig. 3C).
Here, we describe the validation and performance of our workﬂow
for automated quantiﬁcation of microvascular gelatinase activation,
which addresses earlier limitations in reporting the intensity of
gelatinase activation and deﬁning a vessel as “gelatinase active”.
Compared with earlier approaches, the workﬂow takes into account
brightness of the microvascular objects, allowing the user to report
the intensity of gelatinase activation, and deﬁne what level of ISZ
brightness represents an active microvessel. Importantly, compared to

O.S. Mattila et al. / Microvascular Research 97 (2015) 19–24

manual counting the workﬂow is both rapid and exact, and is always
consistent between samples. The workﬂow has now been made
available for free download in the public domain (http://anduril.org/
pub/anima/ISZ_activity/), allows customization of the analysis, and
can also be used together with other cellular markers (Fig. 4). The
workﬂow takes into account a superior number of individual
microvascular objects, increasing the statistical power of the analysis,
and allowing also for detailed comparison of discrete tissue areas or
selected microvascular populations if needed. Of note, in this type of
analysis it is vital to use consistent parameters in staining and imaging
of all samples to allow for reliable comparison of vessel brightness.
The incubation time of ISZ should also be separately optimized for
each sample set to prevent saturation of the microvascular ISZ
signal in samples with high gelatinase activity. Finally, the workﬂow
generates visualization images that are a veriﬁable record of
microvessel selection.
In conclusion, we suggest the following guidelines for quantifying
microvascular gelatinase activity in future experimental studies:
1) Quantiﬁcation should be performed with automated computerized
methodology to ensure consistent target selection parameters, and
to save resources; time, manpower and even animals.
2) Quantiﬁcation should be performed from tissue sections double
stained with ISZ and an endothelial marker, to ensure capture of
the whole microvasculature.
3) The analysis should include measurements of ISZ brightness together
with suitable normalization, so that the level of microvascular
gelatinase activation can be compared between studies.

A

vWF B

D

GFAP

G

NeuN H

E

23

4) Sufﬁcient detail in describing the methodology and parameters of
quantiﬁcation is needed for independent replication of results by
other researchers.
Disclosures
No disclosures.
Author contributions
O.S.M. performed staining procedures, participated in creating the
image analysis software, performed validation of the software and
drafted the manuscript. V.R. created the image analysis software and
performed its validation. D.S. performed the animal experiments. J.S.
and T.P. optimized the ISZ staining methods. All authors contributed
to planning the study, and edited and reviewed the manuscript for
important intellectual content.
Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the Helsinki Biomedical Graduate
School, The Academy of Finland, the Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, the
Paavo Nurmi Foundation, the Aarne Koskelo Foundation, the Maire
Taponen Foundation, The Helsinki University Central Hospital (EVO
funds) and the EU FP7 project FLUODIAMON (grant agreement no.
201837). We also thank the Biomedicum Imaging Unit Core Facility at
Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki for the use of their
instruments, as well as excellent support and advice. Aysan Durukan,

C

F

I

Fig. 4. Automated image analysis can also be utilized to measure ISZ activity of other cerebral cell types. Cellular marker channels, segmentation results and merged ISZ + marker channels
are shown for microvessels (vWF, A–C), astrocytes (GFAP, D–F) and neurons (NeuN, G–I).

24

O.S. Mattila et al. / Microvascular Research 97 (2015) 19–24

Taru Puhakka and Nancy Lim are thanked for their skillful technical
assistance.

References
Dragunow, M., 2008. High-content analysis in neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9,
779–788.
Friedrich, V., Flores, R., Muller, A., Bi, W., Peerschke, E.I., Sehba, F.A., 2011. Reduction of
neutrophil activity decreases early microvascular injury after subarachnoid haemorrhage. J. Neuroinﬂammation 8, 103.
Lee, C.Z., Xue, Z., Hao, Q., Yang, G.-Y., Young, W.L., 2009. Nitric oxide in vascular endothelial growth factor-induced focal angiogenesis and matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity
in the mouse brain. Stroke 40, 2879–2881.
Louboutin, J.-P., Agrawal, L., Reyes, B.A.S., Van Bockstaele, E.J., Strayer, D.S., 2010. HIV-1
gp120-induced injury to the blood–brain barrier: role of metalloproteinases 2 and
9 and relationship to oxidative stress. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 69, 801–816.
Mattila, O.S., Strbian, D., Saksi, J., Pikkarainen, T.O., Rantanen, V., Tatlisumak, T., Lindsberg,
P.J., 2011. Cerebral mast cells mediate blood–brain barrier disruption in acute
experimental ischemic stroke through perivascular gelatinase activation. Stroke 42,
3600–3605.
Otsu, N., 1975. A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. Automatica. 9,
62–66.

Ovaska, K., Laakso, M., Haapa-Paananen, S., Louhimo, R., Chen, P., Aittomäki, V., Valo, E.,
Núñez-Fontarnau, J., Rantanen, V., Karinen, S., Nousiainen, K., Lahesmaa-Korpinen,
A.-M., Miettinen, M., Saarinen, L., Kohonen, P., Wu, J., Westermarck, J., Hautaniemi,
S., 2010. Large-scale data integration framework provides a comprehensive view on
glioblastoma multiforme. Genome Med. 2, 65.
Ra, H.-J., Parks, W.C., 2007. Control of matrix metalloproteinase catalytic activity. Matrix
Biol. 26, 587–596.
Rosenberg, G.A., 2009. Matrix metalloproteinases and their multiple roles in neurodegenerative diseases. Lancet Neurol. 8, 205–216.
Sehba, F.A., Mostafa, G., Knopman, J., Friedrich, V., Bederson, J.B., 2004. Acute alterations in
microvascular basal lamina after subarachnoid hemorrhage. J. Neurosurg. 101,
633–640.
Sehba, F.A., Friedrich, V., Makonnen, G., Bederson, J.B., 2007. Acute cerebral vascular injury
after subarachnoid hemorrhage and its prevention by administration of a nitric oxide
donor. J. Neurosurg. 106, 321–329.
Strbian, D., Karjalainen-Lindsberg, M.-L., Tatlisumak, T., Lindsberg, P.J., 2006. Cerebral
mast cells regulate early ischemic brain swelling and neutrophil accumulation. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 26, 605–612.
Vandooren, J., Geurts, N., Martens, E., Van den Steen, P.E., Opdenakker, G., 2013.
Zymography methods for visualizing hydrolytic enzymes. Nat. Methods 10,
211–220.
Wang, J., Tsirka, S.E., 2005. Neuroprotection by inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases in
a mouse model of intracerebral haemorrhage. Brain 128, 1622–1633.

