Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 454 (2014) 65–70

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc

Perillaldehyde attenuates cerebral ischemia–reperfusion
injury-triggered overexpression of inﬂammatory cytokines
via modulating Akt/JNK pathway in the rat brain cortex
Lixing Xu, Yuebi Li, Qiang Fu ⇑, Shiping Ma ⇑
Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009, PR China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 1 October 2014
Available online 14 October 2014
Keywords:
Perillaldehyde
Ischaemia–reperfusion injury
Inﬂammatory cytokines
Akt
JNK
Apoptotic cell death

a b s t r a c t
Perillaldehyde (PAH), one of the major oil components in Perilla frutescens, has anti-inﬂammatory effects.
Few studies have examined the neuroprotective effect of PAH on stroke. So the aim of our study is to
investigate the effect of PAH on ischemia–reperfusion-induced injury in the rat brain cortex. Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model was selected to make cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury. Rats
were assigned randomly to groups of sham, MCAO, and two treatment groups by PAH at 36.0,
72.0 mg/kg. Disease model was set up after intragastrically (i.g.) administering for 7 consecutive days.
The neurological deﬁcit, the cerebral infarct size, biochemical parameters and the relative mRNA and protein levels were examined. The results showed that the NO level, the iNOS activity, the neurological deficit scores, the cerebral infarct size and the expression of inﬂammatory cytokines including interleukin
(IL)-1b, interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a were signiﬁcantly decreased by PAH treatment. PAH also increased the Phospho-Akt level and decrease the Phospho-JNK level by Western blot
analysis. Meanwhile, the PAH groups exhibited a dramatically decrease of apoptosis-related mRNA
expression such as Bax and caspase-3. Our ﬁndings shown that PAH attenuates cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in the rat brain cortex, and suggest its neuroprotective effect is relate to regulating the
inﬂammatory response through Akt /JNK pathway. The activation of this signalling pathway eventually
inhibits apoptotic cell death induced by cerebral ischemia–reperfusion.
Ó 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
All therapies for cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury have
failed, leaving stroke as a leading cause of death, disability and
waste of medical resources. Stroke is a terrifying ordeal that always
despoils people of independent living by damaging language and
movement without warning [1]. It caused by thrombotic or
embolic occlusion and following recover of blood ﬂow, which
results in excitotoxicity, ionic imbalance, oxidative stress, inﬂammation and apoptosis. Inﬂammation is a key regulatory factor in
pathological states and it usually contributes to blood brain barrier
(BBB) disruption, mitochondria dysfunction and cytoskeleton damaged [2,3]. After cerebral ischemia–reperfusion, inﬂammatory
response, including the rapid activation of resident microglial cells
and inﬁltration of neutrophils and macrophages into the injured
⇑ Corresponding authors at: Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia
Medica, China Pharmaceutical University, Tongjiaxiang 24, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210009,
PR China. Fax: +86 25 3271505 (S. Ma).
E-mail addresses: fuqiang@cpu.edu.cn (Q. Fu), spma@cpu.edu.cn (S. Ma).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.10.025
0006-291X/Ó 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

parenchyma, is involved in brain injury [4]. Microglia, as effector
cells in brain damage and repair, are associated with central nervous system (CNS) pathology [5]. Microglial activation also occurs
rapidly after targeted disruption of the BBB, followed by producing
of cytokines containing IL-1b, IL-6 and TNF-a [6,7]. Therefore, we
may put forward a hypothesis that controlling the expression of
inﬂammatory factor might be a strategy for advancing stroke therapy.c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), a serine/threonine protein
kinase that phosphorylates c-Jun, is an available regulatory factor
of inﬂammation [8]. Activation of PI3K-Akt signaling pathway
can downregulate JNK activity through regulating the balance
between upstream kinases and phosphatases, which plays a critical
role in maintaining neurons structure integrity and advancing survival of neuronal cell [9,10]. The prevailing belief that cerebral
ischemia triggers an intricate cascade of signaling pathway at
molecular and cellular levels, but the regulation of inﬂammation
by PI3K-Akt and JNK pathway is extremely important in the central
nervous system (CNS) and in the periphery [11].
Perillaldehyde (PAH) is a major component in the essential
oil extracted from perilla Herba and has been found exhibiting

66

L. Xu et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 454 (2014) 65–70

vasodilative effect and anti-inﬂammatory effects [12,13]. In consideration of previous studies, we thought that PAH might be a feasible or practicable attempt to treat stroke, which associates with
inﬂammatory mechanisms more or less. So the aim of our study
is to evaluate the neuroprotective effects of PAH in rat with acute
ischaemic stroke and to explore the relationship between immunoinﬂammatory variables and acute neurological deﬁcits.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Preparation of drugs
Perillaldehyde, purchased from Changsha Kaimei Essence &
Flavor Co., Ltd. (Hunan, PR China), was diluted in 0.18% and
0.36% with 0.03% sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC-Na).
2.2. Experiment animals
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (weighing 230–270 g) were purchased from Comparative Medicine Centre of Yangzhou University
(Yangzhou, China). Rats were kept in cages and maintained under
standard housing conditions with a12-h light/12-h dark cycle, the
room temperature was kept at 25 ± 1 °C and the humidity was
maintained at 60–65%. All rats were provided with water and standard chow ad lib for the whole experiment procedure. All the
experiments and animal care were performed strictly in accordance with the Provision and General Recommendation of Chinese
Experimental Animals Administration Legislation and were
approved by the Science and Technology Department of Jiangsu
Province.
2.3. MCAO
After acclimatization to the environment for 7 days, sixty animals were randomly divided into 4 groups: sham- operated control
(sham), MCAO and PAH groups at low (18 mg/kg) and high (36 mg/
kg) dosages. The ﬁrst two groups were intragastrically (i.g.) administered with CMC-Na for 7 days, while the other groups were
administered with drugs.
After drug delivery, middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
was made using the intraluminal suture technique with reference
to origin of the right middle cerebral artery by Longa. Brieﬂy, rats
were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injection of chloral hydrate
(350 mg/kg, i.p.). The right common carotid artery (CCA), external
carotid artery (ECA) and internal carotid artery (ICA) were exposed
through a short incision. CCA and ECA were ligated and ICA was
temporarily clamped by using bulldog clamp. To occlude the middle cerebral artery, a 3–0 monoﬁlament nylon suture with the tip
rounded was inserted into the external carotid artery and
advanced into the internal carotid artery approximately 18–
20 mm beyond the carotid bifurcation until mild resistance was
felt. Rectal temperature was maintained at 36.6–37.5 °C with a
heating blanket throughout the procedure. Rats were subjected
to 2 h of focal ischemia and the monoﬁlament nylon suture was
pulled out gently to accomplish 24 h reperfusion thereafter.

2.5. Measurement of infarct volume and determination of infarction
rate
Three rats in each group were decapitated for TTC staining. The
fresh brains were stored immediately at 20 °C for 15 min after
removal of cerebellum and then were cut into 2-mm thick coronal
slices. Slices were placed into a 2% solution of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) and then warmed in a thermostatic Water
Bath at 37 °C for 30 min. Slices treated with paraformaldehyde (4%)
were refrigerated overnight at 4 °C. The measured slices were photographed, and the area of ischemic brain injury was calculated by
a blinded observer with Image J software, expressed as infarct area
percentage (%).
2.6. ELISA detection of IL-1b, TNF-a and IL-6 concentrations
Three rat serums in each group were taken immediately after
neurobehavioral deﬁcit evaluation. The concentration of cytokines
was determined using commercially available ELISA assays, following the instructions supplied by the manufacturer (R&D, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and quantiﬁed by a microplate reader (450 nm). The
results were shown as picograms per milliliter (pg/ml).
2.7. Oxidative stress-related biochemical index measurement
Eight rat brain cortexes in each group were homogenized in 10%
physiological saline and then centrifuged, and then the supernatants were examined as soon as possible to determine the levels
of Nitric oxide (NO) and the activities of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) using corresponding test kits (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, Nanjing, China).
2.8. Western blot analysis
Three rat brain cortexes in each group were thawed on ice,
weighed rapidly and homogenized in ice-cold tissue lysis buffer
(w:v 1:5). The lysed tissue was centrifuged after 30 min pyrolysis
at 12,000 r for 20 min at 4 °C. The total protein concentration of
the supernatant was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
protein assay kit (Beyotime, Haimen, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After heating at 100 °C for 5 min, the proteins were separated on SDS–PAGE gels and transferred to the
polyvinylidenediﬂuoride (PVDF) membranes (Bio-Rad, Laboratories, Inc., California) for immune blotting. The membrane was then
blocked with blocking solution (5% skimmed milk) at room temperature for 2 h and followed by an overnight incubation at 4 °C
with anti-Akt, Phospho-Akt, Phospho-JNK monoclonal antibodies
(1:1000 dilution, Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA). After wash
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)-Tween, the membranes were
incubated with secondary antibodies (1:5000 dilution, Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA), followed by three washing in TBS-T.
Immunoreactivity was detected with enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (Beyotime, Haimen, China) and visualized
on X-ray ﬁlm (Kodak, Shanghai, China). b-actin (1: 1000; Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA) was used as control.
2.9. Real-time quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (Q-PCR)

2.4. Neurobehavioral deﬁcit evaluation
Eight rats in each group were quantiﬁed at 1 h and 24 h after
reperfusion by using a ﬁve-point scale: 0, no (normal); 1, slight (fail
to ﬂex left forepaw fully); 2, moderate (counterclockwise circling);
3, severe (lean to the left); and 4, very serious neurobehavioral deficit (unconsciousness, fail to walk autonomously and response to
noxious stimulus) [14].

Eight rat brain cortexes in each group were used for Q-PCR analysis. Total RNA was extracted from the thawed brain cortex using
the RNAiso Reagent kit (Vazyme Biotech, Nanjing, China). cDNA
was generated by reverse transcription of total RNA using reverse
transcription kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China). The sequences
of forward and reverse oligo nucleotide primers were designed
using Primer 5 software. The primers used were the following:

L. Xu et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 454 (2014) 65–70

Bax primer, sense: 50 -CGA TGA ACT GGA CAA CAA CAT GGA G-30 ,
antisense: 50 -GCA AAG TAG AAA AGG GCA ACC-30 ; caspase-3 primer, sense: 50 - ACA TCC TCA CTC GTG TTA ACC GGA A-30 , antisense:
50 -CAC GGG ATC TGT TTC TTT GC-30 ; b-actin primer, sense: 50 -ACC
ACC ACA GCT GAG AGG GAA ATC G-30 , antisense: 50 -TTC TCC AGG
GAG GAA GAG G-30 . Quantitative real-time PCR was performed on
CFX96 System (Bio-Rad, USA) by using AceQTMqPCR SYBR Green
Master Mix (Vazyme Biotech, Nanjing, China). The PCR cycle conditions were 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 40 cycles of 10 s at 95 °C
and 30 s at 55 °C and the ampliﬁcation speciﬁcity was evaluated
with a melting curve analysis.

2.10. Statistical analysis
All results presented in the paper were shown as the
mean ± S.D. and subject to a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s test for inter-group comparisons.
For all the analyses used by the GraphPad Prism 5.0 software statistical package (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), a probability value less than 0.05 was considered statistically
signiﬁcant.

3. Results

67

treated with PAH were all signiﬁcantly decreased compared to
MCAO.
3.2. Effect of PAH on the rate of cerebral infarction
According to the results of TTC staining, and PAH signiﬁcantly
decreased the infarct volume. It indicated that PAH could relief
the cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury (Fig. 1B and C).
3.3. Effects of PAH on serum pro-inﬂammatory cytokine levels
As shown in Fig. 2A–C, the serum levels of IL-b, IL-6 and
TNF-ain MCAO group signiﬁcantly increased compared to sham.
However, pretreatment with PAH (18, 36 mg/kg) signiﬁcantly
attenuated ischemia/reperfusion injury-induced upregulation of
pro-inﬂammatory cytokine levels.
3.4. Regulation effect of PAH on oxidative stress
The content of NO was signiﬁcantly increased in MCAO group
compared to the sham, while signiﬁcantly decreased in the PAH
treatment groups compared to MCAO group (Fig. 2D). PAH also
reverse the abnormal increase of iNOS activity by ischemia–reperfusion (Fig. 2E).

3.1. Effect of PAH on neurological scores
3.5. Effect of PAH on Phospho-Akt level
The neurologic deﬁcit scores 1 h and 24 h after reperfusion
were presented in Fig. 1A. As results shown, no deﬁcits were
observed in the sham. Compared to the sham, the scores of MCAO
group were signiﬁcantly increased. While the scores in groups

The effects of PAH on activating of Akt were determined by
Western blot analysis (Fig. 3A). Cerebral ischemia/reperfusion signiﬁcantly decreased Akt phosphorylation in ischemic brain. Rats

Fig. 1. (A) PAH obviously decreased the neurologic deﬁcit scores 1 h and 24 h after reperfusion. (B) The infarct area were shown as white color, and groups treated PAH
signiﬁcantly reduced the infarct volume. (C) The area percentage of cerebral infarction in the groups treated with PAH decreased signiﬁcantly by Image J software. Data were
expressed as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.), n P 3, #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 vs. sham group, ⁄p < 0.05, ⁄⁄p < 0.01 vs. I/R group.

68

L. Xu et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 454 (2014) 65–70

Fig. 2. Effects of PAH treatment on serum IL-1b (A), IL-6 (B) and TNF-a (C) levels in LPS-induced mice. According to the bar graph, PAH could inhibit abnormal expression of
inﬂammatory factor induced by ischemia–reperfusion. (D) NO level in PAH groups dramatically decreased by NO assay kit detecting. (E) PAH could signiﬁcantly reverse iNOS
activity in the cortex by iNOS assay kit detecting. Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.), n P 3, #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 vs. sham group, ⁄p < 0.05, ⁄⁄p < 0.01 vs.
I/R group.

Fig. 3. The Western blot analysis shown that p-Akt (A) and p-JNK (B) protein levels signiﬁcantly decreased in PAH groups. The Q-PCR results exhibited a meaningful decrease
of Bax (C) and capase-3 (D) mRNA levels in PAH groups. Data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (S.D.), n P 3, #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01 vs. sham group, ⁄p < 0.05,
⁄⁄
p < 0.01 vs. I/R group.

L. Xu et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 454 (2014) 65–70

treated with PAH (18, 36 mg/kg) exhibited a signiﬁcant increase in
the phosphorylation of Akt.
3.6. Effect of PAH on Phospho-JNK level
The phosphorylated JNK level was determined by Western blot
analysis (Fig. 3B). Cerebral ischemia/reperfusion might activate
JNK signal pathway, which increased JNK phosphorylation in ischemic brain. Rats treated with PAH (18, 36 mg/kg) inhibited signiﬁcantly the expression of Phospho-JNK.
3.7. Effect of PAH on levels of Bax and caspase-3
The levels of Bax and caspase-3 were determined by Q-PCR
(Fig. 3C and D). Compare to sham, MCAO group presented a significant increase of mRNA levels of Bax and caspase-3. Pretreatment
with PAH (18, 36 mg/kg) signiﬁcantly inhibited this increase.

4. Discussion
In our ﬁndings, PAH alleviates cerebral ischemia–reperfusion
injury by observing the decrease of neurological severity score
and infraction rate. Additionally, PAH decreased the overexpression of IL-1b, IL-6 and THF-a by activating PI3K/Akt and inhibiting
JNK pathway, which is supported by the upregulation of PhosphoAkt level and (the) downregulation of Phospho-JNK level in PAH
groups. Furthermore, we evaluated the effects of PAH on levels of
Bax and caspase-3, which shown that PAH might have anti-apoptosis effect. These results indicate that PAH attenuates cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion injury-triggered overexpression of inﬂammatory factor through activating PI3K/Akt and inhibiting the JNK
signal pathway.
Free radical generation and consequent activation of oxidative
stress in stroke contributes to brain damage, which is accompanied
by an activation of inﬂammatory responses [15]. It is widely
accepted that oxidative stress is one of the causes of various kinds
of diseases, including cancer, diabetes, atherosclerosis, neurodegenerative disorder, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases.
Previous research had demonstrated that oxidative stress is one
of the mechanisms taking part in the process of cerebral ischemic
injury [16]. When tissues are exposed to ischemia followed by
reperfusion (I/R), free radicals are drastically generated in the early
stage and react rapidly with excessive endogenous NO to generate
neurotoxic peroxynitrite which ultimately leading to programed
cell death. In models of inﬂammation, the generation of cytotoxic
effect is a result of the production of large amounts of NO and
NO-dependent reactions are important in modulating the inﬂammatory response [17,18].
In consideration of the pathogenesis of diseases caused by
altered homeostasis, inﬂammation plays an important role in the
process of essential immune response, which comes at the cost
of a transient decline in tissue function. Inﬂammation also enables
survival during infection or injury and maintains tissue homeostasis under a variety of noxious conditions [19]. Previous study has
put forward the proposal that inﬂammation participated in each
subtype of acute ischaemic stroke as a peculiar immuno-inﬂammatory pattern [20]. The ﬁrst cells responding to brain ischaemia are
glial cells, particularly microglia, which could develop into highly
motile macrophages that inﬁltrate and take up residence in the
developing brain and perform immunological functions [21]. With
transcription of early pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as IL1-b
and TNF-a, microglia are able to activate additional inﬂammatory
pathways leading to induction of nitric oxide, adhesion molecules
and IL-6 [20].

69

Akt and JNK are two of the most important signaling pathway
frequently dysregulated expression in stroke. JNK was originally
identiﬁed as two protein kinases,p46 JNK1 and p54 JNK2, which
speciﬁcally phosphorylate the transcription factor, c-Jun, at the
Ser 63 and Ser 73 of its N-terminal transactivation domain [21].
JNK is activated by a host of NO production and this activation generally contributes to inﬂammation and the mediation of cell death
[22,23]. Inactivation of JNK blocks phosphorylation of a wide range
of transcription factors and keeps the expression of harmful proteins from attacking both the CNS and the periphery. Current studies have shown that the inhibitor of JNK, SP600125, performs
neuroprotective action on transient brain ischemia/reperfusioninduced neuronal death in rat partly by suppressing the activation
of nuclear substrate (c-Jun) and inactivating non-nuclear substrate
(Bcl-2) induced by ischemic insult [24]. Akt is an important cellular
survival protein due to its inhibition of JNK activity. According to
our result, during cerebral ischemia–reperfusion, the JNK signaling
pathway is highly activated, inducing the lesion and dysfunction of
neurons; after treatment with PAH, the activation of Akt could be
recovered, subsequently inhibits the abnormal phosphorylation
level of JNK, and eventually exhibits anti- apoptosis effect.
Members of the Bcl-2 family play crucial roles in regulating
apoptosis, which contain pro-survival family members such as
Bcl-2, pro-apoptotic BAX/BAK family members such as Bax, and
pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins. Bax either directly or indirectly
induce the release of proteins from the space between the inner
and outer mitochondrial membranes, and then promotes the activation of caspase-3 and -9 [25]. After stroke, dephosphorylates Akt,
phosphorylates JNK, the protein levels of the Bcl-2 family are changed, the expression level of Bax lose control and dramatically
increase, followed by translocation from the cytosol to the mitochondrial membrane [26,27]. The inhibition of apoptosis signaling
pathways at least might be an intelligent strategy for moderating
cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury and this view is supported
by our data analysis which presented the decrease of the mRNA
level of Bax and caspase-3 after PAH treatment.
In summary, PAH exhibits neuroprotective effects on cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion injury in the rat brain cortex. In this present
study, PAH could reduce microglial activation, oxidative stress
injury and its anti-inﬂammatory effect decreases the overexpression of inﬂammatory factor through activating PI3K/Akt and inhibiting the JNK pathway in the rat brain cortex. Additionally, PAH
could inhibit neuronal death via controlling the level of Bcl-2 family and caspase-dependent pathway. These laboratory ﬁndings
may represent only the tip of the iceberg, a complete picture of
inﬂammation regulation is not available currently and need to be
further investigated.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by grants of the Natural Science
Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (Grant No. BK2011630)
and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities
(Program No. JKZD2013009). This Project also Funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education
Institutions (PAPD) and Research Innovation Program Project for
Graduate Students in Jiangsu Province (CXZZ13_03).
References
[1] B. Owens, Stroke, Nature 510 (2014). pp. S5–S5.
[2] N. Sladojevic, S.M. Stamatovic, R.F. Keep, J.J. Grailer, J.V. Sarma, P.A. Ward, A.V.
Andjelkovic, Inhibition of junctional adhesion molecule-A/LFA interaction
attenuates leukocyte trafﬁcking and inﬂammation in brain ischemia/
reperfusion injury, Neurobiol. Dis. 67 (2014) 57–70.
[3] S. Chen, Z.J. Yin, C. Jiang, Z.Q. Ma, Q. Fu, R. Qu, S.P. Ma, Asiaticoside attenuates
memory impairment induced by transient cerebral ischemia–reperfusion in

70

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

L. Xu et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 454 (2014) 65–70
mice through anti-inﬂammatory mechanism, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 122
(2014) 7–15.
M. Sun, Y. Zhao, Y. Gu, C. Xu, Anti-inﬂammatory mechanism of taurine against
ischemic stroke is related to down-regulation of PARP and NF-jB, Amino Acids
42 (2012) 1735–1747.
U.K. Hanisch, H. Kettenmann, Microglia: active sensor and versatile effector
cells in the normal and pathologic brain, Nat. Neurosci. 10 (2007) 1387–1394.
A. Nimmerjahn, F. Kirchhoff, F. Helmchen, Resting microglial cells are highly
dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo, Science 308 (2005) 1314–
1318.
S.U. Kim, J. de Vellis, Microglia in health and disease, J. Neurosci. Res. 81 (2005)
302–313.
C. Svensson, K. Part, K. Kunnis-Beres, M. Kaldmae, S.Z. Fernaeus, T. Land,
Prosurvival effects of JNK and p38 MAPK pathways in LPS-induced activation
of BV-2 cells, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 406 (2011) 488–492.
A. Brunet, S.R. Datta, M.E. Greenberg, Transcription-dependent and independent control of neuronal survival by the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway,
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 11 (2001) 297–305.
J. Zhu, W. Shen, L. Gao, H. Gu, S. Shen, Y. Wang, H. Wu, J. Guo, PI3K/Aktindependent negative regulation of JNK signaling by MKP-7 after cerebral
ischemia in rat hippocampus, BMC Neurosci. 14 (2013) 1.
M.J. Pérez-Álvarez, C. Maza Mdel, M. Anton, L. Ordoñez, F. Wandosell, Postischemic estradiol treatment reduced glial response and triggers distinct
cortical and hippocampal signaling in a rat model of cerebral ischemia, J.
Neuroinﬂamm. 9 (2012) 157.
S. Takagi, H. Goto, Y. Shimada, K. Nakagomi, Y. Sadakane, Y. Hatanaka, K.
Terasawa, Vasodilative effect of perillaldehyde on isolated rat aorta,
Phytomedicine 12 (2005) 333–337.
W.W. Ji, S.Y. Wang, Z.Q. Ma, R.P. Li, S.S. Li, J.S. Xue, W. Li, X.X. Niu, L. Yan, X.
Zhang, Q. Fu, R. Qu, S.P. Ma, Effects of perillaldehyde on alternations in serum
cytokines and depressive-like behavior in mice after lipopolysaccharide
administration, Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 116 (2014) 1–8.
E.Z. Longa, P.R. Weinstein, S. Carlson, R. Cummins, Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats, Stroke 20 (1989) 84–91.
S.E. Lakhan, A. Kirchgessner, M. Hofer, Inﬂammatory mechanisms in ischemic
stroke: therapeutic approaches, J. Transl. Med. 7 (2009) 97.
M.L. Alexandrova, P.G. Bochev, Oxidative stress during the chronic phase after
stroke, Free Radic. Biol. Med. 39 (2005) 297–316.

[17] M.B. Grisham, D. Jourd’Heuil, D.A. Wink, Nitric oxide. I. Physiological
chemistry of nitric oxide and its metabolites:implications in inﬂammation,
Am. J. Physiol. 276 (1999) G315–G321.
[18] C. Iadecola, F. Zhang, S. Xu, R. Casey, M.E. Ross, Inducible nitric oxide synthase
gene expression in brain following cerebral ischemia, J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 15 (1995) 378–384.
[19] R. Medzhitov, Inﬂammation 2010: new adventures of an old ﬂame, Cell 140
(2010) 771–776.
[20] G. Licata, A. Tuttolomondo, D. Di Raimondo, S. Corrao, R. Di Sciacca, A. Pinto,
Immuno-inﬂammatory activation in acute cardio-embolic strokes in
comparison with other subtypes of ischaemic stroke, Thromb. Haemost. 101
(2009) 929–937.
[21] R.C. Paolicelli, G. Bolasco, F. Pagani, L. Maggi, M. Scianni, P. Panzanelli, M.
Giustetto, T.A. Ferreira, E. Guiducci, L. Dumas, D. Ragozzino, C.T. Gross,
Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain development,
Science 333 (2011) 1456–1458.
[22] D.Y. Lu, H.C. Liou, C.H. Tang, W.M. Fu, Hypoxia-induced iNOS expression in
microglia is regulated by the PI3-kinase/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway and
activation of hypoxia inducible factor-1a, Biochem. Pharmacol. 72 (2006) 992–
1000.
[23] S.O. Abarikwu, Kolaviron, a natural ﬂavonoid from the seeds of Garcinia kola,
reduces LPS-induced inﬂammation in macrophages by combined inhibition of
IL-6 secretion, and inﬂammatory transcription factors, ERK1/2, NF-kappa B,
p38, Akt, p-c-JUN and JNK, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2014 (1840) 2373–2381.
[24] Q.H. Guan, D.S. Pei, Q.G. Zhang, Z.B. Hao, T.L. Xu, G.Y. Zhang, The
neuroprotective action of SP600125, a new inhibitor of JNK, on transient
brain ischemia/reperfusion-induced neuronal death in rat hippocampal CA1
via nuclear and non-nuclear pathways, Brain Res. 1035 (2005) 51–59.
[25] R.J. Youle, A. Strasser, The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities that
mediate cell death, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9 (2008) 47–59.
[26] X.L. Hu, T. Olsson, I.M. Johansson, T. Brännström, P. Wester, Dynamic changes
of the anti-and pro-apoptotic proteins Bcl-w, Bcl-2, and Bax with Smac/Diablo
mitochondrial release after photothrombotic ring stroke in rats, Eur. J.
Neurosci. 20 (2004) 1177–1188.
[27] A.B. Granado-Serrano, M.A. Martín, L. Bravo, L. Goya, S. Ramos, Quercetin
induces apoptosis via caspase activation, regulation of Bcl-2, and inhibition of
PI-3-kinase/Akt and ERK pathways in a human hepatoma cell line (HepG2), J.
Nutr. 136 (2006) 2715–2721.

