Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.

Improving Cerebral Blood Flow Through Liposomal Delivery
of Angiogenic Peptides: Potential of 18F-FDG PET Imaging
in Ischemic Stroke Treatment
Hyosook Hwang, Hwan-Seok Jeong, Phil-Sun Oh, Kyung-Suk Na, JeongIl Kwon, Jeonghun Kim, SeokTae Lim,
Myung-Hee Sohn, and Hwan-Jeong Jeong
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Molecular Imaging & Therapeutic Medicine Research Center, Cyclotron Research Center, Institute
for Medical Sciences, Biomedical Research Institute, Chonbuk National University Medical School and Hospital, Jeonju, Jeonbuk,
South Korea

Strategies to promote angiogenesis can benefit cerebral ischemia.
We determined whether liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides
with a known biologic activity of vascular endothelial growth factor
benefitted cerebral ischemia. Also, the study examined the potential
of 18F-FDG PET imaging in ischemic stroke treatment. Methods:
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (n 5 40) underwent 40 min of middle
cerebral artery occlusion. After 15 min of reperfusion, the rats (n 5 10)
received angiogenic peptides incorporated into liposomes. Animals
receiving phosphate-buffered solution or liposomes without peptides served as controls. One week later, 18F-FDG PET imaging was
performed to examine regional changes in glucose utilization in
response to the angiogenic therapy. The following day, 99mTchexamethylpropyleneamine oxime autoradiography was performed
to determine changes in cerebral perfusion after angiogenic therapy. Corresponding changes in angiogenic markers, including von
Willebrand factor and angiopoietin-1 and -2, were determined by
immunostaining and polymerase chain reaction analysis, respectively. Results: A 40-min period of middle cerebral artery occlusion
decreased blood perfusion in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of the brain,
compared with that in the contralateral cortex, as measured by 99mTchexamethylpropyleneamine oxime autoradiography. Liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides to the ischemic hemisphere of the brain
attenuated the cerebral perfusion defect compared with controls.
Similarly, vascular density evidenced by von Willebrand factor–
positive staining was increased in response to angiogenic therapy,
compared with that of controls. This increase was accompanied
by an early increase in angiopoietin-2 expression, a gene participating in angiogenesis. 18F-FDG PET imaging measured at 7 d after
treatment revealed that liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides
facilitated glucose utilization in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of
the brain, compared with that in the controls. Furthermore, the
change in regional glucose utilization was correlated with the extent of improvement in cerebral perfusion (r 5 0.742, P 5 0.035).
Conclusion: Liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides benefits
cerebral ischemia. 18F-FDG PET imaging holds promise as an
indicator of the effectiveness of angiogenic therapy in cerebral
ischemia.

Received Jan. 16, 2015; revision accepted Apr. 9, 2015.
For correspondence or reprints contact: Hwan-Jeong Jeong, Molecular
Imaging & Therapeutic Medicine Research Center, Jeonbuk Regional Cyclotron
Research Center & Biotracer Imaging Lab, Department of Nuclear Medicine,
Chonbuk National University Medical School & Hospital, 634-18 GeumAm-dong
Duckjin-gu Jeonju-si, Jeollabuk-do, South Korea.
E-mail: jayjeong@jbnu.ac.kr
Published online May 14, 2015.
COPYRIGHT © 2015 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging, Inc.

1106

THE JOURNAL

OF

Key Words: liposomes; angiogenic peptides; therapy; 18F-FDG PET
imaging
J Nucl Med 2015; 56:1106–1111
DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.115.154443

C

erebral ischemia caused by insufficient blood supply to the
brain is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality, affecting 15
million people annually. Although efforts have been made to prevent at-risk tissues from infarction and worsening ischemic injury,
the therapy to treat cerebral ischemia has had limited success.
Angiogenesis is a crucial step underlying functional recovery after
ischemia by restoring reduced blood flow. Literature has shown
that patients with decreased cerebral blood flow and diminished
angiogenic ability after cerebral ischemia tend to have worsening
functional recovery and decreased survival (1–4), supporting the
notion that strategies to promote angiogenesis can provide added
benefits in the treatment of cerebral ischemia.
Drug delivery systems are commonly used to improve therapeutic effectiveness. Although liposomes have been recognized as
a potentially powerful drug delivery system, the effectiveness of
treating cerebral ischemia by therapeutic angiogenesis has not yet
been demonstrated. Therefore, the primary aim of this study was
to investigate the therapeutic effectiveness of liposomal angiogenic peptides in the treatment of cerebral ischemia. To achieve
this goal, the present study used angiogenic peptides instead of
proteins to treat cerebral ischemia because, unlike angiogenic
proteins, peptides have low production costs with no immunogenicity and are better suited for clinical use (5,6).
18F-FDG, a glucose analog with a hydroxyl group in position 29
replaced by a positron-emitting radioactive isotope 18F, is commonly
used as a marker for tissue glucose uptake; as such, it provides
a sensitive and reliable means of assessing glucose metabolism.
PET imaging with 18F-FDG is widely used in the clinical setting
of cancer and myocardial ischemia as a tool to monitor changes in
glucose utilization. However, routine clinical use in a setting of cerebral ischemia is limited. Therefore, the purpose of the study was to
determine whether liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides with
known biologic activity of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) benefits cerebral ischemia and to examine the potential of
18F-FDG PET imaging in ischemic stroke treatment.

NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 56 • No. 7 • July 2015

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of Liposomal Vesicles and Peptide Loading

Liposomes were prepared by a mixture of phosphatidylcholine,
cholesterol, and phosphatidylethanolamine (the molar ratio of 5:4:1;
Sigma) using the method of the lipid thin-film hydration/extrusion.
Briefly, a mixture of phosphatidylcholine, cholesterol, and phosphatidylethanolamine was dissolved in chloroform/methanol (7:3; DuckSan Pure Chemical). The mixture was allowed to evaporate (51C, 4 h)
to obtain a thin film. A phosphate-buffered solution (PBS, pH 7.4)
containing glutathione (liposomes, 40 mM) alone or glutathione
with angiogenic peptides (L-peptides, 43 mM) was added to the film.
The film was completely hydrated (1.5 h, 37C). The peptides
(MRIKPHQGQHI; Peptron) used were derived from VEGF (sequence
81–91) with the proven capability of mimicking the biologic activity
protein (7,8).
To obtain small unilamellar vesicles, the liposomes were extruded
over 20 times through polycarbonate film with decreasing pore sizes
(400, 200, 100, and 50 nm) using the Avanti mini extruder (Avanti Polar
Lipids). Free peptides were removed by size-exclusion chromatography on a PD Midi-Trap G-25 column (GE Healthcare) for L-peptides.
The mean diameter of the liposomes and the size distribution were determined by a dynamic light scattering particle size analyzer (Malvern
Instruments).
The loading efficiency of the angiogenic peptides was determined by
comparing peptide concentrations in PBS before and after liposomal
encapsulation using high-performance liquid chromatography (Thermo
Scientific) with a C18 silica gel column (5 mm, 10 · 250 mm).
Liposome Labeling with
Oxime (99mTc-HMPAO)

99mTc-Hexamethylpropyleneamine

Extravesicular glutathione was removed by centrifugation at 10,000
rpm 3 times, followed by size-exclusion chromatography on a PD
Midi-Trap G-25 column. A mixture (1 mL) of liposomes and 99mTcHMPAO was stirred and incubated for 25 min. Free 99mTc-HMPAO
that was not bound to liposomes was excluded by size-exclusion chromatography on a PD Midi-Trap G-25 column with PBS as an eluent.
Stability of

99mTc-Labeled

Liposomes

The stability of 99mTc-labeled liposomes was determined using
a Sephadex G-25 column with PBS as an eluent solvent to separate
free 99mTc-HMPAO from 99mTc-labeled liposomes. The same volume
of liposomes and fetal bovine serum was mixed and incubated at 37C.
Aliquots of fraction were taken at different time points, and the radioactivity was counted. The stability of liposomes was expressed as
percentage changes from the preincubation values.
Study Protocol

All experiments in this study were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee of Chonbuk National University, Korea.
The therapeutic effectiveness of liposome-encapsulated angiogenic
peptides was studied using a model of transient middle cerebral artery
(MCA) occlusion (n 5 40). The angiogenic potential of peptides used
in this study was validated previously in vivo and in vitro (7,8).
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (;300 g) underwent a transient 40-min
period of MCA occlusion to induce mild ischemic injury (9). After
15 min of reperfusion, liposome-encapsulated angiogenic peptides
(L-peptides, 5.4 nM) were administered (200 mL) intraarterially via the
internal carotid artery. Animals receiving PBS (control) or liposomes
without peptides (liposomes) served as controls. PET/CT brain scanning
was performed at 7 d after surgery, and changes in cerebral perfusion
were determined by measuring the activity of 99mTc-HMPAO in a singleblind manner. Existing evidence indicates that peak angiogenic responses
to ischemia therapy occur within 7 d of treatment. On the basis of the
evidence, we expected that controlled release of angiogenic peptides by

our liposomal formulation could prolong the angiogenic benefits.
Thus, changes in perfusion and vascular density were studied 8 d
after treatment. von Willebrand factor–positive staining was performed to determine changes in vascular density due to the treatment of liposomal angiogenic peptides. Changes in expression of
genes participating in angiogenesis and inflammation were also
determined 24 h after surgery by quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR).
MCA Occlusion

Transient cerebral ischemia was produced by unilateral occlusion of
the MCA. Briefly, rats (;300 g) were anesthetized with a mixture of
ketamine (50 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). Anesthesia was maintained with 2.5% isoflurane mixed with O2 (100%). A commercial 4-0
monofilament nylon suture with a silicone-coated tip (0.19-mm diameter; catalog no. 403756 [Doccol]) was introduced through the left
common carotid artery into the internal carotid artery to occlude the
origin of the left MCA. The monofilament was advanced until slight
resistance was noted. Forty minutes later, blood flow to the left MCA
was restored by pulling the filament out of the artery (9).
Acquisition of In Vivo Small-Animal PET/CT Images and
Quantitative Analysis

Animals (n 5 8/group) were anesthetized with isoflurane at 7 d after
treatment. 18F-FDG (;11.1 MBq) was injected in a volume of 700 mL
via the tail vein. Thirty minutes later, PET/CT images were acquired
using a FLEX X-PET/X-O small-animal imaging instrument (GE
Healthcare). Briefly, CT systems were calibrated to acquire 512 projections (75 kVp, 64-mm detector center of rotation). The CT images
were acquired with 256 projections over 2 min. Transaxial emission
images were reconstructed using software (Exxim Computing Corp.)
that implements a cone-beam reconstruction algorithm. This image
reconstruction was followed by 20 min of 18F-FDG PET scanning.
The radioactivity data of 18F-FDG were reconstructed using the 3dimensional ordered-subsets expectation maximization method.
Reconstructed data from PET and CT were coregistered and visualized
using software (Visage Imaging), with an isotropic spatial resolution of
71 mm for CT and 2 mm for PET.
For quantitative interpretation, a volume-of-interest analysis was
performed. Regions of interest of the ipsilateral ischemic and contralateral
cortices were manually drawn around the lateral surface of the hemisphere covering MCA territories from triplet images of axial, coronal, and
sagittal orientations. Volume-of-interest data were calculated from the
region-of-interest data using the ordered-subsets expectation maximization method. 18F-FDG uptake in the nonischemic cortex was used as
a reference to evaluate regional metabolic changes in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex. The results were expressed as a ratio.
Relative  18 F-FDG  activity
5

18

F-FDG activity in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex
:
18 F-FDG activity in the contralateral cortex

Determination of Cerebral Perfusion by
Autoradiography

99mTc-HMPAO

Rats (n 5 10/group) were anesthetized with isoflurane (3%) at
8 d after treatment. 99mTc-HMPAO (;37 MBq, intravenous) was
administered to determine the extent of perfusion defects caused by
ischemia and the changes caused by treatment of liposomal angiogenic formulation. Thirty minutes after injection, cervical dislocation
was performed. The brains were rapidly excised and fixed with 10%
phosphate-buffered formalin for 30 min. Later, the brains were sectioned (2-mm thickness) perpendicular to the long axis of the brain (4
slices) covering the MCA territories. The slices were exposed to

LIPOSOMAL THERAPY AND

18F-FDG

PET IMAGING • Hwang et al.

1107

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.
imaging plates for 30 min. The images were scanned using a Typhoon
image scanner (GE Healthcare) to determine the activity of 99mTc-HMPAO.
Quantitative image analysis was performed using Multi-Gauge software
(Fuji Film). Activity of 99mTc-HMPAO in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of
the brain (left cortex) versus that in the contralateral cortex (right cortex)
was estimated using region-of-interest analysis. Specifically, 99mTcHMPAO activity in the ipsilateral cortex was normalized to that in the
contralateral cortex. The results were expressed as a ratio.
Relative perfusion 5
99m

Tc-HMPAO activity in the ipsilateral cortex
:
activity in the contralateral cortex

99m Tc-HMPAO

The ratio values were obtained from the 4 slices corresponding to the
MCA territories. The mean of 4 sections is presented.
Immunohistochemical Staining and Quantitative
Determination

Liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides and the therapeutic
effectiveness were also immunohistologically studied by quantitatively
determining vascular density using von Willebrand factor–positive
staining (10) and neuroprotection using glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP)–positive staining (n 5 12/group, respectively). Animals treated
with and without liposomal angiogenic peptides were sacrificed at
8 d after surgery. The brains were fixed with formalin (supplemental
materials [available at http://jnm.snmjournals.org]). The coronal slices
of the brains sectioned were incubated with the primary antibody
against von Willebrand factor (DAKO) as a marker for endothelial
phenotype and GFAP (Abcam) as a marker for astrocyte activation.
The immunostained tissues were then photographed.
The total number of von Willebrand factor–positive vessels present in the
ischemic border and GFAP-positive cells present in the ischemic hemisphere were counted in a double-blind manner. Six fields were randomly
chosen from the areas of interest. The means from the 6 fields are presented.
RNA Isolation and RT-PCR Analysis

The total RNA (n 5 4/group) was isolated from the ipsilateral
cortex (24 h after treatment) using RNeasy mini kits (Qiagen). Complementary DNA was reverse-transcribed from the purified RNA followed by quantitative PCR amplification (RT-PCR). All reactions
were performed in triplicate. Absolute expression levels were calculated after normalization to b actin. The levels of messenger RNA
were expressed as the ratio of negative control without ischemia. The
RT-PCR products were further visualized after electrophoresis migration in agarose gel (supplemental materials).

without radiolabeling). The loading efficiency of angiogenic peptides in liposomes was 62.1 6 0.2%. The stability of the liposomal
formulation studied was 92.2% (50% fetal bovine serum, at
37C) at 24 h (Fig. 1).
Effects on Cerebral Perfusion Defects

The therapeutic effectiveness of liposomal angiogenic peptides
was determined using 99mTc-HMPAO autoradiography 8 d after
treatment. Figure 2 shows representative images of 99mTc-HMPAO
autoradiography with and without liposomal delivery of angiogenic
peptides. A 40-min period of ischemia reduced cerebral blood
perfusion, shown by decreased 99mTc-HMPAO activity in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of the brain. Delivery of liposomal angiogenic peptides to the ischemic hemisphere of the brain attenuated
the cerebral perfusion defect (median, 1.01-fold of the contralateral; IQR, 0.96–1.22; P 5 0.004 vs. control; P 5 0.01 vs. liposomes), compared with that of control (median, 0.92-fold of the
contralateral; IQR, 0.82–0.96) and liposomes (median, 0.91-fold of
the contralateral; IQR, 0.90–0.95).
Effects on Angiogenesis and Glia Activation

We studied whether the liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides
promoted angiogenesis and increased vascular density. Representative images depicting increased vascular density in response to the
treatment of liposomal angiogenic peptides are shown in Figures 3A
and 3C). In control animals without liposomal therapy, a median of
13 vessels per high-power field (IQR, 12–15) were counted in the
ipsilateral penumbra. Treatment of liposomal angiogenic peptides
increased the vascular density (median, 16 vessels per high-power
field; IQR, 15.5–20; P 5 0.039 vs. control). These findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that liposomal delivery of angiogenic
peptides promotes angiogenesis, which leads to improved cerebral
perfusion.
Astrocytes (Figs. 3B and 3D) perform a variety of functions in
the brain, such as cerebral protection and neuronal survival after
ischemia. We analyzed whether the angiogenic therapy applied in
this study affected GFAP activation. Compared with controls (median, 48 cells; IQR, 41–55), a substantial increase in GFAP immunoreactivity was detected in the ischemic hemisphere of the
brains treated with liposomal angiogenic peptides (median, 67
cells; IQR, 59–77; P 5 0.001 vs. control). These data support
the notion that liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides provides
protective effects in the ischemic brain in this model.

Statistical Analyses

Statistical analyses were performed with SPSS 12.0 (SPSS Inc.). Data of
cerebral perfusion and 18F-FDG uptake were analyzed using the Kruskal–
Wallis tests followed by the Mann–Whitney U tests corrected with
Bonferroni for multiple comparisons. Data of vascular density, gene
expressions, and glia activation were analyzed using the Mann–Whitney
U test. A significance level of 0.05 with 2-sided P values was considered
significant. Pearson correlation analysis was performed to determine a relationship between the extent of improved cerebral perfusion and change in
18F-FDG uptake. Data are reported as median and interquartile range (IQR).
RESULTS
Liposomal Formulation Size, Loading Efficiency, and
Stability

The mean diameter of liposomes was 127.6 6 48.0 nm. On
labeling with 99mTc-HMPAO, there were no differences in the size
distribution between groups (131.8 6 45.3 nm vs. 127.6 6 48.0 nm

1108

THE JOURNAL

OF

FIGURE 1. Stability of liposome formulation was determined at various
time points in 50% fetal bovine serum.

NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 56 • No. 7 • July 2015

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.
Liposomal Angiogenic Treatment and Changes in
18F-FDG Uptake

Regional changes in glucose utilization were studied to determine the potential utility of 18F-FDG PET imaging (Fig. 5). A
40-min period of ischemia did not itself alter 18F-FDG uptake in
the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of the brain, compared with that in
the contralateral cortex, measured at 7 d after surgery. In response
to liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides, cortical 18F-FDG
uptake was increased (median, 1.04-fold of the contralateral;
IQR, 1.03–1.08; P 5 0.018 vs. control; P 5 0.021 vs. liposomes),
compared with that of control (median, 1.01-fold of the contralateral; IQR, 0.99–1.03) and liposomes (median, 1.01-fold of the
contralateral; IQR, 0.97–1.02). These data suggest that liposomal
delivery of angiogenic peptides enhances glucose utilization in the
area of the ipsilateral ischemic cortex. More importantly, we found
that the increase in 18F-FDG uptake by angiogenic therapy correlated with the extent of improvement in cerebral perfusion (r 5
0.742, P 5 0.035). Conversely, in control animals, no correlation
between 18F-FDG uptake and change in cerebral perfusion was
observed (r 5 0.670, P 5 0.100).
DISCUSSION

FIGURE 2. Autoradiographic perfusion images of cerebral sections
with (top right) and without (top left) treatment with liposomal angiogenic
peptides. Box plots (bottom) show quantification data. Fifteen minutes
after occlusion, liposomal angiogenic peptides (200 mL) were administered intraarterially. 99mTc-HMPAO autoradiograms were obtained 8 d
after treatment to quantify the radioactivity. Forty minutes of ischemia
reduced cerebral perfusion in ipsilateral ischemic cortex. Liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides attenuated extent of perfusion defect.
Control 5 rats receiving PBS. *Significantly different vs. control.

Angiogenic and Antiinflammatory Gene Expressions

We anticipated that signals for angiogenesis would be activated
in the early stage after liposomal angiogenic therapy (Figs. 4A and
4D). Angiopoietin-1 and -2 are important modulators of angiogenesis that affect endothelial cell functions. Thus, changes in angiopoietin gene expression were determined 24 h after treatment.
Indeed, an increased expression of angiopoietin-2 (median, 1.1fold of the normal without ischemia; IQR, 1.0–1.6; P 5 0.043 vs.
control; median, 0.83-fold of the normal; IQR, 0.79–0.87) was
detectable in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of the brain after treatment
with liposomal angiogenic peptides. These results are in contrast to
those of angiopoietin-1, which showed no appreciable changes after
24 h of treatment (median, 0.59-fold of the normal without ischemia;
IQR, 0.48–0.63; P 5 0.02 vs. control; median, 0.66-fold of the
normal; IQR, 0.43–0.88). These results are compatible with previous
studies of cerebral ischemia exhibiting differential patterns of temporal expression of angiopoietin-2 versus -1 (11,12).
Inflammatory responses after cerebral ischemia damage the
brain and worsen disease pathology. Thus, expression of inflammatory cytokines was also determined along with angiogenic
markers (Figs. 4B–4D). At 24 h after treatment, no changes in
proinflammatory genes (TGF-b2, TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-6) were
detected in response to the angiogenic therapy. Notably, an elevated
expression of TGF-b1, a gene that is involved in antiinflammatory
functions and angiogenic responses, was observed (median, 1.05fold of the normal without ischemia; IQR, 1.00–1.55; P 5 0.05 vs.
control; median, 0.83-fold of the normal; IQR, 0.79–0.87).

The results of the present study showed that liposomal
angiogenic peptides mimicking VEGF reduced cerebral perfusion
defects caused by ischemia and increased vascular density,
compared with controls, suggesting that liposomal delivery of
angiogenic peptides benefits cerebral ischemia. Liposomal angiogenic peptides also enhanced neuroprotection, as evidenced by an
increase in TGF-b1 expression and glia activation, compared with
that in controls. Our study using 18F-FDG PET imaging also demonstrated changes in regional glucose utilization after liposomal
therapy. Specifically, liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides
facilitated glucose utilization in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex
of the brain, compared with that in controls. Furthermore, the
extent of improvement correlated with increased cerebral perfusion. These findings suggest 18F-FDG PET imaging as a tool to

FIGURE 3. Immunohistologic images stained with antibodies against
von Willebrand factor (A and C) and GFAP (B and D) with and without
liposomal angiogenic therapy in ischemic periinfarct region (8 d after
treatment, ·200). Liposomal delivery of angiogenic peptides increased
vascular density and glia activation, compared with nontreated controls.
(C and D) Quantification of immunohistologic images. Arrows in A and B
indicate von Willebrand factor–positive vessels and GFAP-positive cells.
Control 5 rats receiving PBS. *Significantly different vs. control.

LIPOSOMAL THERAPY AND

18F-FDG

PET IMAGING • Hwang et al.

1109

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.
hemisphere of the brain is feasible. These data further support
the hypothesis that the therapeutic effects demonstrated in this
study resulted from the peptides that were delivered by liposomal
vesicles.
In addition to the therapeutic effectiveness, a substantial increase
in TGF-b1 gene expression, an antiinflammatory agent, as well as an
angiogenic cytokine, was also observed in the absence of changes in
proinflammatory responses. Proinflammatory responses to cerebral
ischemia lead to secondary injury to the brain and worsen disease
pathology. Experimental studies have shown benefits of antiinflammatory therapy by decreasing ischemic brain injury (16,17). On the
basis of the existing evidence, it is probable that the increased antiinflammatory response seen in this study might have played a role in
neuroprotection and attenuated the cerebral perfusion defect. The

FIGURE 4. Changes in messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of angiogenesis and inflammation-related genes with and without liposomal angiogenic therapy. Total RNA was extracted from cerebral cortex (24 h
after surgery). mRNA expressions were examined by quantitative RTPCR. Levels of mRNAs are expressed as ratios of negative controls
without ischemia. Liposomal angiogenic peptides increased expression
of angiopoietin-2 and TGF-1b. *Significantly different vs. control.

study the effectiveness of angiogenic therapy to treat cerebral
ischemia.
The brain receives oxygen and nutrients for survival via arteries
that are exclusive to the brain and is thus highly vulnerable to
injuries from ischemia caused by insufficient blood supply. For
this reason, strategies to promote angiogenesis and improve
cerebral blood supply hold promise for treating cerebral ischemia.
In the present study, angiogenesis was facilitated by liposomal
delivery of peptides exhibiting known biologic activity of VEGF,
an angiogenic and neuroprotective factor (13).
Although liposomes are a potentially powerful drug delivery
system, there are currently no liposomal angiogenic formulations
that can effectively treat cerebral ischemia. The results of the
present study showing that liposomal delivery of peptides with
known angiogenic properties to the ischemic hemisphere of the
brain ameliorated cerebral perfusion defects, increased vascular
density, and induced antiinflammation and glia activation provide
supportive evidence that the liposomal formulation used in this
study is therapeutically effective. Future studies using multiple
factors capable of angiogenesis, neuroprotection, and neurogenesis are warranted to further facilitate the therapeutic effect.
An effective drug treatment to enhance outcomes of cerebral
ischemia remains a significant challenge. Specifically, the presence of the blood–brain barrier often limits therapeutic effectiveness by forming a physical barricade and restricting drug delivery
across cells. Cerebral ischemia causes a broad spectrum of pathophysiologic changes, including blood–brain barrier disruptions
and increased vascular permeability: the enhanced permeability
and retention effect. Previous studies have shown that an increase
in vascular permeability by ischemia may enable selective targeting of drugs at the critical site of action, allowing effective drug
delivery to the ischemic hemisphere of the brain (14,15). Our
results of g imaging by 99mTc-HMPAO (supplemental materials)
clearly demonstrated liposomal accumulation in the ischemic
hemisphere of the brain. These data indicate that selective targeting of liposomal angiogenic peptides to the ipsilateral ischemic

1110

THE JOURNAL

OF

FIGURE 5. (A) 18F-FDG PET radioactivity images for coronal slices of
brain with (right) and without (left) liposomal angiogenic therapy obtained
7 d after treatment. 18F-FDG uptake data in ipsilateral cortex show that
relative radioactivity was higher in groups treated with liposomal angiogenic
peptides than controls (B). Correlation study shows that increase in 18F-FDG
uptake after angiogenic therapy was correlated with extent of improvement
in cerebral perfusion. Control 5 rats receiving PBS; L-peptides 5 liposomal
angiogenic peptides. *Significantly different vs. control.

NUCLEAR MEDICINE • Vol. 56 • No. 7 • July 2015

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.
elevated level of glia activation shown in this study further supports
the mechanism of neuroprotection.
A dominant source of energy in the brain is glucose. Glucose
metabolism has a tightly controlled relationship with cerebral
blood flow. Insufficient blood supply to the brain during ischemia
affects glucose metabolism, the extent of which varies depending
on the degree to which cerebral blood flow is diminished (18,19).
The present study using a mild degree of ischemia showed an
increase in 18F-FDG uptake in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex of
the brain 7 d after treatment. Similar results were previously demonstrated in patients with stroke and in animals subjected to a brief
period of ischemia (9,20,21). Our results extend the previous observation by establishing a liposomal angiogenic formulation that
is potentially beneficial in treating cerebral ischemia.
PET scanning with 18F-FDG, which offers the advantage of
noninvasively and repeatedly visualizing functional information
of tissues, is commonly used to identify changes in glucose metabolism in clinical settings, especially in cancer and myocardial
ischemia. Brain disorders are often associated with changes in
regional cerebral blood flow and glucose metabolism (20,22,23).
Despite this, 18F-FDG PET imaging has limited use, particularly
in a clinical setting of cerebral ischemia. The present study
attempted to explore the potential of 18F-FDG PET imaging in
therapeutic angiogenesis for ischemic stroke treatment. The
finding that angiogenic therapy increased 18F-FDG uptake in
the ipsilateral cortex of the brain, the degree of which correlated with attenuated cerebral perfusion defects, indicates that
glucose hypermetabolism during the subacute phase after angiogenic therapy may serve as an indicator of improved cerebral perfusion.
The present study has limitations. Changes in cerebral perfusion
and vascular density were studied to present therapeutic effectiveness without assessment of the functional outcomes. The effect
of peptides without liposomal encapsulation was not studied.
Thus, it is not clear whether the therapeutic benefits shown in our
study simply resulted from the provision of angiogenic peptides
or the liposomal formulation. Although the results of the present
study indicated that our liposomal angiogenic therapy improved
cerebral perfusion and increased vessel density, it remains to be
determined whether such changes will affect clinical outcomes.
CONCLUSION

We provide evidence that liposomal delivery of angiogenic
peptides exhibiting biologic properties of VEGF benefits cerebral
ischemia. Our results also show that cerebral 18F-FDG PET imaging can potentially have profound clinical implications by serving as a signature of improved cerebral perfusion.
DISCLOSURE

The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by
the payment of page charges. Therefore, and solely to indicate this
fact, this article is hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance
with 18 USC section 1734. This research was funded by Radiation
Technology R&D program 2012M2A2A7035779 and Basic Science Research Program 2014R1A1A2008959 through the National Research Foundation of Korea grant funded by the Ministry

of Science ICT and Future Planning. No other potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported.
REFERENCES
1. Schmidt R, Schmidt H, Fazekas F. Vascular risk factors in dementia. J Neurol.
2000;247:81–87.
2. Szpak GM, Lechowicz W, Lewandowska E, Bertrand E, Wierzba-Bobrowicz T,
Dymecki J. Border zone neovascularization in cerebral ischemic infarct. Folia
Neuropathol. 1999;37:264–268.
3. Allen CM. Predicting the outcome of acute stroke: a prognostic score. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1984;47:475–480.
4. Krupinski J, Kaluza J, Kumar P, Kumar S, Wang JM. Role of angiogenesis in
patients with cerebral ischemic stroke. Stroke. 1994;25:1794–1798.
5. Finetti F, Basile A, Capasso D, et al. Functional and pharmacological characterization of a VEGF mimetic peptide on reparative angiogenesis. Biochem Pharmacol. 2012;84:303–311.
6. Giordano RJ, Cardo-Vila M, Salameh A, et al. From combinatorial peptide
selection to drug prototype (I): targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor
receptor pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2010;107:5112–5117.
7. García-Aranda MI, Mirassou Y, Gautier B, et al. Disulfide and amide-bridged
cyclic peptide analogues of the VEGF81-91 fragment: synthesis, conformational analysis and biological evaluation. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011;19:7526–
7533.
8. Hwang H, Kwon J, Oh PS, et al. Peptide-loaded nanoparticles and radionuclide
imaging for individualized treatment of myocardial ischemia. Radiology. 2014;
273:160–167.
9. Bunevicius A, Yuan H, Lin W. The potential roles of 18F-FDG-PET in management of acute stroke patients. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:634598.
10. Lee TK, Hwang H, Na KS, et al. Effect of angiogenesis induced by consecutive
intramuscular injections of vascular endothelial growth factor in a hindlimb
ischemic mouse model. Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2014;48:225–229.
11. Beck H, Acker T, Wiessner C, Allegrini PR, Plate KH. Expression of angiopoietin-1,
angiopoietin-2, and tie receptors after middle cerebral artery occlusion in the
rat. Am J Pathol. 2000;157:1473–1483.
12. Hayashi T, Noshita N, Sugawara T, Chan PH. Temporal profile of angiogenesis
and expression of related genes in the brain after ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 2003;23:166–180.
13. Sun Y, Jin K, Xie L, et al. VEGF-induced neuroprotection, neurogenesis,
and angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. J Clin Invest. 2003;111:
1843–1851.
14. Liu S, Levine SR, Winn HR. Targeting ischemic penumbra part II: selective drug
delivery using liposome technologies. J Exp Stroke Transl Med. 2011;4:16–23.
15. Ishii T, Asai T, Oyama D, et al. Treatment of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion
injury with PEGylated liposomes encapsulating FK506. FASEB J. 2013;27:
1362–1370.
16. Boche D, Cunningham C, Gauldie J, Perry VH. Transforming growth factor-beta
1-mediated neuroprotection against excitotoxic injury in vivo. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2003;23:1174–1182.
17. Trendelenburg G, Dirnagl U. Neuroprotective role of astrocytes in cerebral ischemia: focus on ischemic preconditioning. Glia. 2005;50:307–320.
18. Wise RJ, Rhodes CG, Gibbs JM, et al. Disturbance of oxidative metabolism of
glucose in recent human cerebral infarcts. Ann Neurol. 1983;14:627–637.
19. Baron JC, Rougemont D, Soussaline F, et al. Local interrelationships of cerebral
oxygen consumption and glucose utilization in normal subjects and in ischemic
stroke patients: a positron tomography study. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1984;
4:140–149.
20. Ginsberg MD, Reivich M, Giandomenico A, Greenberg JH. Local glucose utilization in acute focal cerebral ischemia: local dysmetabolism and diaschisis.
Neurology. 1977;27:1042–1048.
21. Paschen W, Mies G, Hossmann KA. Threshold relationship between cerebral
blood flow, glucose utilization, and energy metabolites during development of
stroke in gerbils. Exp Neurol. 1992;117:325–333.
22. Bergsneider M, Hovda DA, McArthur DL, et al. Metabolic recovery following
human traumatic brain injury based on FDG-PET: time course and relationship
to neurological disability. J Head Trauma Rehabil. 2001;16:135–148.
23. Marklund N, Sihver S, Langstrom B, Bergstrom M, Hillered L. Effect of traumatic brain injury and nitrone radical scavengers on relative changes in regional cerebral blood flow and glucose uptake in rats. J Neurotrauma. 2002;19:
1139–1153.

LIPOSOMAL THERAPY AND

18F-FDG

PET IMAGING • Hwang et al.

1111

Downloaded from jnm.snmjournals.org by on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.

Improving Cerebral Blood Flow Through Liposomal Delivery of Angiogenic
Peptides: Potential of 18F-FDG PET Imaging in Ischemic Stroke Treatment
Hyosook Hwang, Hwan-Seok Jeong, Phil-Sun Oh, Kyung-Suk Na, JeongIl Kwon, Jeonghun Kim, SeokTae Lim,
Myung-Hee Sohn and Hwan-Jeong Jeong
J Nucl Med. 2015;56:1106-1111.
Published online: May 14, 2015.
Doi: 10.2967/jnumed.115.154443

This article and updated information are available at:
http://jnm.snmjournals.org/content/56/7/1106

Information about reproducing figures, tables, or other portions of this article can be found online at:
http://jnm.snmjournals.org/site/misc/permission.xhtml
Information about subscriptions to JNM can be found at:
http://jnm.snmjournals.org/site/subscriptions/online.xhtml

The Journal of Nuclear Medicine is published monthly.
SNMMI | Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging
1850 Samuel Morse Drive, Reston, VA 20190.
(Print ISSN: 0161-5505, Online ISSN: 2159-662X)
© Copyright 2015 SNMMI; all rights reserved.

