Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Experimental Neurology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yexnr

Research Paper

Progesterone protects endothelial cells after cerebrovascular occlusion
by decreasing MCP-1- and CXCL1-mediated macrophage inﬁltration☆
Ebony Washington Remus a, Iqbal Sayeed a, Soonmi Won a, Alicia N. Lyle b, Donald G. Stein a,⁎
a
b

Department of Emergency Medicine Brain Research Laboratory, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
Department of Cardiology, Emory University Atlanta, GA, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 14 May 2015
Received in revised form 29 June 2015
Accepted 13 July 2015
Available online 17 July 2015
Keywords:
Brain ischemia
Cerebrovascular repair
Endothelial cells
Macrophage inﬁltration
Progesterone

a b s t r a c t
The neuroprotective effects of progesterone after ischemic stroke have been established, but the role of progesterone in promoting cerebrovascular repair remains under-explored. Male Sprague–Dawley rats underwent
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) for 90 min followed by reperfusion for 3 days. Progesterone
(8 mg/kg/day) was administered intraperitoneally at 1 h after initial occlusion followed by subcutaneous injections at 6, 24 and 48 h post-occlusion. Rats were euthanized after 72 h and brain endothelial cell density and macrophage inﬁltration were evaluated within the cerebral cortex. We also assessed progesterone's ability to induce
macrophage migration toward hypoxic/reoxygenated cultured endothelial cells. We found that progesterone
treatment post-tMCAO protects ischemic endothelial cells from macrophage inﬁltration. We further
demonstrate that inﬁltration of monocytes/macrophages can be induced by potent chemotactic factors such as
monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and the chemokine ligand 1 (CXCL1), secreted by hypoxic/
reoxygenated endothelial cells. Progesterone blunts secretion of MCP-1 and CXCL1 from endothelial cells after
hypoxia/reoxygenation injury and decreases leukocyte inﬁltration. The treatment protects ischemic endothelial
cells from macrophage inﬁltration and thus preserves vascularization after ischemic injury.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Our laboratory and others have demonstrated that in many preclinical studies progesterone has substantial neuroprotective effects
against brain injury, including traumatic brain injury (TBI) and ischemic
stroke (Sayeed et al., 2007; Ishrat et al., 2009; Kaore et al., 2012; Won
et al., 2014). Progesterone has been shown to reduce infarct volume,
edema, global inﬂammation and behavioral deﬁcits in both permanent
and transient rodent models of middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) compared to vehicle-injected controls (Sayeed et al., 2007;
Gibson et al., 2009; Ishrat et al., 2009, 2012; Jiang et al., 2009; Kaore
et al., 2012). As previously reported, progesterone signiﬁcantly reduces
infarct volume 72 h after transient (t)MCAO (Sayeed et al., 2006).
Although we are learning more about the role of progesterone in neuroprotection and repair, many of the molecular mechanisms and speciﬁc
cell type(s) mediating its beneﬁcial effects after ischemic/reperfusion
injury remain to be determined. One of the mechanisms that can reduce

☆ Sources of support: This work was supported by NIH UO1 NS062676 to DGS and AHA
SDG grant 11SDG5430002 to IS. Partial funding for some of the assays used in this project
was provided by BHR Pharma and the Marcus Foundation. The authors have no conﬂicts of
interest concerning this research.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Emergency Medicine Brain Research
Laboratory, 1365B Clifton Rd NE, Suite 5100, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.
E-mail address: dstei04@emory.edu (D.G. Stein).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.07.010
0014-4886/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

infarct size after ischemia may be increased blood ﬂow, which in turn
leads to neurovascular remodeling processes and functional recovery.
After ischemic/reperfusion injury, increased vascularization or
increased vascular protection may be critical to mediate functional
recovery, with endothelial cells being the primary effector cell type
responsible for neo-vascularization and angiogenesis (Sunderkotter
et al., 1994; Folkman, 1995; Cao et al., 2005). Functional recovery of
ischemic tissues and organs is dependent on vascular networks that sufﬁciently supply hyper-oxygenated blood to endothelial cell populations.
Therefore, to reduce the severity of the injury, preserving endothelial
cell viability and function is of utmost importance after ischemic/
reperfusion injury. As a component of the post-stroke injury cascade,
macrophage inﬁltration can trigger apoptosis of healthy cells in vivo,
including endothelial cells (Diez-Roux and Lang, 1997). Conversely,
macrophage inﬁltration can also promote wound healing and scar tissue
formation after ischemic injury, and facilitate recovery (Frangogiannis,
2004). We are interested in understanding endothelial cell viability
and macrophage recruitment patterns post-injury, in both the presence
and absence of progesterone. It is plausible that progesterone could
facilitate communications between ischemic endothelial cells and peripheral macrophages. Macrophages can be recruited to ischemic tissue
by cytokines and chemokines that are expressed by endothelial cells
(Stroo et al., 2010). Depending on tissue type, whether macrophage
inﬁltration and/or chemokine secretion facilitate injury progression
or prevent further damage after ischemic reperfusion injury remains

402

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

highly controversial (Lambert et al., 2008; Akcay et al., 2009; Nahrendorf
et al., 2010; Stroo et al., 2010).
Monocyte chemoattractant protein, also known as MCP-1/CCL2, is a
critical chemokine involved in the positive chemotaxis of macrophages
toward endothelial cells after both kidney and myocardial ischemic
reperfusion injury (Shyy et al., 1994; Stroo et al., 2010). The murine chemokine keratinocyte chemoattractant CXCL1/KC, a potent neutrophil
chemoattractant, is also heavily involved in ischemic/reperfusion injury
(Shea-Donohue et al., 2008). Because tissue damage and repair are
dependent on the timely induction and suppression of chemokines, it
is important to identify what modulates chemokine expression during
ischemic injury.
Because of progesterone's long history of demonstrating neuroprotection after CNS injury, the purpose of this study was to test its effects
on vascularization and/or cerebral vascular protection after ischemic
injury. We evaluated progesterone-mediated MCP-1- and CXCL1dependent macrophage inﬁltration and its effects on the cerebral
vasculature following ischemic injury. Here we demonstrate that an
important mechanism by which progesterone decreases the severity
of ischemic/reperfusion injury is by decreasing macrophage inﬁltration
and thus protecting cerebrovascular endothelial cells from inﬂammation.
2. Methods
2.1. Subjects
Adult male Sprague Dawley rats (250–350 g; Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) were used according to procedures approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, Emory University,
Atlanta GA (protocol # DAR-2001411). All animals were housed in an
AAALAC-approved Research Animal Facility with a temperature-,
humidity-, and light-controlled environment, and placed under a 12hour reverse light–dark cycle. Public Health Service Policy on Humane
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, the Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals, and all other applicable regulations, policies, and
procedures were followed and approved by Emory University Institutional Animal Use and Care Committee. The experiments are reported
here in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines. Animals were randomized into three groups (n = 6–8 each): sham-operated vehicle-treated
control; tMCAO + vehicle; and tMCAO + progesterone (8 mg/kg).
The rats were assigned randomly to the treatment groups and group
identity was coded with regard to surgery and treatment.
2.2. Drug preparation
Reagent grade progesterone (P-3972; Sigma Aldrich Co., St Louis,
MO) was dissolved in 22.5% 2-hydroxypropyl-β cyclodextrin and
administered by intraperitoneal (IP) injection 1 h post-occlusion to
ensure rapid delivery (Ishrat et al., 2010), and then subcutaneously
(SC) at 6, 24, and 48 h post-occlusion. The 8 mg/kg dose is based on previous dose response studies in rodents demonstrating that this amount
provides maximal protective beneﬁts in the treatment of various types
of brain injury (Ishrat et al., 2009; Wali et al., 2014; Yousuf et al., 2014).
2.3. Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion injury model
Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by occlusion of the right middle
cerebral artery as previously described (Longa et al., 1989). Brieﬂy, a
midline incision was made on the ventral surface of the neck and the
right common carotid artery was isolated and ligated with a 6.0 silk
suture. The internal carotid artery and the pterygopalatine artery were
temporarily occluded using a microvascular clip. A 4–0 nylon monoﬁlament with a heat-blunted tip was introduced into the internal carotid
artery through the incision in the external carotid artery. Relative cerebral blood ﬂow was monitored for the entire 90 min of occlusion using
laser Doppler (LD) perfusion. Only rats with a mean ischemic cerebral

blood ﬂow less than 40% of baseline LDF were included to reduce variability and ensure relative uniformity of the ischemic insult. Mean relative cerebral blood ﬂow observed during occlusion in rats treated with
progesterone (26.26% ± 4.03%) was not statistically different from
that observed in vehicle-treated animals (25.69% ± 3.71%). Reperfusion,
as demonstrated by early recovery of the LD ﬂowmetry signal, occurred
in all animals regardless of treatment group within minutes of occluding
ﬁlament release. There were no signiﬁcant differences in the increase
in mean relative cerebral blood ﬂow in the progesterone-treated
(93.47% ± 9.36%) animals compared with the vehicle-treated group
(101.80% ± 11.17%).
At 5 min before the onset of reperfusion, drug treatment was administered by IP injection. After 90 min of MCAO, the occluding ﬁlament
was withdrawn from the common carotid artery to allow reperfusion.
One animal died during the tMCAO procedure (prior to treatment) for
reasons unknown and was not included in further analyses.
2.4. Histology and immunohistochemistry
Microvessel density, endothelial cell proliferation and macrophage
density in the penumbra cortex were detected by immunohistochemistry, using previously reported methods as a guideline (Wang et al.,
2012). Transcardial perfusion was performed and brains were ﬁxed
with 10% formalin, harvested and then dehydrated in a 15%, 20%
and 30% serial sucrose gradient. Brains were then snap-frozen and
cryo-cut coronally at 30 μm. Brain sections were incubated overnight
at 4 °C with the following primary antibodies: rat blood–brain barrier
(SMI 71) monoclonal antibody (1:1000, Covance, Princeton, NJ) to
detect endothelial cells; CD68 (1:200, Abcam, Cambridge, MA) to detect
tissue macrophages; Ki67 (1:500, Abcam) to detect cell proliferation;
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz,
CA) to determine the pro-angiogenic potential of endothelial cells.
For SMI71, CD68, VEGF and Ki67, sections were incubated with the
appropriate ﬂuorescence dye-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:200,
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Nuclei were stained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI) included in the mounting medium (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA). Immunolabeling signals were captured using
a Zeiss ﬂuorescent microscope and quantiﬁed using a 20 × objective
lens from 5 random ﬁelds from each section and from 3 independent
sections for each brain.
2.5. Cell culture assays and hypoxic injury model
Commercially available endothelial cells (bEnd.3, ATCC, Manassas,
VA) derived from the cerebral cortex of mice were used for oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) studies as previously reported (Hiu et al., 2008).
Cells were grown in high-glucose Dulbecco's Modiﬁed Eagle Medium
(DMEM; Invitrogen) in the presence of 10% fetal bovine serum (ATCC)
and penicillin/streptomycin. For normoxic conditions (N20% oxygen),
the cells were transferred into serum-free media containing 4.5 g/l
glucose (control media). To induce hypoxia, cells were transferred to a
serum- and glucose-free DMEM media that was pre-bubbled with nitrogen gas for 30 min. Hypoxia conditions consisted of 2 h hypoxia in
a standard hypoxia chamber set to 0.1% oxygen, with or without the
administration of 20 μM progesterone. Reoxygenation was initiated by
adding serum-free, normoxic media (Hiu et al., 2008). TIB-186/IC21
cells were graciously donated by Robert Taylor, Emory University, and
cultured in RPMI (Gibco, Grand Island, NY) containing 15% fetal bovine
serum (ATCC) and penicillin/streptomycin. Non-treated and nonhypoxic controls were also included within this assay.
2.6. Two chamber trans-well migration assay
An 8-μm polycarbonate membrane trans-well assay (Costar Corning,
Tewksbury, MA) was used to determine the migratory potential of
macrophages toward hypoxia stimulated endothelial cells (Reinhart-

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

King, 2008). bEnd.3 endothelial cells were seeded at a density of
1 × 10 5 cells/well in complete DMEM and cultured to conﬂuence
into the lower chamber of a 24-well plate. The endothelial cells
were then subjected to hypoxia for 2 h and reperfusion for 4 h
(+/− progesterone). During reoxygenation, cultured macrophages
(TIB-186/IC21, ATCC) were seeded at a density of 1 × 104 in the upper
trans-well chamber and allowed to migrate during the reperfusion
stage for 4 h. After 4 h, macrophages were ﬁxed and stained with
DAPI. Cells from 4 random ﬁelds per porous ﬁlter were quantiﬁed for
each condition.
2.7. Cytokine-speciﬁc proteome array
Cytokine release into conditioned media after hypoxia/reperfusion
+/− progesterone treatment was measured utilizing a Mouse Cytokine
Array kit (ARY006) (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. Brieﬂy, conditioned media (8 ml) from
bEnd.3 cells treated with progesterone (20 μM) for 2 h during hypoxia
and 4 h during reperfusion were concentrated 3-fold using a Pierce
Concentrator. After blocking, array panels were incubated in a mixture
of conditioned media (1.5 ml) and a cocktail of biotinylated detection
antibodies (15 μl) overnight at 4 °C. Any cytokine/detection antibody
complex present is bound by its cognate immobilized capture antibody on the membrane. After a wash to remove unbound material,
streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase and chemiluminescent detection
reagents were added sequentially. To validate results obtained by the
proteome proﬁler, concentrations of MCP-1/CCL2 and Cxcl1 chemokines
were measured by ELISA (R&D Systems) using manufacturer's recommendations. Experiments were performed 6 independent times.
2.8. Protein extraction and Western blotting
30 μg of protein lysed in radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer
(RIPA) was loaded onto 7.5% SDS polyacrylamide gels (BioRad, Hercules,
CA) and subsequently transferred to PDVF membranes (Amersham,
Piscataway, NJ). Membranes were blocked with 5% milk. The TNF-α
antibody (Abcam) was used at a 1:5000 dilution. Blots were analyzed
using densitometry software (Un-Scan-It, Orem, UT) and normalized
to β-actin (Cell Signaling, Danvers MA), used at a 1:10,000 dilution.
2.9. Statistical analysis
Based on a delta-value of 1.25, we calculated the sample sizes and
power needed to reject the null hypothesis to achieve 80% power to
detect a 50% difference in the outcome measures indicated above. The
number of rats per group at these criteria was determined to be at
least six to reject the null hypothesis (H0) at the 0.05 level at a power
of 0.8. The parameters were analyzed using one-way analysis (ANOVA,
2 tailed) of variance followed by the Bonferroni post hoc test. All data
are presented as mean ± s.e.m. All tests were considered statistically
signiﬁcant at p values less than 0.05.
3. Results
3.1. Progesterone protects endothelial cell population 3 days after tMCAO
The literature suggests that angiogenesis increases as early as 7 days
post-tMCAO surgery within the cerebral cortex and is maintained over
14 days. This process is quantiﬁed by measuring increases in endothelial
cell density compared to sham controls (Wang et al., 2012). Since we
have shown that progesterone administration improves functional
recovery as early as 3 days after tMCAO, we monitored angiogenesis
at 3 days to determine whether there were increases in this parameter
after progesterone treatment (Sayeed et al., 2006). After tMCAO surgery, 3 days of progesterone treatment signiﬁcantly increased endothelial cell density on both the injured and the intact sides of the brain

403

compared to vehicle controls (Fig. 1A). We also observed that the ipsilateral cortex of tMCAO animals given vehicle showed little to no endothelial cell population within the cerebral cortex (Fig. 1A). The injury
produced extensive loss of ipsilateral endothelial cells 3 days following
ischemia/reperfusion injury (Fig. 1B), which was attenuated by progesterone treatment (Fig. 1B; p b .05). We evaluated endothelial cell density with a second endothelial marker, EBA, and were able to conﬁrm
these results (Supplementary Fig. 1). We also evaluated angiogenesis
8 days post-tMCAO and found that tMCAO itself increases ipsilateral
endothelial cell density compared to sham controls when compared to
cell density seen in the contralateral hemisphere (p b .05; data not
shown). To verify whether the progesterone cerebral vascular effect
was protective or proliferative, we performed immunostaining with
proliferation markers VEGF or Ki67. Endothelial cells from cerebral cortical sections of progesterone-treated rodents did not co-stain with the
proliferation markers VEGF or Ki67 (Fig. 1C). An in vitro test of hypoxic
endothelial cells undergoing reoxygenation in the presence of progesterone also failed to show increased VEGF expression or an increase
in cell numbers (data not shown). Thus far, our results can be taken to
suggest that progesterone does, in fact, protect preexisting cerebral
vascular endothelial cells and further demonstrates that this population of endothelial cells is not the result of progesterone-mediated
proliferation/angiogenesis.
3.2. Progesterone blunts macrophage inﬁltration 3 days post-tMCAO
Signiﬁcant numbers of macrophages were present within the injured/ipsilateral cerebral cortex of vehicle-treated animals, but more
importantly, these cells were not present in the progesterone-treated
tMCAO group (Fig. 2). Other than sections from tMCAO animals treated
with vehicle, no positive staining for macrophages, as measured by ED1/CD68, was observed in any of the other cerebral cortical sections
(Fig. 2). We obtained a signiﬁcant decrease in endothelial cell density
(Fig. 1) with a concomitant increase in macrophage inﬁltration in response to ischemia/reperfusion injury (Fig. 2), as seen in vehicle control
animals.
3.3. Progesterone inhibits macrophage migration toward hypoxic endothelial
cells
During normoxic conditions, a basal number of macrophages migrated toward endothelial cells. Endothelial cells subjected to hypoxia/
reoxygenation resulted in a 5-fold increase in macrophage migration,
which was blunted by the addition of progesterone (Fig. 3C; p b .05).
We observed that media treated with progesterone alone is not responsible for the difference in macrophage migration patterns, as evidenced
by the lack of change in macrophage migration (Fig. 3B). Indeed,
progesterone has an effect on macrophage migration only when endothelial cells are present, suggesting that the hormone functions to modulate endothelial cell factor secretion, which in turn alters macrophage
recruitment after hypoxia/reperfusion injury. Our ﬁnding is in line
with our in vivo staining of the cerebral cortex, which shows the
presence of macrophages after tMCAO with vehicle treatment, and
no macrophage response following progesterone given after tMCAO
(Fig. 2). We hypothesize that endothelial cells exposed to hypoxic/
ischemic conditions secrete factors that inﬂuence macrophage recruitment and that the factors secreted are modulated by progesterone
treatment.
3.4. Progesterone blunts chemokine expression
Of 32 candidate chemokines and cytokines, we identiﬁed four
that were modulated after exposure to hypoxia/reperfusion and
progesterone: MCP-1/CCL2, CXCL1/KC, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases (TIMP1) and chemokine ligand 2 (MIP-2/CXCL2). Based on
literature searches, two of the candidates, MCP-1/CCL2 and CXCL1/KC,

404

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

Fig. 1. Progesterone protects endothelial cell population 3 days post-tMCAO. (A) Representative images of staining for endothelial cells using blood–brain barrier (SMI 71) from the
cerebral cortex 3 days post-tMCAO and progesterone (P4)/vehicle (veh) treatment. Top panel shows endothelial cell (red) density in the contralateral (control) region of the ischemic
brain while the lower panel shows endothelial cell density on the ipsilateral ischemic side of the cerebral cortex (box on Cresyl violet stained section shows region of interest for immunostaining). (B) Endothelial cell density normalized to contralateral hemisphere. tMCAO reduced endothelial cell density 3 days post-injury compared to sham controls, while progesterone
signiﬁcantly increased endothelial cell density over vehicle controls. (C) Representative images from the cerebral cortex of progesterone-treated animals analyzed for angiogenesis. VEGF
(red) does not co-localize with endothelial cells (green). *p b 0 .05, **p b 0.001; n = sham (6), tMCAO + veh (7), P4 (8).

Fig. 2. Progesterone blunts macrophage inﬁltration. (A) Representative images of staining for macrophages using ED1/CD68 in the cerebral cortex 3 days post-tMCAO. Top panel
shows contralateral hemisphere where there are no macrophages in any of the treatment groups. Lower panel shows macrophages present only in the vehicle-treated tMCAO group.
n = sham (3), tMCAO + veh (7), progesterone (P4) (3).

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

405

Fig. 3. Progesterone-treated hypoxic endothelial cells inhibit macrophage migration. (A) Schematic of the two-chamber two-cell transwell assay. Endothelial cells (bEnd.3) subjected to
hypoxia/reoxygenation are plated in the bottom chamber and macrophages (IC21) are suspended in the top chamber and allowed to migrate. Representative 20× images of macrophages
(stained by DAPI) after migrating toward (B) media alone +/− progesterone or (C) hypoxic endothelial cells +/− progesterone. (D) Hypoxia/reoxygenation increased macrophage
migration compared to normoxia controls and was blunted by the addition of progesterone (***p b 0.0001; n = 4).

were previously associated with ischemia-mediated macrophage inﬁltration. Further validation of these two candidates of interest was
performed using speciﬁc ELISAs. We found that expression of both
MCP-1/CCL2 and CXCL1/KC, which typically is elevated after ischemic
injury (Stroo et al., 2010), was inhibited after exposure to progesterone
(Fig. 4A and B; p b .05). It is noteworthy that CXCL1/KC secretion
trended toward increased expression from normoxia to hypoxia/
reoxygenation injury, suggesting that this chemokine may be maintained at basal levels, except when in the presence of progesterone,
when its secretion is blunted (Fig. 4B; p b .05) Our results show that
chemokines are involved in recruiting macrophages into the endothelial space post-infarction and that progesterone can blunt the recruitment of macrophages, thus prolonging and protecting the stability of
preexisting endothelial cells.
It is well documented that pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as TNFα and IL-1β stimulate chemokine synthesis in ischemic tissues
(Frangogiannis, 2004). Accordingly, we evaluated the expression of
TNF-α in our hypoxic endothelial cells and found, as expected, that
hypoxia and hypoxia/reperfusion increase TNF-α. We also found that
progesterone blunts TNF-α expression to levels similar to normoxia
levels, and TNF-α may be a key signaling molecule leading to the secretion of MCP-1 and CXCL1 chemokines (Fig. 4C).

4. Discussion
Here we propose a novel mechanism of action by which progesterone functions to protect endothelial cells from macrophage-mediated
inﬁltration, inﬂammation and death. The basis for this protection is
related to chemokine expression patterns of hypoxic endothelial cells,
which can initiate the recruitment or suppression of macrophages into

the zone of injury. This macrophage/chemokine effect is conserved
within in vivo and in vitro models of ischemic stroke.
Indeed, progesterone has an effect on macrophage migration only
when endothelial cells are present, suggesting that the hormone functions to modulate endothelial cell factor secretion, which in turn alters
macrophage recruitment after hypoxia/reperfusion injury. Our ﬁnding
is in line with our in vivo staining of the cerebral cortex, which shows
the presence of macrophages after tMCAO with vehicle treatment, and
no macrophage response following progesterone given after tMCAO
(Fig. 2). We hypothesize that endothelial cells exposed to hypoxic/
ischemic conditions secrete factors that inﬂuence macrophage recruitment and that the factors secreted are modulated by progesterone
treatment.
In the present study, we found that endothelial cells are protected
in the cerebral cortex by progesterone within 3 days after ischemic/
reperfusion injury induced by tMCAO. We also noted that without progesterone, the endothelial cell population in the area of the infarct was
eliminated and replaced by a signiﬁcant presence of macrophages in the
cerebral cortex. We were unable to identify a relationship between
these progesterone-protected endothelial cells and angiogenic and/or
arteriogenic markers, leading us to conclude that progesterone was in
fact protecting preexisting endothelial cells from the macrophageinduced cytotoxicity post-ischemic/reperfusion injury rather than
stimulating the angiogenesis that follows the injury. Based on the
results of our experiment we think that macrophage inﬁltration is
detrimental to the promotion of perfusion recovery after ischemic
injury. This ﬁnding, taken together with the fact the endothelial cells
from the progesterone group were negative for angiogenic markers
(Fig. 1C), leads us to hypothesize that the preexisting population of endothelial cells is protected from macrophage inﬁltration and, ultimately,
macrophage-induced death.

406

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

Fig. 4. Progesterone blunts inﬂammatory cytokine secretion from hypoxic endothelial cells. (A) MCP-1/CCL2 release after hypoxia/reoxygenation. (B) CXCL1/KC release after hypoxia
reoxygenation. Cytokine release is signiﬁcantly increased compared to normoxia after hypoxia/reoxygenation and signiﬁcantly decreased after the addition of progesterone. p b .05
s = 6 (C) Cellular TNF-α expression after hypoxia/reoxygenation, blunted after the addition of progesterone.

In our in vitro experiment we found that progesterone blunted the
migration of macrophages toward hypoxia/reoxygenated endothelial
cells. Interestingly, progesterone-treated media in the absence of injured cells was not sufﬁcient to induce macrophage migration, because
progesterone is not in itself a migratory stimulus for macrophages. Our
study shows that the hypoxic/reoxygenated condition of the endothelial cell is necessary to stimulate macrophage migration patterns.
By proﬁling the media from hypoxic/reoxygenated endothelial cells,
we identiﬁed candidate chemokines modulated by progesterone treatment. Two chemokines involved in macrophage recruitment were
reduced in the presence of progesterone: MCP-1/CCl2 and CXCL1/KC.
Because Farivar et al. have previously shown that TNF-α-deﬁcient
mice undergoing experimental infarction exhibit decreased chemokine
expression, this suggested an important role for TNF-α in mediating
the post-infarction chemokine response (Farivar et al., 2004). Other
studies have linked TNF-α and chemokine expression in the rat myocardium, where lipopolysaccharide-induced CXC chemokine (LIX) is
expressed by resident myocardial cells during ischemia-reperfusion
and is induced in cultured cardiomyocytes by TNF-α via NF-κB activation
(Chandrasekar et al., 2001). Based on these reports, we evaluated the expression of TNF-α in our cell culture model after hypoxia/reoxygenation
and found that, in line with current literature, progesterone decreases
TNF-α expression to modify the injury cascade.
The inﬂuence of chemokines on ischemic reperfusion injury is very
much time-dependent and tissue-speciﬁc. Previous studies have identiﬁed a role for chemokines in renal protection after ischemic injury but
none have implicated progesterone as a regulator. Stroo et al. demonstrated that during renal ischemic/reperfusion injury, tubular epithelial
cells produce chemokines that upon inhibition and/or neutralization

ameliorate the initiation and progression of renal damage (Stroo et al.,
2010). Sung et al. showed a similar result, suggesting that not only is
MCP-1-dependent macrophage inﬁltration contributory to renal ischemic damage, but also that inhibition reduced the severity of injury
(Sung et al., 2002). In experimental diabetic nephropathy, Ccl2/MCP-1
deﬁciency decreased renal damage by reducing the accumulation
of macrophages. Inhibition of Ccl2/MCP-1 signaling and neutralizing
Cxcl1/KC during the inﬂammatory response has a protective effect
on ischemic renal injury and also attenuates hepatocellular injury
after ischemia/reperfusion (Shea-Donohue et al., 2008).
In contrast to reports implicating chemokines in the progression of
ischemic renal injury, some myocardial studies have linked increased
chemokine expression with beneﬁcial effects after reperfusion injury
(Morimoto et al., 2008). Myocardial infarction depends on the inﬁltration of macrophages to promote scar tissue, neovascularization, remodeling and wound healing (Lambert et al., 2008; Morimoto et al., 2008;
Nahrendorf et al., 2010). We now have shown that cerebrovascular
endothelial cells appear to function in ways similar to the kidney in
response to chemokine secretion and macrophage inﬁltration after
ischemic reperfusion injury in the brain. We propose that elevated
chemokine expression (particularly MCP-1 and CXCL1) contributes to
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury and that progesterone blunts the
secretion of these factors by ischemic endothelial cells (Fig. 5). This process will then lead to reduced macrophage inﬁltration, more vascular
protection and functional recovery after stroke.
Multiple reports clearly demonstrate that effective repair of ischemic
tissue is dependent on a well-orchestrated cellular response and on
timely induction and suppression of chemokines in a locally restricted
manner. Our ﬁndings corroborate reports that early upregulation of

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

407

Fig. 5. Schematic of progesterone-mediated vascular protection after ischemia/reperfusion injury. After ischemia, TNF-α is upregulated within endothelial cells (1), leading to increased
secretion of macrophage-recruiting chemokines MCP-1 and CXCL1 (2). Following chemokine upregulation, monocytes inﬁltrate the endothelial space, leading to the increased presence
of macrophages (4) and macrophage-mediated endothelial cell damage (5). Progesterone's effect on the cerebral vasculature after ischemia is to protect endothelial cells from further
damage and loss by inhibiting TNF-alpha expression, chemokine secretion and macrophage inﬁltration.

chemotactic factors such as MCP-1 and CXCL1 in response to hypoxia/
reoxygenation or ischemic/reperfusion injury contribute to ischemic
injury through macrophage-mediated inﬂammatory signaling in the
brain. The signiﬁcance of our data is that progesterone-mediated suppression of secreted MCP-1 and CXCL1 will contribute to the protection
of endothelial cells and ultimately blood vessels, which are necessary for
CNS repair after stroke and subsequent functional recovery.
The results of this investigation provide a basis for further research
into the potential therapeutic use of progesterone in patients suffering
from cerebral and other forms of ischemia (e.g., renal ischemia) in
which restoration of blood ﬂow and vascular integrity would reduce
injury and promote functional recovery.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.07.010.
References
Akcay, A., Nguyen, Q., Edelstein, C.L., 2009. Mediators of inﬂammation in acute kidney
injury. Mediat. Inﬂamm. 2009, 137072.
Cao, Y., Hong, A., Schulten, H., Post, M.J., 2005. Update on therapeutic neovascularization.
Cardiovasc. Res. 65, 639–648.
Chandrasekar, B., Smith, J.B., Freeman, G.L., 2001. Ischemia–reperfusion of rat myocardium activates nuclear factor-KappaB and induces neutrophil inﬁltration via
lipopolysaccharide-induced CXC chemokine. Circulation 103, 2296–2302.
Diez-Roux, G., Lang, R.A., 1997. Macrophages induce apoptosis in normal cells in vivo.
Development 124, 3633–3638.
Farivar, A.S., Krishnadasan, B., Naidu, B.V., Woolley, S.M., Verrier, E.D., Mulligan, M.S.,
2004. Alpha chemokines regulate direct lung ischemia–reperfusion injury. J. Heart
Lung Transplant. 23, 585–591.
Folkman, J., 1995. Angiogenesis in cancer, vascular, rheumatoid and other disease. Nat.
Med. 1, 27–31.
Frangogiannis, N.G., 2004. The role of the chemokines in myocardial ischemia and reperfusion. Curr. Vasc. Pharmacol. 2, 163–174.
Gibson, C.L., Coomber, B., Rathbone, J., 2009. Is progesterone a candidate neuroprotective
factor for treatment following ischemic stroke? Neuroscientist 15, 324–332.
Hiu, T., Nakagawa, S., Hayashi, K., et al., 2008. Tissue plasminogen activator enhances the
hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced impairment of the blood–brain barrier in a primary
culture of rat brain endothelial cells. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 28, 1139–1146.

Ishrat, T., Sayeed, I., Atif, F., Stein, D.G., 2009. Effects of progesterone administration on
infarct volume and functional deﬁcits following permanent focal cerebral ischemia
in rats. Brain Res. 1257, 94–101.
Ishrat, T., Sayeed, I., Atif, F., Hua, F., Stein, D.G., 2010. Progesterone and allopregnanolone
attenuate blood–brain barrier dysfunction following permanent focal ischemia by
regulating the expression of matrix metalloproteinases. Exp. Neurol. 226, 183–190.
Ishrat, T., Sayeed, I., Atif, F., Hua, F., Stein, D.G., 2012. Progesterone is neuroprotective
against ischemic brain injury through its effects on the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/
protein kinase B signaling pathway. Neuroscience 210, 442–450.
Jiang, C., Wang, J., Li, X., Liu, C., Chen, N., Hao, Y., 2009. Progesterone exerts neuroprotective effects by inhibiting inﬂammatory response after stroke. Inﬂamm. Res. 58,
619–624.
Kaore, S.N., Langade, D.K., Yadav, V.K., Sharma, P., Thawani, V.R., Sharma, R., 2012. Novel
actions of progesterone: what we know today and what will be the scenario in the
future? J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 64, 1040–1062.
Lambert, J.M., Lopez, E.F., Lindsey, M.L., 2008. Macrophage roles following myocardial
infarction. Int. J. Cardiol. 130, 147–158.
Longa, E.Z., Weinstein, P.R., Carlson, S., Cummins, R., 1989. Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20, 84–91.
Morimoto, H., Hirose, M., Takahashi, M., Kawaguchi, M., Ise, H., Kolattukudy, P.E., Yamada,
M., Ikeda, U., 2008. MCP-1 induces cardioprotection against ischaemia/reperfusion injury: role of reactive oxygen species. Cardiovasc. Res. 78, 554–562.
Nahrendorf, M., Pittet, M.J., Swirski, F.K., 2010. Monocytes: protagonists of infarct inﬂammation and repair after myocardial infarction. Circulation 121, 2437–2445.
Reinhart-King, C.A., 2008. Endothelial cell adhesion and migration. Methods Enzymol.
443, 45–64.
Sayeed, I., Guo, Q., Hoffman, S.W., Stein, D.G., 2006. Allopregnanolone, a progesterone
metabolite, is more effective than progesterone in reducing cortical infarct volume
after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Ann. Emerg. Med. 47, 381–389.
Sayeed, I., Wali, B., Stein, D.G., 2007. Progesterone inhibits ischemic brain injury in a rat model
of permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 25, 151–159.
Shea-Donohue, T., Thomas, K., Cody, M.J., Aiping, Z., Detolla, L.J., Kopydlowski, K.M.,
Fukata, M., Lira, S.A., Vogel, S.N., 2008. Mice deﬁcient in the CXCR2 ligand, CXCL1
(KC/GRO-alpha), exhibit increased susceptibility to dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)induced colitis. Innate Immun. 14, 117–124.
Shyy, Y.J., Hsieh, H.J., Usami, S., Chien, S., 1994. Fluid shear stress induces a biphasic
response of human monocyte chemotactic protein 1 gene expression in vascular
endothelium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91, 4678–4682.
Stroo, I., Stokman, G., Teske, G.J., Raven, A., Butter, L.M., Florquin, S., Leemans, J.C., 2010.
Chemokine expression in renal ischemia/reperfusion injury is most profound during
the reparative phase. Int. Immunol. 22, 433–442.
Sunderkotter, C., Steinbrink, K., Goebeler, M., Bhardwaj, R., Sorg, C., 1994. Macrophages
and angiogenesis. J. Leukoc. Biol. 55, 410–422.

408

E.W. Remus et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 401–408

Sung, F.L., Zhu, T.Y., Au-Yeung, K.K., Siow, Y.L., O K, 2002. Enhanced MCP-1 expression
during ischemia/reperfusion injury is mediated by oxidative stress and NF-kappaB.
Kidney Int. 62, 1160–1170.
Wali, B., Ishrat, T., Won, S., Stein, D.G., Sayeed, I., 2014. Progesterone in experimental
permanent stroke: a dose–response and therapeutic time-window study. Brain 137,
486–502.
Wang, Z., Tsai, L.K., Munasinghe, J., Leng, Y., Fessler, E.B., Chibane, F., Leeds, P., Chuang,
D.M., 2012. Chronic valproate treatment enhances postischemic angiogenesis
and promotes functional recovery in a rat model of ischemic stroke. Stroke 43,
2430–2436.

Won, S., Lee, J.H., Wali, B., Stein, D.G., Sayeed, I., 2014. Progesterone attenuates hemorrhagic transformation after delayed tPA treatment in an experimental model of
stroke in rats: involvement of the VEGF-MMP pathway. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
34, 72–80.
Yousuf, S., Sayeed, I., Atif, F., Tang, H., Wang, J., Stein, D.G., 2014. Delayed progesterone
treatment reduces brain infarction and improves functional outcomes after ischemic
stroke: a time-window study in middle-aged rats. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 34,
297–306.

