Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11
DOI 10.1186/s12974-014-0226-z

RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF
NEUROINFLAMMATION

Open Access

Scutellarin regulates the Notch pathway and
affects the migration and morphological
transformation of activated microglia in
experimentally induced cerebral ischemia in rats
and in activated BV-2 microglia
Yun Yuan1†, Parakalan Rangarajan2†, Enci Mary Kan3, Yajun Wu2, Chunyun Wu1* and Eng-Ang Ling2*

Abstract
Background: Activated microglial cells release an excess of inflammatory mediators after an ischemic stroke.
We reported previously that scutellarin effectively suppressed the inflammatory response induced by activated
microglia in rats subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO); however, the mechanism via which
scutellarin exerts its effects on microglial activation has not been explored. This study aimed to elucidate if
scutellarin can regulate the Notch pathway that is linked to microglia activation in MCAO rat, and in
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced BV-2 microglia. Along with this, we also investigated some characteristic
behavioral responses of activated microglia.
Methods: Expression of various members of the Notch pathway, including Notch-1, intracellular Notch receptor
domain (NICD), recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless (RBP-JK) and transcription factor hairy and
enhancer of split-1 (Hes-1) in activated microglia was assessed by immunofluorescence staining and western
blot after experimental MCAO and in vitro LPS activation. The effect of scutellarin on migration of microglia was
determined by the transwell chamber assay as well as expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
(MCP-1). The morphological change of microglia induced by scutellarin was detected by F-actin staining and
electron microscopy.
Results: Scutellarin markedly attenuated the expression of NF-κB, Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1 both in vivo
and in activated microglia. It decreased the expression of MCP-1 and microglial migration, but increased the ability
of microglia adhesion. Scutellarin also altered the phenotype of microglia by causing rearrangement or
reorganization of its cytoskeleton.
Conclusions: The results suggest that scutellarin regulates the activation of microglia via the Notch pathway and
concurrently induces morphological and functional changes in activated microglia.
Keywords: scutellarin, Notch pathway, activated microglia, cytoskeleton, migration, cerebral ischemia

* Correspondence: wuchunyunkm@163.com; antlea@nus.edu.sg
†
Equal contributors
1
Department of Anatomy and Histology/Embryology, Faculty of Basic
Medical Sciences, Kunming Medical University, 1168 West Chunrong Road,
Kunming 650500, PR China
2
Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 4 Medical Drive, MD10, Singapore 117597, Singapore
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Yuan et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 2 of 21

Table 1 Surgical procedures and number of rats used in various treatments

Double inmunofluorescence

Sham-operated +
saline group (sham)

MCAO + saline
group (MCAO)

MCAO + scutellarin
low dose group (SL)

MCAO + scutellarin
high dose group (SH)

n=9

n = 15

n = 15

n = 15

Western blot

n=9

n = 15

n = 15

n = 15

Total

n = 18

n = 30

n = 30

n = 30

MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Introduction
Stroke is a cerebrovascular neuropathology that causes severe neurological deficits leading to long-term disability
[1]. Stroke is either caused by ischemia, which is triggered
by the blockade of blood vessels supplying the brain [2] or
hemorrhage, which is due to bleeding in the brain parenchyma [3]. In the event of a stroke, microglia, which are
the innate immune cells of the central nervous system
(CNS), are activated [4]. These activated microglia then
migrate to the infarct area to perform phagocytotic
clearance of cellular debris [5], thus offering neuroprotection following ischemia. On the other hand, the
prolonged and non-specific inflammatory reaction of
activated microglia may cause injury to healthy neurons,
resulting in progressive neuronal damage [6]. Microglia
are thought to contribute to neuronal damage via release of excessive proinflammatory cytokines and/or
cytotoxic factors, such as nitric oxide (NO), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Activation of microglia
following ischemia has been shown to occur over a
period of several months after the initial attack [7].
Therefore, this therapeutic window may be utilized to
moderate microglial activation. It is well documented
that microglia undergo a series of morphological transformation and functional alterations, including proliferation and migration when activated by an injurious or
infectious stimulus. Therefore, it is essential to

understand and design ways to modulate these functional aspects of activated microglia, so as to ameliorate
neuronal damage caused by microglia-mediated neuroinflammation after stroke.
In the search for a potential drug that might help reduce
microglia-mediated neuroinflammation, there has been increasing interest on scutellarin (4,5,6-trihydroxyflavone7-glucuronide), a Chinese herbal compound reported to
possess antioxidant properties [8,9]. Scutellarin has been
shown to attenuate microglial inflammatory response [10].
In addition to its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, scutellarin has been demonstrated to have antiapoptotic properties in animal models of ischemic stroke
[11]. However, the direct molecular targets of this drug in
activated microglia have not been elucidated.
The Notch signaling pathway has been shown to control
many functions in various types of tissues, both in healthy
as well as in pathological conditions. In the developing
CNS, the interaction between Notch and its ligands Delta1 and Jagged-1 has been reported to trigger off a cascade
of biochemical events that eventually regulates neuronal
differentiation and gliogenesis [12]. In addition, the Notch
pathway is also implicated in the progression of CNS pathologies such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and ischemic
stroke [13]. Our previous report showed that Notch-1 and
its ligands Jagged-1 and Delta-1 are expressed in the
amoeboid microglia in the early postnatal rat brain, and
regulate the microglial expression of pro-inflammatory

Table 2 Antibodies used for western blotting and staining
Antibody

Host

Source

Catalog number

NFκB

Rabbit polyclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

sc-109
sc-6014-R

Notch-1

Rabbit polyclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

NICD

Rabbit polyclonal

Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany

07-1232

RBP-Jk

Rabbit polyclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

sc-28713

Hes-1

Rabbit polyclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

sc-25392

MCP-1

Rabbit polyclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

sc-28879

Integrin β2

Rabbit polyclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

sc-28661

RhoA

Mouse monoclonal

Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA, USA

sc- 418

Rac1

Mouse monoclonal

Millipore Corporation, CA, USA

2328346

iNOS

Mouse monoclonal

BD Pharmingen San Jose, CA USA

610432

TNF-α

Rabbit polyclonal

Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA

AB2148P

β-actin

Mouse monoclonal

Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA

A-5441

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Figure 1 (See legend on next page.)

Page 3 of 21

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 4 of 21

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 1 Scutellarin reduced NFκB expression in activated microglia in vivo and in vitro. Confocal images showing the expression of
nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFκB) (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral zones of MCAO
rat (D-F) and following scutellarin treatment (G-I). A drastic increase in the expression of NFκB (E) is evident in the activated microglia (D) in middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rat. Note that NFκB expression (H) is reduced in activated microglia (G) 7 days following treatment of MCAO rats with
scutellarin. An upregulation of NFκB (N) is observed in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglia (M) in comparison to control (J-L). NFκB is
reduced (Q) in activated microglia treated with scutellarin. DAPI - blue. Scale bars in A-I: 20 μm, J-R: 50 μm.

cytokines when activated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
[14]. Recently, we have also shown a vital role for the
Notch pathway in activated microglia in response to hypoxic brain injury through its transactivation of NFκB and
subsequent cytokine release [15]. Remarkably, inhibition
of γ-secretase, an enzyme that cleaves Notch-1 into notch
intracellular domain (NICD), led to suppression of microglial activation following hypoxia [15]. In addition, several
studies have reported a central role for the Notch signaling
pathway in other cellular mechanisms such as migration
[16,17], proliferation [18,19], and phagocytosis [20]. In
order to modulate microglial activation, it would be desirable to unravel the role of Notch and its downstream
signaling molecules involved in microglial proliferation,
migration, and phagocytosis.
In light of the above, we aimed to investigate if scutellarin is able to affect the functions of activated microglia
via regulation of the Notch pathway, through the use of
the experimental middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) model of ischemic stroke and in vitro LPS activation of BV-2 microglial cells. The study aims to provide
a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanism via
which scutellarin acts upon the Notch-NFκB pathway in
activated microglia, so as to open up the possibility of
these pathways to be targeted to attenuate microgliamediated neuroinflammation and to aid in the functional
recovery of brain tissue following ischemic stroke.

Methods

middle cerebral artery (MCA) was exposed and cauterized
[21]. In the sham-operated rats, the same surgical procedure was followed, but the MCA was not cauterized. The
rats in the respective drug groups were given an intraperitoneal injection of scutellarin (50 mg/kg (low dose) or 100
mg/kg (high dose) dissolved in saline; purity 99%, Cat.
No. 131021, Shanghai Winherb Medical Technology, China)
at 2 h before and at 12, 24, 36, 48, and 60 h after MCAO;
rats were sacrificed at 1, 3 and 7 d after MCAO.
Dose-dependency of scutellarin effects in BV-2 cells

BV-2 cells were pretreated with different dosages of
scutellarin (0.54 mM, 0.1 mM, 0.02 mM) for 1 h followed
by LPS (1 μg/ml) incubation for 3 h. The protein expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and TNF-α
was then detected by western blot analysis. The information of both antibodies used is given in Table 2. Both
iNOS and TNF-α were selected for this purpose because it
is well documented that they are typical biomarkers for activated microglia, which has been demonstrated previously
by us [22], as well as by others. It was found that scutellarin decreased the expression level of both proteins in a
dose-dependency manner with the effect of 0.54 mM scutellarin being most effective (Additional file 1: Figure S1).
Therefore, we have used 0.54 mM dosage for all in vitro
experiments in this study. Along with this, we have also
evaluated scutellarin at different dosages on Notch expression in LPS-activated BV-2 cells, and this has yielded a
similar dose-dependency effect.

Animals and injection of scutellarin

A total of 108 adult male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing
250 to 280 g were obtained from the Experimental Animal
Center of Kunming Medical University. All animals were
cared for according to National Institutes of Health Guide
for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. All experimental protocols and the use of animals were approved by
Kunming Medical University. All efforts were made to
minimize the number and suffering of the rats used. The
animals were randomly divided into sham-operated + saline (sham), MCAO + saline (MCAO), MCAO + scutellarin low dose (50 mg/kg) (SL), and MCAO + scutellarin
high dose (100 mg/kg) (SH) groups (Table 1).
The animals were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal
injection of sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg). Briefly, a
circular aperture 3 mm in diameter was made in the right
parietal bone with a dental drill, and the main trunk of the

Double immunofluorescence labeling in the cerebrum
and BV-2 microglial cells

A total of 15 rats of various experimental groups were
used for double immunofluorescence labeling: 1, 3, and 7
days (n = 5 at each time point) along with 9 rats for sham
(n = 3 at each of the 3 time points). Following deep
anesthesia with 6% sodium pentobarbital, the rats were
sacrificed by perfusion with 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1
M phosphate buffer. The brain was removed and paraffin
embedded. Coronal sections of 7 μm thickness were cut on
a microtome (Model: 2165; Leica, Bensheim, Germany).
For blocking of nonspecific binding proteins, tissue
sections were incubated in 5% normal goat serum diluted
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 1 h at room temperature (22 to 24°C). The sections were then incubated
in a humidified chamber with the following primary

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Figure 2 (See legend on next page.)

Page 5 of 21

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 6 of 21

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 2 Scutellarin reduced Notch-1 expression in activated microglia in vivo and in vitro. Confocal images showing the expression of
Notch-1 (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral zones of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rat (D-F) and following treatment
with scutellarin (G-I). An enhanced expression of Notch-1 (E) can be observed in the activated microglia (D) in MCAO rat. A noticeable reduction of
Notch-1 expression (H) is observed in activated microglia (G) 7 days following treatment with scutellarin. An upregulation of Notch-1 (N) is observed
in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglia (M) in comparison to control (J-L). Notch-1 is reduced (Q) in activated microglia treated with
scutellarin. DAPI - blue. Scale bars in A-R: 50 μm.

antibodies: monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, MCP-1
(rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:100) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Cat. No. sc-28879); Notch-1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:100)
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc- 6014-R); intracellular Notch receptor domain, NICD (Rabbit polyclonal
IgG 1:200) (Merck KGaA, Cat. No. 07-1232); recombining
binding protein suppressor of hairless, RBP-JK (rabbit
polyclonal IgG 1:100) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat.
No. sc- 28713); transcription factor hairy and enhancer
of split-1, Hes-1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:100) (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc- 25392); and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells, NFκB
(rabbit polyclonal IgG, 1:100) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Cat. No. sc-109) diluted in PBS overnight at 4°C. Following washing in PBS, sections were incubated, with the respective fluorescent secondary antibodies: Cy3-conjugated
secondary antibody and FITC-conjugated lectin (Lycopersicon esculentum), which labels both microglia and blood
vessel endothelial cells for 1 h at room temperature. After
three rinses with PBS, the sections were mounted with a
fluorescent mounting medium containing 4′,6-diamidino2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Sigma, USA; Cat. No. F6057).
Colocalization was observed by confocal microscopy (Fluoview 1000, Olympus Company Pte. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
The details of the antibodies used are given in Table 2.
BV-2 microglial cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), supplemented with
10% fetal calf serum (FCS) at 37°C in a humidified incubator under 5% CO2. The cells were divided into control,
LPS-induced and LPS + scutellarin groups. The cells
were pretreated with scutellarin (0.54 mM) for 1 h at
37°C in a humidified incubator under 5% CO2. This dosage used was based on the cell viability assay done previously by us [22], as well as on the dose-dependency results
(see Additional file 1: Figure S1). After incubation, the
medium was discarded and the cells were washed with
PBS, and then incubated with LPS (1 μg/ml, SigmaAldrich, MO, USA) for 3 h. The culture medium was replaced with basic DMEM before treatment. For controls,
the medium was replaced with basic DMEM. The cells
were then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS
for 20 min. Following rinsing with PBS, the cover slips
with adherent cells were used for immunofluorescence
staining. In each group, BV-2 microglial cells were incubated with the primary antibodies as described above overnight at 4°C. Subsequently, the cells were incubated with

FITC/Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h at room
temperature. After washing, the cover slips were mounted
using a fluorescent mounting medium with DAPI. All images were captured using a confocal microscope.
Western blotting analysis for middle cerebral artery
occlusion tissues and BV-2 microglial cells

A total of 54 rats were used for western blotting analysis.
The sham-operated rats (n = 9, 3 per time point), and
MCAO rats given saline, and scutellarin (two different
dosages, SL and SH) injections were sacrificed at 1 (n = 5
for each group), 3 (n = 5 for each group) and 7 days (n = 5
for each group), respectively. The ischemic cortex and corresponding area in the controls derived from each group
were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Tissue
samples from various groups were homogenized with protein extraction reagent (Pierce, IL, USA) containing protease inhibitors. For BV-2 microglial cells of different groups
(the control, LPS-induced and LPS + scutellarin), the cells
were lysed with lysis buffer, mechanically scraped off with
a rubber scraper and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 25
min. Protein concentrations of both tissues and BV-2
microglial cells were determined by using a protein assay
kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA; Cat. No. 500-0002).
Samples of supernatants containing 50 μg protein of tissue lysate or 40 μg protein of BV-2 microglial cells were
loaded and heated to 95°C for 5 min, and then separated
by sodium dodecyl sulfate-poly-acrylamide gel electrophoresis in 10% and 12% gels respectively, in a MiniProtein II apparatus (Bio-Rad, CA, USA). Protein bands
were electroblotted onto polyvinylindene difluoride
(PVDF) membrane and blocked with non-fat dried milk
for 1 h. The membranes were incubated with MCP-1
(rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:1000) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; Cat. No. sc-28879), Notch-1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG
1:1500) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc- 6014R), NICD (Rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:4000) (Merck KGaA,
Cat. No. 07-1232), RBP-JK (rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:500)
(Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc- 28713), Hes-1
(rabbit polyclonal IgG 1:300) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc- 25392) and β-actin (mouse monoclonal
IgG 1:10000) (Sigma; Cat. No. A5441) primary antibodies (Table 2) diluted in Tris-Buffered Saline-0.1%
Tween (TBST) overnight at 4°C. They were then incubated with the secondary antibodies, either with horseradish peroxidase conjugated anti-rabbit IgG (Thermo

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Figure 3 (See legend on next page.)

Page 7 of 21

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 8 of 21

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 3 Scutellarin reduced NICD expression in activated microglia in vivo and in vitro. Confocal images showing the expression of Notch
intracellular domain (NICD) (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral zones of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rat (D-F)
and following treatment with scutellarin (G-I). NICD expression (E) is augmented in the activated microglia (D), but this is decreased (H) in
activated microglia (G) 7 days following treatment with scutellarin. An upregulation of NICD (N) is observed in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated
BV-2 microglia (M) in comparison to control (J-L). NICD is reduced (Q) in activated microglia treated with scutellarin. DAPI - blue. Scale bars in
A-R: 50 μm.

Scientific; Cat. No. 31460) or anti-mouse IgG (Thermo
Scientific; Cat. No. 31430). Protein was detected by a
chemiluminescence kit (GE Healthcare UK Limited,
Bucks, UK) following the manufacturer’s instructions
and developed on film. The band intensity was quantified in Image J software (National Institutes of Health,
NIH, USA). All experiments were repeated at least in
triplicate. In addition, nuclear protein of BV-2 microglial cells was extracted to detect the effect of scutellarin
on NICD transferring to nucleus. Nuclear protein extraction was performed by using the NE-PER Nuclear
and Cytoplasmic Extraction Kit (Thermo Scientific,
MA, USA. Cat. No. 78833) following the manufacturer’s
instructions and the amount of protein was determined
by using a protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA,
USA; Cat. No. 500-0002).

and shaken at 80 rpm for 3 min. The images of cells left
on the surface of the plate were captured at a magnification of 200x. Five visual fields were randomly selected and
the cells in these visual fields were counted using Image J
software. The percentage of cells that remained adherent
to the wells was calculated as follows:
sum of number of cells in five visual fields after trypsinization
 100 %
sum of number of cells in five visual fields before trypsinization

The assays were performed in triplicate, and results
are expressed as percentage mean ± SD. The protein
contents of these cells were extracted for the detection
of the adhesion molecule-integrin β2 (rabbit polyclonal
antibody 1:500) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc28661) by western blot assay.

Cell migration assay

The effect of scutellarin on BV-2 microglial cell migration was assessed using Transwell™ permeable support
polycarbonate membrane inserts (8.0 μm pore size; Costar, USA), placed in a 24-well plate. After treatment
with scutellarin at different concentrations (0.54 mM,
0.27 mM and 0.11 mM) for 3 h, the cells were washed
with PBS, trypsinized, and resuspended in basic medium.
The 200-μl cell suspension without FCS (3 × 104 cells)
was seeded into the inside of the insert, and 600 μl
DMEM with 20% FCS was added into each well of
the 24-well plate. After incubation at 37°C with 5% CO2
for 20 h, the medium was discarded and the cells
remaining inside the insert were carefully removed. Cells
were then fixed with 100% methanol for 15 min at room
temperature and were stained with 0.5% of crystal violet
at room temperature for 30 min. The cells were rinsed
with distilled water until excess dye was removed. The
images of migrated cells on the lower surface of the insert were captured at a magnification of 120x. Cells in
five visual fields were counted on each insert using
Image J software. Results are expressed as mean (± SD)
of the number of cells per visual field.
Cell adhesion assay

BV-2 microglial cells were plated in 6-well plates at a
density of 3 × 105 cells/well for 24 h following treatment
with scutellarin at different concentrations (0.54 mM, 0.27
mM and 0.11 mM) for 3 h. The cells were then trypsinized

Morphology and cytoskeleton assay
F-actin labeling

To detect the actin cytoskeleton in microglia, Rhodamine
Phalloidin (3.5:500, Cat. PHDR1, Cytoskeleton Inc., USA)
was used. BV-2 microglial cells grown on poly-L-lysine
coated cover slips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
for 10 min at room temperature. Cells were washed once
with PBS at room temperature for 30 s and treated in
permeabilization buffer (0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS) for 5
min at room temperature. After rinsing, the cells were incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature with
Rhodamine Phalloidin (diluted in PBS according to the
manufacturer’s specifications). Following incubation, the
cells were rinsed in PBS and the cover slips were mounted
onto glass slides with a fluorescent mounting medium.
Rho pathway

Rho GTPases are known to be involved in the control of
actin cytoskeleton and cell migration. To investigate if
scutellarin would affect the morphological changes of
microglia via the Rho pathway, the protein supernatant of
BV-2 microglial cells treated with 0.54 μM scutellarin was
also extracted to detect for involvement of the Rho pathway using primary antibodies RhoA (mouse monoclonal
IgG 1:500) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc- 418)
and Rac1 (mouse monoclonal IgG 1:1000) (Millipore
Corporation, Cat. No. 2328346) by western blot assay.

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Figure 4 (See legend on next page.)

Page 9 of 21

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 10 of 21

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 4 Scutellarin reduced RBP-JK expression in activated microglia in vivo and in vitro. Confocal images showing the expression of
recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless (RBP-JK) (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral zones of middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) rat (D-F) and following treatment with scutellarin (G-I). The expression of RBP-JK (E) is increased in the activated
microglia (D) in MCAO rat. A noticeable reduction of RBP-JK expression (H) is observed in activated microglia (G) 7 days following treatment
with scutellarin. An upregulation of RBP-JK (N) is observed in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglia (M) in comparison to control (J-L).
RBP-JK is decreased (Q) in activated microglia treated with scutellarin. DAPI - blue. Scale bars in A-I: 20 μm, J-R: 50 μm.

Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)

For scanning electron microscopy (SEM), BV-2 microglial cells, control and treated with scutellarin, were
seeded on cover slips in a 24-well plate at 2 × 104/cm2.
After prewashing three times with PBS, the cells were
fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde and 3% glutaraldehyde in
0.1 M phosphate buffer at 4°C for 1 h before further fixation with 1% osmium tetroxide in PB, pH 7.4 for 30
min. Subsequently the samples were washed with 0.1 M
PB and dehydrated through an ascending series of ethanol at room temperature before being transferred to
a Bal-Tec CPD-030 critical point dryer (Bal-Tec AG,
Balzers, Liechtenstein), using liquefied carbon dioxide as
the transition fluid. The cover slips were then mounted on
SEM stub. All cells were sputter-coated with 20 nm gold
in a sputter coater (Balzers SCD 004) before examination
in a scanning electron microscope (FEI 650 SEM).
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)

Control and scutellarin treated BV-2 microglial cells were
fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde and 3% glutaraldehyde in PB
at 4°C for 1 h before post-fixation with 1% osmium tetroxide, pH 7.4 for 1 h. Subsequently, the cell samples were
dehydrated through an ascending series of ethanol at room
temperature before infiltration with acetone and resin
followed by final embedding in resin which was allowed to
polymerize at 60°C for 24 h. The cell samples were cut with
an ultra-microtome (Leica). Ultrathin sections obtained
were mounted on formvar-coated copper grids and double
stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. The grids were
viewed in a JEOL 1010 transmission electron microscope.
Statistical analyses

SPSS 16.0 statistical software was used for statistical analysis. The data were expressed as mean ± SD and analyzed
using one-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc analysis
using Dunnet’s test to determine the statistical significance
of different groups. All experiments were conducted in
triplicate from different tissue samples. The difference was
considered statistically significant when P <0.05.

Results
Scutellarin inhibited expression of NFκB in activated
microglia

NFκB expression in activated microglia was detected by
double immunofluorescence staining in MCAO rats given

scutellarin treatment. NFκB immunofluorescence in activated microglia in the penumbral zones was noticeably
enhanced after MCAO, but it was evidently reduced at 7
days following treatment with scutellarin. Scutellarin also
decreased the expression of NFκB in LPS-induced activated BV-2 microglia (Figure 1).
Scutellarin reduced the expression of proteins in the
Notch pathway in activated microglia in middle cerebral
artery occlusion rats and in lipopolysaccharide-induced
BV-2 microglia

To investigate the effects of scutellarin on the Notch pathway, we examined the production of Notch-1, NICD,
RBP-JK and Hes-1 in the brain tissue of MCAO rats given
the treatment of low and high doses of the drug by double
immunofluorescence staining, and in BV-2 microglia.
Here we show the images of activated microglia in MCAO
rats treated with a high dose of scutellarin only. Notch-1
immunofluorescence in activated microglia in the penumbral zones was noticeably enhanced after MCAO, but it
was markedly reduced at 7 days following treatment with
scutellarin (Figure 2). The expression of NICD (Figure 3),
RBP-JK (Figure 4, Additional file 2: Figure S2) and Hes-1
(Figure 5, Additional file 3: Figure S3) paralleled with that
of Notch-1 after treatment with scutellarin. On closer
examination, RBP-JK and Hes-1 immunofluorescence was
localized both in the cytoplasm and nucleus in activated
microglia. The significance of this is considered in the
discussion.
Consistent with results in vivo, expression changes in
the Notch pathway proteins, including Notch-1, NICD,
RBP-JK and Hes-1, were also observed in LPS-induced
microglial BV-2 cells. Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1
immunofluorescence intensity was markedly augmented
when the cells were subjected to LPS treatment, but was
reduced in LPS-activated microglia pretreated with scutellarin (Figures 2, 3, 4, and 5).
Western blot analysis also showed that the protein expression of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1 in the brain
tissue of MCAO rats was obviously suppressed at 7 days
after treatment with scutellarin (Figure 6A). There was,
however, no obvious difference in the protein level treated
with low and high dosage. The protein expression of
Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1 was also significantly
decreased in BV-2 microglial cells pretreated with scutellarin (Figure 6B). The expression level of NICD in the

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Figure 5 (See legend on next page.)

Page 11 of 21

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 12 of 21

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 5 Scutellarin reduced Hes-1 expression in activated microglia in vivo and in vitro. Confocal images showing the expression of
transcription factor hairy and enhancer of split-1 (Hes-1) (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral zones of middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) rat (D-F) and following treatment with scutellarin (G-I). An increase in the expression of Hes-1 (E) is evident in the
activated microglia (D) in MCAO rat. A noticeable reduction of Hes-1 expression (H) is observed in activated microglia (G) 7 days following
treatment with scutellarin. An upregulation of Hes-1 (N) is observed in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglia (M) in comparison to
control (J-L). Hes-1 is reduced (Q) in activated microglia treated with scutellarin. DAPI - blue. Scale bars in A-R: 50 μm.

nucleus, which was increased after LPS stimulation, was
suppressed when pretreated with scutellarin (Figure 6C).
The protein expression of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and
Hes-1 in the brain tissue of MCAO rats was also augmented following ischemia and was also attenuated with
scutellarin treatment at 1 and 3 days. There was no obvious difference in expression between different time
points. Additional file 4: Figure S4 showed the protein
expression by western blot and NICD immunofluroscence expression at 3 days.
Scutellarin inhibited migration of microglia and reduced
the expression of MCP-1 in activated microglia in vivo
and in vitro

Transwell migration experiment in vitro was performed
to assess whether scutellarin influences the motility
of microglia. Migration of BV-2 microglia towards the
lower compartment treated with different concentrations
of scutellarin was significantly decreased compared with
the control; however, the effect on migration was not
dose-dependent among groups (Figure 7).
MCP-1 immunoexpression in activated microglia was detected by double immunofluorescence staining in MCAO
rats given scutellarin treatment. MCP-1 immunofluorescence in activated microglia in the penumbral zones was
noticeably enhanced after MCAO, but it was markedly
reduced at 7 days following treatment with scutellarin.
Western blot analysis also showed that the protein expression of MCP-1 was obviously suppressed at 3 and 7 days
after treatment with the drug (Figure 8). It is noteworthy
that at 7 days, there was no difference in MCP-1 expression
between MCAO and scutellarin low dose (SL) group.
As with results in vivo, expression change in MCP-1
was also observed in LPS-induced BV-2 microglial cells.
MCP-1 immunofluorescence intensity was markedly
augmented when the cells were subjected to LPS treatment, but was suppressed in LPS-activated microglia
pretreated with scutellarin. The protein expression of
MCP-1 was also significantly decreased in BV-2 microglial cells pretreated with the drug (Figure 9).
Scutellarin increased the adhesion of BV-2 microglia and
expression of integrin β2

The cells tightly adhered to the wells in the control were
markedly decreased in numbers after trypsinization and
shaking, while the majority of activated BV-2 cells given

Scutellarin for 3 h remained adherent to the wells. The
frequency of adherent cells treated with different concentrations of scutellarin was significantly increased
when compared with the control, but the change was
not dose dependent (Figure 10A-I).
To further investigate the adhesive effects of scutellarin
on microglia, we examined the production of integrin β2.
The protein expression of integrin β2 was noticeably increased in BV-2 microglial cells treated with scutellarin of
different concentrations. There was no significant difference
between groups with the drug treatment (Figure 10J-K).
Scutellarin alters the external morphology and
ultrastructure of BV-2 microglial cells
F-actin labeling

Actin bundles were orderly distributed in BV-2 microglia of
the control, which shows a spherical outline (Figure 11A).
BV-2 microglia treated with scutellarin exhibited more
microspike projections and flattened or lamellar processes
with intense staining of F-actin (Figure 11B, C). Scutellarin
treatment promoted the formation of microspike projections and increase in actin staining intensity in BV-2 microglia (Figure 11D).
Rho pathway

The protein expression of Rac 1 was increased in BV-2
microglial cells treated with scutellarin from 1-3 h, but
there was no significant difference among different time
points. The expression level of RhoA was not altered by
scutellarin (Figure 11E).
Electron microscopy

SEM images showed that the spherical BV-2 microglial
cells in the control group emitted a few thin cytoplasmic
processes. After scutellarin treatment, the cells appeared
more flattened and the cell bodies extended numerous
processes bearing secondary and tertiary projections.
TEM images showed that the control cells exhibited a
relatively round profile in section as compared with cells
treated with scutellarin. In the latter, the cells were ramified. Bundles of microtubules and microfilaments in parallel arrays were distributed in the cell body and in
broad and slender cytoplasmic processes after scutellarin
treatment (Figure 12).

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 13 of 21

Figure 6 Protein expression of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1 was decreased in MCAO rat and in BV-2 microglia following treatment
with scutellarin. (A) The expression levels of Notch-1, Notch intracellular domain (NICD), recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless (RBP-JK)
and transcription factor hairy and enhancer of split-1 (Hes-1) in middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rat brains are depressed significantly at 7 days
following treatment with scutellarin (low, SL and high, SH dose) when compared with the MCAO rats not treated with scutellarin. (B) The expression
levels of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1 in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglial cells are reduced significantly when given scutellarin
treatment. (C) Scutellarin decreases NICD translocation into the nucleus in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglial cells. Significant differences
in protein levels are expressed as * P <0.05 and ** P <0.01. The values represent the mean ± SD in triplicate.

Discussion
Neuroinflammation in the acute phase brain damage as
well as chronic diseases has been reported to result in
neuronal death, glia activation, synaptic impairment

etcetera. The hallmark feature of neuroinflammation due
to brain insult is the activation of microglia and
microglia-mediated neuroinflammation has been extensively explored both in vivo with different experimental

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 14 of 21

Figure 7 Scutellarin inhibited migration of BV-2 microglia. Transwell migration assay shows that scutellarin reduces the migration of BV-2
microglia. Light microscopy images of BV-2 cells treated with scutellarin of different concentrations and the control are shown. The quantitative
analysis reveals a decrease in the migration of microglia with scutellarin treatment. Data are represented as mean ± SD (n = 3), * P <0.01. Scale
bar = 100 μm.

animal models in the developing and mature brain and
in vitro. In this connection, it has been well documented that activated microglia releases a plethora of
inflammatory mediators that may exacerbate the neurodegeneration process.
Microglial cells are responsible for the first line of
immune defense in the CNS. In response to injury,
microglia undergo progressive morphological and functional changes indicative of their activation. It has been
well documented that microglia can scavenge cellular
debris [23,24] and invading pathogens, as well as release
neurotrophic factors that regulate the microenvironment
stabilization [25]. However, over-activated microglia also

release cytotoxic substances and proinflammatory cytokines which can aggravate injury of the tissues. Activation
of microglia is thought to contribute to neuronal damage
via the release of excessive proinflammatory cytokines
and/or cytotoxic factors [26,27]. Therefore, suppressing
over-activated microglia in pathological conditions seems
to be an attractive therapeutic strategy for various neuroinflammatory or neurodegenerative disorders.
To date, many agents either synthetic or of natural
sources have been documented to be able to block the
inflammatory response driven by microglial activation
[28-30]. Further progress has been made to identify active compounds extracted from herbal medicines which

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 15 of 21

Figure 8 Scutellarin reduced MCP-1 expression in activated microglia after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Confocal images
showing the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) (red) in lectin + microglia (green) in the penumbral zones of MCAO rat
(D-F) and following treatment with Scutellarin (G-I). Increase in MCP-1 expression (E) can be observed in the activated microglia (D) in MCAO rat.
A marked reduction of MCP-1 expression (H) is observed in activated microglia (G) 7 days following treatment with scutellarin. DAPI - blue. Scale
bars in A-I: 20 μm. The expression levels of MCP-1 in MCAO rat are depressed significantly at 3 and 7 days (J) following treatment with scutellarin
at low (SL) and high (SH) dosage when compared with the MCAO rats not treated with the drug (compared with M). Significant differences in
protein levels between MCAO and drug used rats are expressed as * P <0.01.

can modulate microglia-mediated inflammation. One of
such compounds is scutellarin, the major active component
extracted from Erigeron breviscapus (Vant.) Hand-Mazz
[31]. It has been reported that scutellarin can inhibit LPSinduced production of proinflammatory mediators such as
NO, TNF-α, IL-1β and ROS in rat primary microglia or
BV-2 mouse microglial cell line [10,22].
NFκB is a transcription factor known to be one of the
most important regulators of proinflammatory gene

expression such as TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, inducible
nitric oxide synthase and cyclo-oxygenase-2 [32]. The
Notch and NFκB pathways function synergistically in
regulating several aspects of cellular functioning [33].
We have shown that the Notch pathway is upstream of
NFκB and regulates activated microglia [14,15]. Previous
studies have shown that scutellarin possesses the ability
to suppress the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokine
production in activated microglia, which is through the

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 16 of 21

Figure 9 MCP-1 expression was suppressed following treatment of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated BV-2 microglia with scutellarin.
Confocal images show an upregulation of Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) (E) in LPS-activated BV-2 microglia (D) in comparison
to control (A-C). Pretreatment with scutellarin leads to decrease in the expression of MCP-1 (H) in LPS-activated BV-2 microglia (G). DAPI - blue.
Scale bars in A-I: 50 μm. The expression levels of MCP-1 in LPS-activated BV-2 microglial cells are depressed significantly following treatment with
scutellarin by western blot (J, K). Significant difference in protein level between LPS and scutellarin-treated cells are expressed as * P <0.01. The
values represent the mean ± SD in triplicate.

NFκB pathway [10,22]. Here, we confirm that scutellarin
can inhibit the expression of NFκB in activated BV-2
microglia and activated microglia in MACO rats. In
the present study, we aimed at ascertaining if scutellarin
could disrupt the Notch pathway, thereby affecting
NFκB-mediated cytokine production in activated microglia. Indeed, scutellarin suppressed the expression of
members of the Notch signaling pathway such as Notch-1
and NICD, RBP-JK and Hes-1, as well as the nuclear
translocation of NICD in activated microglia both in vivo
and in vitro. A noteworthy feature in this study was the
localization of RBP-JK and Hes-1 in activated microglia.
It was noted that though they predominantly localize in
the nucleus of activated microglia following translocation

from the cytosol to the nucleus, some residual cytoplasmic
localization and staining is also seen. Another possible explanation for this would be diffusion of these proteins
from the nucleus during tissue section preparations. Notwithstanding, these results establish that scutellarin targets
the Notch pathway, which lies upstream of NFκB [34].
Among the various cytokines released by activated
microglia, MCP-1 plays an important role in the induction
of cellular migration, blood-brain barrier alteration, and
inflammation progress in the CNS [35]. MCP-1 can cause
the migration and activation of microglia [36] inducing a
series of inflammatory responses. It has been reported that
scutellarin can inhibit cell migration [37,38]. Here we have
shown that microglial migration was significantly inhibited

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 17 of 21

Figure 10 Scutellarin promoted adhesion of BV-2 microglia. Light microscope images show the number of cells in the control is markedly
decreased (B) compared with that before trypsinization and shaking (A). Treatment with scutellarin of different concentrations leads to an
increase in numbers of attached cells (D, F, H). The percentage of adherent cells treated with different concentrations of scutellarin significantly is
increased as compared with the control (I). Scale bars in A-H: 100 μm. The expression level of integrin β2 is upregulated following treatment
with scutellarin of different concentrations (J, K). Significant difference between control and scutellarin treated cells are expressed as * P <0.01.
The values represent the mean ± SD in triplicate.

by scutellarin with a corresponding reduction in the expression of MCP-1 in the microglia of MCAO rats and
BV-2 microglial cells. Taken together, it is suggested that
scutellarin exerts its inhibitory effect on microglial migration by reducing the expression of MCP-1.
Besides its effect on MCP-1, scutellarin increased the
ability of adhesion in microglia which is consistent with its
inhibitory effect on microglial migration. We also examined the expression of integrin β2 in microglia. β2 integrins
play a major role in cell migration to the inflammatory lesion and also induce cytokine production [39]. It is known
that β2 integrins as adhesive co-receptors are required for
neutrophil responses triggered by a large number of stimuli
such as TNF and other proinflammatory cytokines. We
show here that the protein expression of the integrin β2
was noticeably increased in BV-2 microglial cells when
treated with scutellarin. This provides strong morphological evidence that scutellarin can promote microglial

adhesion by expressing integrin β2. It is therefore suggested that scutellarin can increase adhesion thereby decreasing migration of microglia.
An earlier report suggested that Hes-1, a downstream
member of the Notch pathway, is a vital regulator of
neuronal migration in the hypothalamus [40]. In our
study, we found that scutellarin inhibited Hes-1 expression and microglia migration, but promoted microglia
attachment. It is reasonable therefore to suggest that
scutellarin can halt migration of activated microglia by
inhibiting the Notch pathway.
BV-2 microglia underwent drastic morphological change
following scutellarin treatment. By F-actin labeling, scutellarin was found to induce increased actin fluorescence
intensity and altered the morphology of BV-2 microglia.
BV-2 microglial cells given scutellarin treatment were
highly ramified bearing many microspike projections and
flattened processes when compared with the control.

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 18 of 21

Figure 11 Scutellarin increased the fluorescence intensity of F-actin, promoted the formation of projections and increased the expression
of Rac1. Confocal immunofluorescence images showing the expression of F-actin (Rhodamine, red) in BV-2 microglial cells. The expression of F-actin
in the control cells (A) appears to be increased in cells treated with scutellarin. Note that microglia treated with scutellarin show more projections of
actin microspikes (B, C). Scale bar in A-B: 20 μm, C: 10 μm. The quantitative analysis shows that the intensity of F-actin in BV-2 microglial cells treated
with scutellarin is increased compared with that of cells in control (D). Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 3), * P <0.01. The protein expression of
Rac 1 is increased in BV-2 cells treated with scutellarin, but that of RhoA remains relatively unaltered (E).

Furthermore, SEM images showed that when treated scutellarin, BV-2 microglial cells appeared to have a more flattened cell body with long extending primary processes
that were flattened or lamellar and arising from these
are many secondary projections. In contrast, the cells in
the control group emitted thin processes. TEM images
showed abundant microtubules/microfilaments both in
the cell body and in cytoplasmic processes after scutellarin treatment. Taken together, it is justified to suggest

that scutellarin affects the cytoskeletal arrangement or
reorganization in microglial cells, therefore promoting
the formation of flattened and microspike projections.
Arising from the above, it is suggested that scutellarin
inhibits the migration of microglia and this may be
attributed to its effects on the reorganization and
stabilization of cytoskeletal dynamics.
To understand how scutellarin would exert its effect on
the cytoskeletal formation, we detected the expression of

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Figure 12 (See legend on next page.)

Page 19 of 21

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 20 of 21

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 12 Scutellarin treatment led to ultrastructural changes of BV-2 microglia. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images show that
the cells given scutellarin appear flattened with cell bodies that extend numerous processes emitting secondary and tertiary projections.
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images show that the control BV-2 microglial cells have a relatively round cellular outline. They assume a
more ramified phenotype when treated with scutellarin. Parallel arrays of microtubules/microfilaments (arrows) - both in the cell body and in the
cytoplasmic processes - are observed after scutellarin treatment.

Rho family small GTPases (Rho GTPases). Rho GTPases
are involved in the control of actin cytoskeleton and cell
migration. RhoA and Rac1 are members of Rho GTPases
[41]. Rac1 stimulates actin polymerization and Rac1 activation induces formation of lamellae of cells and cell
spreading on extracellular matrixes. Here, we found the
expression of Rac1 was increased in BV-2 microglial cells
after scutellarin treatment, but RhoA expression was not
affected. In view of this, it is suggested that Rac1 may play
an important role in promoting extension of cytoskeleton
and formation of flattened processes in scutellarin treated
microglia.
Finally, contrary to the reports by others in which the
Notch pathway has been implicated in migration and
phagocytosis in different cells, scutellarin did not appear
to exert an obvious effect on microglial migration, adhesion and phagocytosis via the Notch pathway as shown
by the DAPT (a γ-secretase inhibitor) treatment, and
phagocytosis of latex beads (YY, PR and E-A L, unpublished data). This suggests that while scutellarin can directly affect the Notch pathway, the effects on microglial
behaviors seem to involve other pathways but this remains to be further explored.

Conclusion
It is unequivocal from this study that scutellarin can attenuate the NFκB expression and inhibit the nuclear
translocation of NFκB in activated microglia. Coupled
with this, scutellarin inhibits the Notch pathway by reducing the expression of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK and
Hes-1 in microglia in vivo and in vitro. Scutellarin increased the ability of adhesion in microglia, while it
inhibited the expression of MCP-1 and microglial migration. It also changed the phenotype of microglia by promoting the formation of processes and rearranging the
cytoskeleton. The present results have provided the first
morphological evidence that scutellarin regulated the activation of microglia via the Notch pathway and induced
the morphological and functional changes in activated
microglia. This may be effected via the NFκB pathway,
which is known to operate synergistically with the Notch
pathway. Other pathways, however, should also be considered but this awaits further investigation. Notwithstanding, the present results have provided strong experimental
evidence supporting scutellarin as a therapeutic strategy to
attenuate microglia-mediated neuroinflammation in ischemic/hypoxic brain injury.

Additional files
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Scutellarin decreased the protein expression
of iNOS, TNF-α and Notch-1 in a dose-dependent manner in activated BV-2
microglia. BV-2 cells were pretreated with Scutellarin at 0.02, 0.1, and 0.54
mM for 1 h and then stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 1 μg/ml for
3 h. The expression levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and Notch-1 in LPS-activated BV-2 microglial
cells are reduced significantly being most drastic with scutellarin treatment
at 0.54 mM. Significant differences in protein levels are expressed as
* P <0.05 and ** P <0.01. The values represent the mean ± SD in triplicate.
Additional file 2: Figure S2. Scutellarin reduced RBP-JK expression in
activated microglia in vivo. Confocal images showing the expression and
nuclear localization of recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless
(RBP-JK) (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral
zones of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rat (D-F) and following
treatment with scutellarin (G-I). RBP-JK expression (E) was markedly
increased and localized to the nucleus in activated microglia (D) in MCAO
rat. Arrows in E and H show nuclear localization of RBP-JK. At 7 days
following treatment of MCAO rats with scutellarin, RBP-JK expression (H)
became hardly detectable in microglia (G). DAPI – blue. Scale bars in A-I:
20 μm.
Additional file 3: Figure S3. Scutellarin-reduced Hes-1 expression in
activated microglia in vivo. Confocal images showing the expression and
nuclear localization of transcription factor hairy and enhancer of split-1
(Hes-1) (red) in lectin + microglia (green, arrows) in the penumbral zones
of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rat (D-F) and following
treatment with scutellarin (G-I). Hes-1 expression (E) was markedly
increased and localized to the nucleus in activated microglia (D) in
MCAO rat. Arrows in E and H show nuclear localization of Hes-1. At 7
days following treatment of MCAO rats with scutellarin, Hes-1 expression
(H) was attenuated in microglia (G). DAPI – blue. Scale bars in A-I: 20 μm.
Additional file 4: Figure S4. Scutellarin-decreased NICD
immunofluorescence and protein expression of Notch-1, NICD, RBP-JK
and Hes-1 in middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rats 3 days
following treatment with scutellarin. Confocal images showing the
expression of Notch intracellular domain (NICD) (red) in lectin + microglia
(green, arrows) in the penumbral zones of MCAO rat (D-F) and following
treatment with scutellarin (G-I). NICD expression (E) is increased in the
activated microglia (D), but is decreased (H) in activated microglia (G) 3
days following treatment with scutellarin. The expression levels of Notch-1,
NICD, recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless (RBP-JK) and
transcription factor hairy and enhancer of split-1 (Hes-1) in MCAO rat brains
is reduced significantly at 3 days following treatment with scutellarin (SL
and SH dose) when compared with MCAO rats not treated with scutellarin.
Significant differences in protein levels are expressed as * P <0.05 and
** P <0.01. The values represent the mean ± SD in triplicate.

Abbreviations
CNS: central nervous system; Hes-1: transcription factor hairy and enhancer
of split-1; IL-1β: interleukin-1 beta; iNOS: inducible nitric oxide synthase;
LPS: lipopolysaccharide; MCAO: middle cerebral artery microglia; MCP-1: monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1; NF-κB: nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer
of activated B cells; NICD: Notch intracellular domain; NO: nitric oxide;
RBP-JK: recombining binding protein suppressor of hairless; Rho GTPases: Rho
family small GTPases; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SEM: scanning electron
microscopy; SH: scutellarin high dose; SL: scutellarin low dose; TEM: transmission
electron microscopy; TNF-α: tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Yuan et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:11

Page 21 of 21

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

17. Bolos V, Mira E, Martinez-Poveda B, Luxan G, Canamero M, Martinez AC,
et al. Notch activation stimulates migration of breast cancer cells and
promotes tumor growth. Breast Cancer Res. 2013;15:R54.
18. Guentchev M, McKay RD. Notch controls proliferation and differentiation of
stem cells in a dose-dependent manner. Eur J Neurosci. 2006;23:2289–96.
19. VanDussen KL, Carulli AJ, Keeley TM, Patel SR, Puthoff BJ, Magness ST, et al.
Notch signaling modulates proliferation and differentiation of intestinal
crypt base columnar stem cells. Development. 2012;139:488–97.
20. Grandbarbe L, Michelucci A, Heurtaux T, Hemmer K, Morga E, Heuschling
P. Notch signaling modulates the activation of microglial cells. Glia.
2007;55:1519–30.
21. Wu YP, Tan CK, Ling EA. Expression of Fos-like immunoreactivity in the brain
and spinal cord of rats following middle cerebral artery occlusion. Exp Brain
Res. 1997;115:129–36.
22. Yuan Y, Zha H, Rangarajan P, Ling EA, Wu C. Anti-inflammatory effects of
Edaravone and Scutellarin in activated microglia in experimentally induced
ischemia injury in rats and in BV-2 microglia. BMC Neurosci. 2014;15:125.
23. Thomas WE. Brain macrophages: evaluation of microglia and their functions.
Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1992;17:61–74.
24. Ling EA, Wong WC. The origin and nature of ramified and amoeboid
microglia: a historical review and current concepts. Glia. 1993;7:9–18.
25. Kaur C, Ling EA, Wong WC. Transformation of amoeboid microglial cells
into microglia in the corpus callosum of the postnatal rat brain: an electron
microscopical study. Arch Histol Jpn. 1985;48:17–25.
26. Neumann H, Kotter MR, Franklin RJ. Debris clearance by microglia: an essential
link between degeneration and regeneration. Brain. 2009;132:288–95.
27. Jin R, Yang G, Li G. Inflammatory mechanisms in ischemic stroke: role of
inflammatory cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2010;87:779–89.
28. Sivakumar V, Ling EA, Lu J, Kaur C. Role of glutamate and its receptors and
insulin-like growth factors in hypoxia induced periventricular white matter
injury. Glia. 2010;58:507–23.
29. Huo Y, Rangarajan P, Ling EA, Dheen ST. Dexamethasone inhibits the
Nox-dependent ROS production via suppression of MKP-1-dependent MAPK
pathways in activated microglia. BMC Neurosci. 2011;12:49.
30. Dheen ST, Jun Y, Yan Z, Tay SS, Ling EA. Retinoic acid inhibits expression of
TNF-alpha and iNOS in activated rat microglia. Glia. 2005;50:21–31.
31. Zhang HF, Hu XM, Wang LX, Xu SQ, Zeng FD. Protective effects of
scutellarin against cerebral ischemia in rats: evidence for inhibition of the
apoptosis-inducing factor pathway. Planta Med. 2009;75:121–6.
32. D’Acquisto F, May MJ, Ghosh S. Inhibition of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-B): an
emerging theme in anti-inflammatory therapies. Mol Interv. 2002;2:22–35.
33. Ang HL, Tergaonkar V. Notch and NFkappaB signaling pathways: do they
collaborate in normal vertebrate brain development and function?
Bioessays. 2007;29:1039–47.
34. Schwarzer R, Dorken B, Jundt F. Notch is an essential upstream regulator of
NF-kappaB and is relevant for survival of Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg cells.
Leukemia. 2012;26:806–13.
35. Semple BD, Kossmann T, Morganti-Kossmann MC. Role of chemokines in
CNS health and pathology: a focus on the CCL2/CCR2 and CXCL8/CXCR2
networks. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2010;30:459–73.
36. McManus CM, Liu JS, Hahn MT, Hua LL, Brosnan CF, Berman JW, et al.
Differential induction of chemokines in human microglia by type I and II
interferons. Glia. 2000;29:273–80.
37. Wang D, Wang L, Gu J, Yang H, Liu N, Lin Y, et al. Scutellarin inhibits high
glucose-induced and hypoxia-mimetic agent-induced angiogenic effects in
human retinal endothelial cells through reactive oxygen species/hypoxiainducible factor-1alpha/vascular endothelial growth factor pathway.
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2014;64:218–27.
38. Li H, Huang D, Gao Z, Lv Y, Zhang L, Cui H, et al. Scutellarin inhibits cell
migration by regulating production of alphavbeta6 integrin and E-cadherin
in human tongue cancer cells. Oncol Rep. 2010;24:1153–60.
39. Park SR, Park KS, Park YJ, Bang D, Lee ES. CD11a, CD11c, and CD18 gene
polymorphisms and susceptibility to Behcet’s disease in Koreans. Tissue
Antigens. 2014;84:398–404.
40. Aujla PK, Bora A, Monahan P, Sweedler JV, Raetzman LT. The Notch effector
gene Hes1 regulates migration of hypothalamic neurons, neuropeptide
content and axon targeting to the pituitary. Dev Biol. 2011;353:61–71.
41. Burridge K, Wennerberg K. Rho and Rac take center stage. Cell. 2004;116:167–79.

Authors’ contributions
E-AL and C-YW designed the experimental project. YY, PR, EMK and Y-JW
carried out the experiments and prepared the manuscript. All authors
participated in discussion, analysis of data, and editing, and approved the
final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This project is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Project number 31260254, C-Y Wu), Applied Basic Research Program of
Yunnan Province (Project number 2011FB243, C-Y Wu) and National
University of Singapore (Project number R-180-000-140-592, E-A Ling).
Author details
1
Department of Anatomy and Histology/Embryology, Faculty of Basic
Medical Sciences, Kunming Medical University, 1168 West Chunrong Road,
Kunming 650500, PR China. 2Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 4 Medical Drive, MD10,
Singapore 117597, Singapore. 3Defense Medical and Environmental Research
Institute, DSO National Laboratories, 27 Medical Drive, Singapore 117510,
Singapore.
Received: 29 October 2014 Accepted: 19 December 2014

References
1. Poungvarin N. Stroke in the developing world. Lancet. 1998;352 Suppl 3:
SIII19–22.
2. Hinkle JL, Guanci MM. Acute ischemic stroke review. J Neurosci Nurs.
2007;39:285–93. 310.
3. Smith SD, Eskey CJ. Hemorrhagic stroke. Radiol Clin North Am. 2011;49:27–45.
4. Gerhard A, Neumaier B, Elitok E, Glatting G, Ries V, Tomczak R, et al. In vivo
imaging of activated microglia using [11C]PK11195 and positron emission
tomography in patients after ischemic stroke. Neuroreport. 2000;11:2957–60.
5. Neher JJ, Emmrich JV, Fricker M, Mander PK, Thery C, Brown GC.
Phagocytosis executes delayed neuronal death after focal brain ischemia.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013;110:E4098–107.
6. Wang JY, Gualco E, Peruzzi F, Sawaya BE, Passiatore G, Marcinkiewicz C,
et al. Interaction between serine phosphorylated IRS-1 and beta1-integrin
affects the stability of neuronal processes. J Neurosci Res. 2007;85:2360–73.
7. Lalancette-Hebert M, Phaneuf D, Soucy G, Weng YC, Kriz J. Live imaging of
Toll-like receptor 2 response in cerebral ischaemia reveals a role of olfactory
bulb microglia as modulators of inflammation. Brain. 2009;132:940–54.
8. Hong H, Liu GQ. Protection against hydrogen peroxide-induced cytotoxicity
in PC12 cells by scutellarin. Life Sci. 2004;74:2959–73.
9. Liu H, Yang X, Tang R, Liu J, Xu H. Effect of scutellarin on nitric oxide
production in early stages of neuron damage induced by hydrogen
peroxide. Pharmacol Res. 2005;51:205–10.
10. Wang S, Wang H, Guo H, Kang L, Gao X, Hu L. Neuroprotection of
Scutellarin is mediated by inhibition of microglial inflammatory activation.
Neuroscience. 2011;185:150–60.
11. Lin LL, Liu AJ, Liu JG, Yu XH, Qin LP, Su DF. Protective effects of scutellarin
and breviscapine on brain and heart ischemia in rats. J Cardiovasc
Pharmacol. 2007;50:327–32.
12. Lutolf S, Radtke F, Aguet M, Suter U, Taylor V. Notch1 is required for
neuronal and glial differentiation in the cerebellum. Development.
2002;129:373–85.
13. Alberi L, Hoey SE, Brai E, Scotti AL, Marathe S. Notch signaling in the brain:
in good and bad times. Ageing Res Rev. 2013;12:801–14.
14. Cao Q, Lu J, Kaur C, Sivakumar V, Li F, Cheah PS, et al. Expression of Notch-1
receptor and its ligands Jagged-1 and Delta-1 in amoeboid microglia in
postnatal rat brain and murine BV-2 cells. Glia. 2008;56:1224–37.
15. Yao L, Kan EM, Kaur C, Dheen ST, Hao A, Lu J, et al. Notch-1 signaling
regulates microglia activation via NF-kappaB pathway after hypoxic
exposure in vivo and in vitro. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e78439.
16. Xie J, Wang W, Si JW, Miao XY, Li JC, Wang YC, et al. Notch signaling
regulates CXCR4 expression and the migration of mesenchymal stem cells.
Cell Immunol. 2013;281:68–75.

