Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Experimental Neurology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yexnr

Regular Article

Acquired Immunoglobulin G deﬁciency in stroke patients and
experimental brain ischemia
Arthur Liesz a,b,c,⁎, Stefan Roth a,b, Markus Zorn d, Li Sun c, Kerstin Hofmann a,b, Roland Veltkamp c,e
a

Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Munich, Germany
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Germany
Department of Neurology, University Heidelberg, Germany
d
Department of Internal Medicine, University Heidelberg, Germany
e
Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, UK
b
c

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 4 February 2015
Revised 27 April 2015
Accepted 29 April 2015
Available online 7 May 2015
Keywords:
Stroke
Immunosuppression
Post-stroke infection
IgG deﬁciency
Translational research

a b s t r a c t
Background and purpose: Acute brain injuries induce a systemic immune depression syndrome (SIDS) that predisposes patients to bacterial infections. While cellular compartments of this syndrome have been well characterized, the contribution of humoral immune mechanisms and particularly immunoglobulins to SIDS has not been
investigated so far.
Methods: We determined serum immunoglobulin levels and infectious complications at several time points in
159 ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke patients. Additionally, ﬁndings were veriﬁed in a transient middle cerebral
artery occlusion model. A novel immunoassay was established to analyze the IgG excretion ratio in mice.
Results: We identiﬁed a transient IgG reduction in patients suffering from substantial ischemic or hemorrhagic
brain injuries. The IgG-reduction was associated with subsequent bacterial infections. Similarly, transient
hypogammaglobulinemia was detected in a murine stroke model. We then used this animal model to further distinguish the mechanism of the IgG reduction by an IgG transfer paradigm. Excretional loss rather than deﬁcient
production of IgG was demonstrated to underlay hypogammaglobulinemia.
Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst report of transient hypogammaglobulinemia after ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke
suggesting involvement in infectious complications. These ﬁndings pave the road for further studies investigating
post-stroke hypogammaglobulinemia as a druggable target for stroke-induced complications.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Extensive brain ischemia induces an immunosuppressive syndrome
in the subacute phase that predisposes patients to bacterial infections
(Meisel et al., 2005). Infections caused by this acquired immunodeﬁciency signiﬁcantly worsen post-stroke morbidity and mortality and
impair neurological recovery (Balami et al., 2011). Several seminal
contributions within the last years have dissected the underlying pathophysiological pathways and consistently described lymphopenia and
impairment of monocyte function as the cellular hallmarks of the
post-stroke immunosuppression syndrome (Liesz et al., 2013; Prass
et al., 2003, 2006; Urra et al., 2009).
In contrast, little attention has been paid to the potential involvement of humoral immune mechanisms in the framework of poststroke immunosuppression although the humoral immune response
constitutes the ﬁrst line of defense in case of infection (Janeway et al.,
2005). The humoral immune system is comprised of macromolecules
⁎ Corresponding author at: Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Feodor-LynenStr. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany. Fax: +49 89 4400 46113.
E-mail address: Arthur.Liesz@med.uni-muenchen.de (A. Liesz).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.021
0014-4886/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

in body ﬂuids assigned to distinct functional systems including the
complement system, preformed agglutinins, pentraxins, and most
importantly, immunoglobulins (Shishido et al., 2012). Herein, immunoglobulins take over several critical roles such as neutralization of pathogens, opsonization and activation of the complement cascade (Janeway
et al., 2005).
We aimed to characterize the impact of stroke on circulating
immunoglobulins. Speciﬁcally, we investigated whether a depression
of immunoglobulins is associated with a higher susceptibility of stroke
patients to bacterial infections and examined underlying mechanisms.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Research subjects
The patient population investigated for this study was recruited and
described for a previously reported trial (Liesz et al., 2013). All procedures after written informed consent and were approved by the local
ethics committee of the University Heidelberg (S-348/2011). In brief,
patients were included into the study within 24 h after symptomonset from TIA, ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke. Exclusion criteria

A. Liesz et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

were preceding infections within 14 d before admission, chronic immunological conditions or premedication, cancer and pregnancy. Control
patients were included when presenting for pre-surgical examination
for cataract operation. Patients were matched by age, gender,
premedication and cerebrovascular risk proﬁle. Diagnosis and infarct/
hemorrhage volumetry were performed on CT or MRI images obtained
during routine cranial imaging. Patients with cerebrovascular diseases
underwent blood sampling on admission (day 1), days 3 and 7, and at
follow-up at 60–90 d later. Research subjects from the previous trial
(Liesz et al., 2013) were selected accordingly to sample and data availability. The population characteristics are shown in Table 1.
24-hour collection urine for IgG analysis was obtained within the
ﬁrst 72 h after symptom onset in a separate study cohort prospectively
recruited independent of the abovementioned patient cohort. The same
inclusion and exclusion criteria were applied as for the abovementioned
cohort with the exception that patients were speciﬁcally selected for the
presence of extensive infarcts of more than 50 ml. This additional patient cohort was necessary due to the different pre-analytical sampling
requirements for measurements in the 24-hour collection urine.
2.2. Clinical data
Stroke severity was determined by the National Institutes of Health
Stroke Scale (NIHSS), the infarct/hemorrhage volume was analyzed
using a Syngo Multimodality workplace with syngoMMWP-software
(version VE31A, Siemens). Because a deﬁned and validated lesion
volume for discrimination of “small” and “large” lesions does not exist
and also no biologically meaningful cutoff value is established, we
used the median of the lesion volume in the respective group to
dichotomize between small and large lesions as previously described
(Hug et al., 2010; Liesz et al., 2013). This dichotomization was
predeﬁned in the trial protocol and resulted in the median lesion volumes (i.e. cutoff values) speciﬁed in Table 1. Routine microbiological
analyses were obtained by the treating physician's discretion and
were documented for the ﬁrst 7 d after symptom onset. Positive
bacterial infections were scored only in case of positive microbiological
analysis (presence of typical pathogenic bacteria, signiﬁcant numbers of
colony-forming units (CFU) for facultative pathogenic bacteria or any

47

positive bacterial culture of physiologically sterile material) or for
(high-sensitivity procalcitonin) hsPCT values N 0.1 (standard validated
normal values b 0.05).
2.3. Laboratory studies of human samples
All assays and samples were performed in the central laboratory of
the University Hospital Heidelberg by the same procedures used and
validated for routine diagnostical analysis. IgG, IgA and IgM concentrations in serum were determined by turbidimetric analysis and IgG in
urine samples by nephelometric analysis. HsPCT was measured by
electrochemo-luminescence immunoassay (ECLIA). Urine albumin
concentrations were measured by turbimetry.
2.4. Animals
The study was conducted in accordance with national guidelines for
the use of experimental animals, and the protocols were approved by
the governmental committees (Regierungspraesidium Oberbayern,
Germany). We used age-matched, male mice (C57BL/6 J, 8–9 weeks,
Charles River Laboratories). Animals were housed under speciﬁedpathogen free conditions at the Institute for Stroke and Dementia
Research, Munich.
2.5. Animal experiments
Animals received intraperitoneal injection of 500 μg biotinylated
control-IgG (clone: LTF-2, BioXCell, USA) 24 h before induction of focal
brain ischemia. Middle cerebral artery occlusion was performed by
intraluminal transient ﬁlamentous occlusion as previously described
(Engel et al., 2011). Mice were anesthetized with 1.0–2.0% halothane
in O2/N2O-enriched air. After neck dissection, we made an incision
into the left external carotid artery (ECA) between two ligations and advanced a silicon-covered 7–0 nylon monoﬁlament (Doccol corporation,
#701912PK5RE) through the internal carotid artery to occlude the MCA.
MCA occlusion was documented as a decrease in relative perfusion
values obtained by a laser Doppler probe placed over the cortical area
supplied by the MCA. Reduction of less than 80% compared to baseline

Table 1
Clinical characteristics of patients used for analysis in the control, transient ischemic attack (TIA), ischemic stroke (stroke) and intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) group.

Clinical characteristics
n (total: 159)
Age (years)
Gender (male/female)
Median lesion volume (ml)
Laterality (right/left)
NIHSSS at admission
Symptom to day 1 time (h)
Mortality (on day 7)
Mortality (on followup)
Followup (survivors)
Bacterial infectionse
Pre-existing condition at admission
Dyslipidemia
Arterial hypertension
Diabetes
Smoking
Premedication at admission
β-AR blocker
Oral anticoagulantsa
Antiplatelet drugb

Control

TIA

Stroke

ICH

p value

30
70.7 ± 8.8
15/15
n.a.
n.a.
0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

22
64.3 ± 9.7
16/6
n.a.
11/11
0.1 ± 0.5
12.2 ± 7.8
0
0
17 (77%)
0 (0%)

67
68.8 ± 10.4
39/28
27.9
30/37
12.1 ± 8.2
12.4 ± 7.5
4 (6%)
10 (15%)
46 (69%)
20 (30%)

43
66.8 ± 14.3
25/18
20.4
25/18
16.6 ± 11.8
10.1 ± 7.5
1 (2%)
6 (14%)
28 (76%)
29 (67%)

0.180
0.428
0.485c
0.171d
0.112c
0.277
0.369d
0.160d
0.604d
b0.01d

9 (30%)
26 (87%)
9 (30%)
2 (7%)

5 (23%)
16 (73%)
4 (18%)
5 (23%)

18 (27%)
43 (64%)
21 (31%)
13 (19%)

8 (19%)
27 (63%)
6 (14%)
8 (19%)

0.540
0.109
0.157
0.379

12 (4%)
7 (23%)
8 (27%)

7 (32%)
1 (5%)
10 (46%)

26 (39%)
11 (16%)
16 (24%)

12 (28%)
7 (16%)
11 (26%)

0.615
0.341
0.256

Metric data is shown as mean ± SD, non-metric values as absolute numbers and percentage.
a
Phenprocoumon and rivaroxaban.
b
Aspirin, aspirin + dipyridamole, and clopidogrel.
c
U test for stroke and ICH.
d
Chi square test for TIA, stroke and ICH.
e
Newly diagnosed bacterial infections within the ﬁrst week after symptom onset as deﬁned in the Materials and methods section.

48

A. Liesz et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

ﬂow was used as an exclusion criterion. We ﬁxed the ﬁlament in this position by ligation, closed the neck, removed the Doppler probe and
placed the mouse in its cage. Then, 60 min after ﬁlament insertion the
mouse was reanesthetized and the ﬁlament removed. During the operations body temperature was kept at 37 °C with a feedback controlled
heating pad. Sham operation was performed in exactly the same manner as described above, including repeated anesthesia 60 min after
sham surgery, except that the ﬁlament was only introduced brieﬂy
into the ECA. The overall mortality in the 60 min occlusion model by
usage of the stated ﬁlament was 25% for the 5 d observation period.
To assure comparable volume intake between mice undergoing
MCA occlusion and Sham surgery all mice were kept without free excess
to water after the respective surgery. Instead, all animals received in
total 1 ml water orally and 2 ml water subcutaneously per day and additional hydrogel on the cage ﬂoor, which is similarly accessible for
Sham and MCAo-treated mice.

After the indicated time-point, urine was collected in sterile reaction
tubes by spontaneous micturition during manual ﬁxation of the mouse,
blood was withdrawn by cardial puncture in deep anesthesia with
ketamine/xylazine and the animal the perfused with normal saline.
The brains were removed from the skull and frozen on powdered dry
ice. 20 μm thick coronal cryosections were obtained from each brain
every 400 μm, stained by a standard cresyl-violet staining protocol,
scanned at 600 dpi and analyzed for the assessment of infarct volume
by integration of infarcted areas on each section.
2.6. Preparation of biotinylated IgG
1 mg batches of rat IgG2a (clone: LTF-2, BioXCell) were conjugated
with biotin in BuPH-Buffer according to the manufacturer's protocol
(EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotinylation, Thermo Scientiﬁc). Then, excess
biotin was removed using Zeba Spin desalting columns in 3 repetitions.

Fig. 1. Severe ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes induce a transient hypogammaglobulinemia in patients. (A) Serum IgG concentrations were determined by nephelometry at the indicated
time points and respective patient groups described in detail in Table 1. Day 1: day of symptom onset, FU: 60–90 d after symptom onset. Linear regression analyses revealed a signiﬁcant
association between serum IgG concentrations and functional deﬁcit (B) and lesion volume (C) in the ischemic stroke and ICH cohorts. (D) ROC curve analysis for lesion volume at day 1 as
a predictor of hypogammaglobulinemia at day 7. AUC: area under the curve. Control and TIA patients were excluded for analysis shown in panels B–D.

A. Liesz et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

Biotin-labeled IgG was resuspended in deionized water and stored at
4 °C. The quantity of biotinylation was measured by a conventional
HABA assay. HABA reagent (Thermo Scientiﬁc) and Avidin were
mixed in ﬂat-bottom wells and spectrophotometrically assayed using
a Thermo Scientiﬁc Multiskan® microplate reader to determine background absorption. Then, biotinylated IgG solution was added to the
HABA/Avidin mixture and the absorbance measured. The delta
absorbance after adding the protein solution was used for calculation
of biotin groups per IgG molecule by a cell path length of 0.5 cm for
the used 96-well microplate and standard HABA calculation formula.

49

by incubation with high-afﬁnity HRP-Streptavidin (1:250, Pierce) for
3 h at 24 °C. Assays were developed by tetramethylbenzidine substrate
and the absorbance measured as stated above in duplicate samples and
triplicate dilutions. Due to the excess biotin-complexation of IgG (8–12
molecules per IgG) and thereby exponential signal ampliﬁcation, third
order polynomial regression was performed for calculation of standard
curves. Extinction values were normalized to standard curve of
biotinylated-IgG standard samples and to the quantity of biotin
molecules per IgG protein.
2.8. Statistical analysis

2.7. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
2.7.1. Endogenous IgG
Unlabeled, endogenous serum and urine IgG was measured using a
commercial total IgG ELISA kit following the manufacturer's protocols
(eBioscience, # 88-50400). All samples were analyzed in duplicates
and processed in triplicate dilutions for veriﬁcation of dilution linearity
using a Thermo Scientiﬁc Multiskan® microplate reader at 570/450 nm.
A linear standard curve for logarithmic extinction values was obtained
for normalization of sample values and calculation of absolute IgG
concentration.
2.7.2. Biotinylated IgG
Biotinylated IgG was measured in serum samples by deploying an
ELISA-based streptavidin binding-assay. Round-bottom 96-well microplates were coated with polyclonal anti-IgG capture antibodies
(eBioscience). Pre-coated plates were then incubated with serum diluted in PBS with 1% Tween 20 and 10% BSA and IgG-binding was detected

All statistical analyses were performed using Graphpad Prism software (version 6.0b). Statistical hypothesis tests by comparison of
mean were performed by using the Mann–Whitney U Test for comparison of two groups or the Kruskal–Wallis test for more than two groups
with post-hoc analysis by the Dunn's correction for multiple comparisons. Regression and ROC curve analyses are described within the manuscript text. P values b0.05 were considered to be statistically
signiﬁcant.
3. Results
3.1. IgG is selectively reduced after extensive brain lesions
In total, 159 patients were enrolled into this study (Table 1). The
mean time between symptom onset and ﬁrst laboratory analysis (day
1) was 11.8 h. More than 80% of the surviving patients after a cerebrovascular event could also be investigated at follow-up analysis

Fig. 2. IgA and IgM serum concentrations are not affected by ischemic or hemorrhagic brain injury in patients. Serum IgA (A) and IgM (B) concentrations were measured at the indicated
time after symptom onset in the respective patient cohort as shown in Fig. 1. Each data point represents an individual patient. Horizontal lines indicate the mean and error bars the standard deviation. None of the groups were signiﬁcantly different in serum concentrations between time points or in comparison to the control group. Follow up: 60–90 d after symptom
onset.

50

A. Liesz et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

30–60 d after the event. We measured serum immunoglobulin concentrations (IgG, IgA and IgM) at the indicated time points. This analysis revealed a signiﬁcant reduction of serum IgG concentrations 7 d after
large ischemic strokes and intracerebral hemorrhages (Fig. 1A). Interestingly, IgG concentrations returned to baseline levels in all groups at
follow-up. In contrast, TIAs or small ischemic lesions did not affect
serum IgG levels (Fig. 1A). Performing univariate regression analyses,
we detected a signiﬁcant correlation between serum IgG concentrations
at 7 d and stroke severity (NIHSS at admission) as well as lesion volume
in the stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) patient cohort
(Figs. 1B, C). ROC curve analysis revealed a very good performance
(AUC: 0.74; p = 0.001) for ischemic or hemorrhagic lesion size as a
predictor of hypogammaglobulinemia below 6.0 g/l, i.e. two standard
deviations below the mean of the control patient cohort (Fig. 1D). Best
test performance for lesion volume as a predictor of secondary IgG reduction was achieved by using a lesion volume of 15 ml as a discriminator, resulting in 75% sensitivity and 71% speciﬁcity for the induction of
post-stroke hypogammaglobulinemia in our patient cohort. Interestingly, the transient immunoglobulin deﬁciency was speciﬁc for the IgG
subclass as IgA or IgM levels remained unchanged in any of the analyzed
subpopulations (Fig. 2). Analysis of the frequency of bacterial infections
in the ischemic stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage subgroups, respectively, showed a signiﬁcantly higher infection rate after ICH (Table 1).
Therefore, we investigated the association of lesion/hemorrhage size
with reduction in serum IgG concentration 7 d after symptom onset
by linear regression and ROC curve analysis. These analyses revealed a
similar association pattern and performance of predictors between
ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke (Suppl. ﬁgure).
Next, we compared IgG serum levels between patients experiencing
bacterial infections during the ﬁrst week and patients without infections

(Fig. 3A). Infections were deﬁned by positive microbiological test results
and/or substantially elevated concentrations of procalcitonin in a highsensitivity assay (hsPCT, see Materials and methods for details). Nonlinear segmental regression analyses revealed a signiﬁcant difference
(ANCOVA, difference between intercepts) for IgG serum concentration
between the patient groups (Fig. 3B). ROC curve analysis conﬁrmed sufﬁcient performance of IgG serum concentrations at day 3 and excellent
performance at day 7 for prediction of bacterial infections (Fig. 3C).
3.2. IgG deﬁciency results from IgG loss rather than insufﬁcient production
We further investigated in an experimental stroke model whether
transient IgG reduction is due to an insufﬁcient IgG production or its
loss from the intravascular space (Fig. 4A). Using an experimental stroke
model (ﬁlament-induced MCAo) resulting in extensive brain lesions,
we were able to conﬁrm a signiﬁcant reduction of serum IgG concentrations 5 d after brain ischemia also in mice (Fig. 4B). In order to discriminate between IgG loss and insufﬁcient production, we established a
model of labeled IgG-transfer and analysis of the two IgG subfractions
(endogenous and Biotin-labeled) from the same serum sample (see
Figs. 4C, D and details in the Materials and methods section). In this
second independent experiment, we could verify the reduction of endogenous IgG (IgGend) 5 d after MCAO (n = 6, p = 0.043) while the
ratio between endogenous and exogenous (Bio-IgG) remained stable
(p = 0.88) after brain ischemia (Fig. 4E). These results suggested that
the observed reduction in total IgG after stroke was attributable to IgG
loss but not a reduction of IgG production, because de novo IgG production deﬁciency by plasma cells would have resulted in a reduced IgGend/
Bio-IgG ratio. With this novel hypothesis of an IgG reduction independent of cellular dysfunction, we analyzed the association of lymphocyte

Fig. 3. Post-stroke hypogammaglobulinemia is associated with bacterial infections in ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke patients. (A) IgG serum concentrations were grouped by the occurrence of bacterial infection within the ﬁrst week after brain injury and are depicted for the ﬁrst 4 d after symptom onset by third-order polynomial ﬁtting. (B) Difference between curves
was determined by linear regression and analysis of difference between intercepts (ANCOVA), revealing a signiﬁcant (p = 0.0035) difference for IgG concentrations between infection and
non-infection groups (pooled ischemic stroke and ICH patients). (C) ROC curve analysis for the performance of IgG serum concentrations as predictors of bacterial infection on days 3 and 7
in ischemic stroke and ICH patients. AUC: area under the curve.

A. Liesz et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

51

Fig. 4. Hypogammaglobulinemia results from IgG loss rather than decreased production in experimental stroke. (A) Infarct induction by transient occlusion of the MCA for 60 min (MCAo)
results in extensive brain lesions in a murine experimental stroke model. Left panels: representative consecutive coronal brain sections, right panel: analysis of infarct volumetry.
(B) Serum total IgG levels 5 d after experimental stroke (MCAo). We analyzed in an independent experiment the ratio of endogenous versus injected (labeled) IgG as an indicator for
passive loss or production deﬁciency as the cause of total IgG reduction after stroke. (C) Schematic diagrams of the experimental timeline. Mice received biotinylated IgG pre-titrated
to achieve comparable circulating IgG concentrations as for endogenous IgG. Blood was sampled 24 h and 6 d after IgG transfer and 5 d after MCAO transfer, respectively. (D) A modiﬁed
immunosorbent assay enabled the comparison of the endogenous/exogenous serum IgG ratio at the indicated time points after IgG administration and/or MCAO induction by measurement of the individual IgG fractions from the same serum sample as indicated (blue shading indicates detection of the respective IgG fraction). (E) Analysis of serum concentrations for
IgGend and Bio-IgG (bars, left axis label) and their ratio (dots between bars, right axis label) after experimental brain ischemia. The ratio between the IgG fractions was not altered after
MCAo in mice (p = 0.88) but IgGend was signiﬁcantly reduced (n = 6). Labeling of the x-axis is according to the analysis time points described in panel C. (F) Linear regression analysis for
lymphocyte as percentage of total white blood cells (WBC) 3 d after symptom onset in patients and IgG serum concentrations in the same patients at day 7 (r2: coefﬁcient of determination). (G) Urine concentrations of albumin and IgG were measured in 24 h-collection urine from patients with extensive brain ischemia N50 ml within the ﬁrst 72 h after symptom onset.
Grey shaded area illustrates the range of normal values (albumin: b20 mg/d/l; IgG: b10 mg/l). Four out of 5 patients had a microalbuminuria while only 2 of them had a negligible increase
in urine IgG concentrations. (H) Urine IgG concentration was measured in mice urine samples 3 d after MCAo-induction or Sham surgery. Measurements for all samples (n = 5 per group)
were below the highly sensitive detection limit of 1.5 ng/ml.

counts in our patient cohort at day 3 – as we previously detected the
nadir for this measurement at this time point (Liesz et al., 2009; Liesz
et al., 2013) – with IgG serum concentrations at day 7 after symptom

onset. The analysis revealed only a very minor correlation (r2 = 0.09)
for this association, conﬁrming the potential independence of cellular
and humoral alterations after severe brain injury in ischemic stroke

52

A. Liesz et al. / Experimental Neurology 271 (2015) 46–52

and ICH patients (Fig. 4F). Next, we investigated proteinuria as the most
likely reason for IgG loss in the murine model and in 5 patients with extensive brain ischemia and no documented previous renal disease and
normal serum creatinine values at admission. However, we did not detect a clinically signiﬁcant urine IgG excretion in any of the patients despite evident microalbuminuria in a 24-hour collection urine analysis,
initiated within the ﬁrst 72 h after symptom onset (Fig. 4G). In mice,
urine IgG was not detectable at all in a high-sensitivity immunoassay
measured at 3 d after experimental stroke induction (Fig. 4H).
4. Discussion
Herein, we describe for the ﬁrst time an acquired transient
IgG-deﬁciency after extensive experimental and clinical stroke.
Hypogammaglobulinemia is a signiﬁcant risk factor for bacterial infections, most commonly presenting as respiratory infections
(Mawhorter and Yamani, 2008). Remarkably, pneumonia is the most
common bacterial infection in the acute phase after stroke (Sellars
et al., 2007). Previous reports investigating selective, primary immunodeﬁciency syndromes suggest that a serum IgG level below 6 g/l is
associated with a signiﬁcant increase of death due to severe infections
including sepsis (Furst, 2009). The mean IgG concentration in patients
with extensive brain lesions was reduced to 6.7 g/l (age-matched controls: 10.7 g/l). Therefore, considering also the impaired cellular function after stroke, the additional IgG reduction of nearly 40% might
have a major impact on patients' immune competence. Indeed, our
study suggests an association of post-stroke hypogammaglobulinemia
with increased risk of bacterial infections in the subacute phase after
ischemic stroke and ICH. Therefore, transient post-stroke IgG reduction
might be a potential target of future therapies for patients with severe
brain injuries at risk for bacterial infections such as pneumonia and
urinary tract infections (Westendorp et al., 2011). Immunoglobulin replacement therapy (IgRT) is established for more than 50 years and
was the ﬁrst indication for intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy
long before its use as an immunomodulatory drug (Compagno et al.,
2014). Therefore, drug safety, contraindications and the critical consideration of high treatment costs with potential treatment beneﬁt are well
known. Future experimental studies in murine stroke model should further investigate the potential efﬁcacy of IVIG as a therapeutic option for
restoring post-stroke humoral immune deﬁciency before paving the
way for future clinical trials.
Interestingly, we detected a similar kinetic pattern, extent of IgG
reduction and similar predictive values of disease severity for
hypogammaglobulinemia between ischemic stroke and ICH. These results might indicate a common pathophysiological mechanism despite
differing modes of brain injury. Acquired hypogammaglobulinemia
can have various causes including loss of protein (e.g. enteropathies, nephrotic syndrome) or impaired immunoglobulin synthesis (e.g. leukemia, AIDS, immunosuppressive medication). Our experiments support
loss of IgG as the pathophysiological mechanism underlying transient
post-stroke hypogammaglobulinemia. Although we could not clarify
the exact route of IgG loss, our ﬁndings do not suggest that it occurred
via renal excretion. However, we cannot deﬁnitely exclude renal IgG
loss as a source of serum IgG reduction because our urine analysis in
patients as well mice focused on the ﬁrst three days after brain injury
and did not cover later time points. Other potential mechanisms include
accelerated degradation of IgG or loss by diffusion to the “third space” as
has been described for inﬂammatory diseases leading to increased
capillary permeability. Although our results do not suggest a direct
pathophysiological link between cellular dysfunction (and post-stroke
lymphopenia) with the observed transient IgG reduction, potential
common upstream mediators might be plausible. We have previously
shown that damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) such as

high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) contribute to the multiphasic systemic immunomodulation after severe brain injury (Liesz et al., 2015).
In this concept, DAMPs are released from the necrotic brain tissue to
the periphery and induce a cascade of acute massive immune activation
and subsequent immune exhaustion with subacute lymphopenia as a
hallmark feature. Similar molecular mechanisms are also conceivable
for the alterations of the humoral immunoglobulin fraction by e.g. alteration of vascular permeability or increased immunoglobulin complexation/degradation through DAMP-mediated activation of endothelial or
innate immune cells. The results of this study highlight the need to further investigate the pathophysiological implications of post-stroke IgG
deﬁciency and to integrate these ﬁndings in the current concept of
post-stroke immunodepression.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.021.
Source of funding
This work was supported by grants from the Else Kröner-Fresenius
Foundation (2012/A118), DFG (VE196/3-1) and the Munich Cluster
for Systems Neurology.
Disclosures
None.
References
Balami, J.S., Chen, R.L., Grunwald, I.Q., Buchan, A.M., 2011. Neurological complications of
acute ischaemic stroke. Lancet Neurol. 10, 357–371.
Compagno, N., Malipiero, G., Cinetto, F., Agostini, C., 2014. Immunoglobulin replacement
therapy in secondary hypogammaglobulinemia. Front. Immunol. 5, 626.
Engel, O., Kolodziej, S., Dirnagl, U., Prinz, V., 2011. Modeling stroke in mice — middle
cerebral artery occlusion with the ﬁlament model. J. Vis. Exp. 6 (pii: 2423).
Furst, D.E., 2009. Serum immunoglobulins and risk of infection: how low can you go?
Semin. Arthritis Rheum. 39, 18–29.
Hug, A., Murle, B., Dalpke, A., Zorn, M., Liesz, A., Veltkamp, R., 2010. Usefulness of serum
procalcitonin levels for the early diagnosis of stroke-associated respiratory tract
infections. Neurocrit. Care 14, 416–422.
Janeway Jr., C.A., Travers, P., Walport, M., Shlomchik, M.J., 2005. Immunobiology. 8th ed.
Garland Science Publishing, New York City, NY.
Liesz, A., Hagmann, S., Zschoche, C., Adamek, J., Zhou, W., Sun, L., Hug, A., Zorn, M., Dalpke,
A., Nawroth, P., Veltkamp, R., 2009. The spectrum of systemic immune alterations
after murine focal ischemia: immunodepression versus immunomodulation. Stroke
40, 2849–2858.
Liesz, A., Ruger, H., Purrucker, J., Zorn, M., Dalpke, A., Mohlenbruch, M., Englert, S.,
Nawroth, P.P., Veltkamp, R., 2013. Stress mediators and immune dysfunction in
patients with acute cerebrovascular diseases. PLoS One 8, e74839.
Liesz, A., Dalpke, A., Mracsko, E., Antoine, D.J., Roth, S., Zhou, W., Yang, H., Na, S.Y.,
Akhisaroglu, M., Fleming, T., Eigenbrod, T., Nawroth, P.P., Tracey, K.J., Veltkamp, R.,
2015. DAMP signaling is a key pathway inducing immune modulation after brain injury. J. Neurosci. 35, 583–598.
Mawhorter, S., Yamani, M.H., 2008. Hypogammaglobulinemia and infection risk in solid
organ transplant recipients. Curr. Opin. Organ Transplant. 13, 581–585.
Meisel, C., Schwab, J.M., Prass, K., Meisel, A., Dirnagl, U., 2005. Central nervous system
injury-induced immune deﬁciency syndrome. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 775–786.
Prass, K., Meisel, C., Hoﬂich, C., Braun, J., Halle, E., Wolf, T., Ruscher, K., Victorov, I.V., Priller,
J., Dirnagl, U., Volk, H.D., Meisel, A., 2003. Stroke-induced immunodeﬁciency
promotes spontaneous bacterial infections and is mediated by sympathetic activation
reversal by poststroke T helper cell type 1-like immunostimulation. J. Exp. Med. 198,
725–736.
Prass, K., Braun, J.S., Dirnagl, U., Meisel, C., Meisel, A., 2006. Stroke propagates bacterial
aspiration to pneumonia in a model of cerebral ischemia. Stroke 37, 2607–2612.
Sellars, C., Bowie, L., Bagg, J., Sweeney, M.P., Miller, H., Tilston, J., Langhorne, P., Stott, D.J.,
2007. Risk factors for chest infection in acute stroke: a prospective cohort study.
Stroke 38, 2284–2291.
Shishido, S.N., Varahan, S., Yuan, K., Li, X., Fleming, S.D., 2012. Humoral innate immune response and disease. Clin. Immunol. 144, 142–158.
Urra, X., Cervera, A., Obach, V., Climent, N., Planas, A.M., Chamorro, A., 2009. Monocytes
are major players in the prognosis and risk of infection after acute stroke. Stroke
40, 1262–1268.
Westendorp, W.F., Nederkoorn, P.J., Vermeij, J.D., Dijkgraaf, M.G., van de Beek, D., 2011.
Post-stroke infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Neurol. 11.

