Editorial
Neuroprotection in Ischemic Stroke
AhR We Making Progress?
Arun Padmanabhan, MD, PhD; Saptarsi M. Haldar, MD

C

Downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

the tryptophan metabolite L-kynurenine (L-kyn) and the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is an important mediator of ischemic neuronal damage that can be pharmacologically manipulated in vivo. AhR is a member of the Per-Arnt-Sim family of
basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that are activated
by a range of structurally divergent ligands, including environmental pollutants (eg, dioxins) and the endogenous tryptophan catabolite L-kyn.11,12 AhR is normally inactive under
basal conditions and retained in the cellular cytoplasm bound
to several chaperone proteins. On ligand binding, AhR translocates to the nucleus and heterodimerizes with the AhR nuclear
translocator to bind DNA and to alter gene expression.13
Endogenous AhR signaling has been shown to play important roles in cardiovascular development and physiology and
in the modulation of inflammatory signals.14,15 Previous work
has also demonstrated that ablation of AhR results in enhancement of ischemia-induced angiogenesis.16 As noted above,
L-kyn (a byproduct of the tryptophan-degrading tryptophan2,3-dioxygenase [TDO] enzyme) was recently discovered to
be an endogenous AhR ligand that plays important roles in
cancer pathobiology and immune activation.12
From this rationale, Cuartero et al used in vitro and in vivo
models to test the hypothesis that the L-Kyn–AhR signaling
pathway potentiates acute ischemic brain injury. They found
that AhR protein abundance, nuclear translocation, and transcriptional activity in cortical neurons are increased in a mouse
model of stroke induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO). Using pharmacological AhR inhibitors and activators and mice with genetic Ahr deficiency, they demonstrate
that AhR is an important mediator of acute ischemic damage
during MCAO. Mechanistic studies suggest that AhR activation during ischemia may mediate certain pathological effects
via inhibition of cAMP response element binding protein signaling. The authors go on to demonstrate that L-kyn accumulates in the brain during acute ischemia where it functions as
an endogenous activator of AhR. Exogenously administered
L-kyn exacerbates stroke, as assessed by infarct volume, in
an AhR-dependent fashion. Perhaps most intriguingly, the
authors also demonstrate that inhibition of L-kyn production
via pharmacological blockade of TDO decreased AhR activation and reduced infarct volume after MCAO. Taken together,
these studies implicate the L-Kyn–AhR pathway as a novel
mediator of brain damage during stroke and identify TDO and
AhR as new “druggable” targets in this disease (Figure).
The work of Cuartero and colleagues raises a number of
interesting questions that have important translational implications for cerebrovascular disease. First, although the authors
demonstrate that L-Kyn functions as an endogenous activator
of AhR, they also find increased protein abundance of AhR during ischemia. Are these additional mechanisms governing AhR

erebrovascular accidents, more commonly referred to as
strokes, remain the second most common cause of mortality and the third most common cause of disability worldwide.1 It
has been estimated that more than three quarters of all strokes in
the United States are attributable to ischemia, with the remainder principally related to intracranial hemorrhage.2,3 Although
our attempts to address modifiable risk factors for stroke have
decreased the incidence of stroke, stroke-related death and disability are increasing at concerning rates.4,5 These observations
lie in stark contrast to contemporary metrics for acute myocardial infarction, for which both short-term mortality and long-term
mortality have been decreasing over the past 30 years,6,7 concomitant with the increasing use of prompt reperfusion strategies,
including primary percutaneous coronary intervention. The cell
types affected in the context of stroke and myocardial infarction
(neurons and cardiomyocytes, respectively) are similar in that
both are terminally differentiated cells that are exquisitely sensitive to ischemic insults. Following the adage that “time is brain” in
the setting of acute ischemic stroke, the benefit of restoring blood
flow with thrombolytic therapy decreases in a continuous fashion
over time, with studies demonstrating that each 15-minute delay
in the time to initiation of therapy is associated with reduced odds
of independent ambulation and survival.8,9 However, compared
with coronary revascularization, the temporal window for safe and
effective cerebral reperfusion therapy is exceedingly narrow and
complicated by the challenges associated with identifying stroke
symptoms and obtaining rapid neuroimaging, issues that can further delay rapid triage and initiation of treatment. Therefore, a
huge unmet need remains for the development of novel therapeutic strategies for ischemic neuroprotection to improve outcomes in
acute stroke. Toward that end, elucidating the precise molecular
mechanisms that govern neuronal susceptibility to ischemia is a
critical step in identifying pathways that may ultimately be amenable to pharmacological manipulation for patients with stroke.

Article see p 2040
In this issue of Circulation, Cuartero et al10 use mouse models of stroke to demonstrate that a signaling pathway involving
The opinions expressed in this article are not necessarily those of the
editors or of the American Heart Association.
From the Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston (A.P.); Case Cardiovascular Research
Institute, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University School
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH (S.M.H.); and Harrington Heart & Vascular
Institute, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, OH (S.M.H.).
Correspondence to Saptarsi M. Haldar, MD, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, 2103 Cornell Rd, Room 4-525, Cleveland,
OH 44106. E-mail saptarsi.haldar@case.edu
(Circulation. 2014;130:2002-2004.)
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org
DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013533

2002

Padmanabhan and Haldar   L-Kyn–AhR Pathway in Ischemic Stroke   2003
Ischemia
AhR+/+

AhR-/AhR inhibitor
TDO inhibitor

TDO

drugs?

L-kynurenine
drugs?

CREB
Signaling

Other Endogenous/
Exogenous
AhR Ligands?

AhR
Other
Pathways?

Larger Stroke

Downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure. The L-kynurenine–aryl hydrocarbon receptor (L-Kyn–
AhR) signaling pathway mediates neuronal susceptibility to
ischemia. Using the middle cerebral artery occlusion mouse
model of stroke, Cuartero et al10 demonstrate that genetic Ahr
deficiency, pharmacological AhR inhibition, and inhibition of
L-Kyn production (via pharmacological inhibition of tryptophan2,3-dioxygenase [TDO]) all confer ischemic neuroprotection
(left). Right, A mechanistic framework for the present findings.
CREB indicates cAMP response element binding protein.

accumulation potential targets for ischemic neuroprotection?
Second, this study uses systemic delivery of L-Kyn or TDO
inhibitors in the MCAO model of stroke. It will be important
to understand which cell types are responsible for producing
L-kyn during cerebral ischemia because a significant quantity
of this metabolite is produced by the liver. Mouse models harboring a conditional allele of TDO may prove useful in this
regard. Given the link among tryptophan metabolism, AhR, and
immune cell activation,12 the current observations in the brain
raise the possibility that similar pathways may be involved in
other cardiovascular conditions (eg, atherogenesis, myocardial
infarction, heart failure) or neurodegenerative disorders (eg,
Alzheimer disease). Third, what pathways downstream of AhR
are responsible for mediating ischemia-induced neurotoxicity?
Although repression of cAMP response element binding protein signaling is certainly plausible, AhR may well be working through multiple mechanisms. Unbiased approaches to
identify AhR-mediated effects in neurons, coupled with studies of neuron-specific AhR deletion, will be particularly informative. This work also begs the epidemiological question of
whether environmental dioxin exposure contributes to stroke
risk. Studies of individuals exposed to agent orange, a herbicide used extensively during the Vietnam War and known to
be contaminated with the dioxin 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, may be informative in this context. Finally, apart from
L-kyn, are there other as-yet uncharacterized endogenous or
exogenous AhR ligands that confer stroke risk? Conversely,
are there any endogenous inhibitors of the AhR pathway?
Future work that builds on the index observations of Cuartero
and colleagues may elucidate additional therapeutic strategies
for the prevention and treatment of stroke.
Providers caring for patients suffering from acute stroke are
rarely afforded the opportunity to intervene immediately after
the onset of ischemia. Although this study provides proof of
principle that early inhibition of the L-Kyn–AhR axis confers
neuroprotection in the setting of ischemic stroke, the most
pressing question that arises is whether pathway blockade at
a later time point remains efficacious. Furthermore, how does

manipulation of this pathway interact with reperfusion therapies, and could this strategy potentially expand the relatively
limited window during which cerebral revascularization is
effective? Ultimately, the questions of whether such observations in mouse models such as MCAO eventually translate to
larger mammals or humans remain a major challenge for the
field.17 Despite these long-term hurdles, this work represents an
exciting new inroad for the development of novel neuroprotective strategies and suggests that we are indeed making progress.

Disclosures
None.

References
	1.	Lozano R, Naghavi M, Foreman K, Lim S, Shibuya K, Aboyans V,
Abraham J, Adair T, Aggarwal R, Ahn SY, Alvarado M, Anderson HR,
Anderson LM, Andrews KG, Atkinson C, Baddour LM, Barker-Collo S,
Bartels DH, Bell ML, Benjamin EJ, Bennett D, Bhalla K, Bikbov B, Bin
Abdulhak A, Birbeck G, Blyth F, Bolliger I, Boufous S, Bucello C, Burch
M, Burney P, Carapetis J, Chen H, Chou D, Chugh SS, Coffeng LE, Colan
SD, Colquhoun S, Colson KE, Condon J, Connor MD, Cooper LT, Corriere
M, Cortinovis M, de Vaccaro KC, Couser W, Cowie BC, Criqui MH, Cross
M, Dabhadkar KC, Dahodwala N, De Leo D, Degenhardt L, Delossantos
A, Denenberg J, Des Jarlais DC, Dharmaratne SD, Dorsey ER, Driscoll
T, Duber H, Ebel B, Erwin PJ, Espindola P, Ezzati M, Feigin V, Flaxman
AD, Forouzanfar MH, Fowkes FG, Franklin R, Fransen M, Freeman
MK, Gabriel SE, Gakidou E, Gaspari F, Gillum RF, Gonzalez-Medina
D, Halasa YA, Haring D, Harrison JE, Havmoeller R, Hay RJ, Hoen B,
Hotez PJ, Hoy D, Jacobsen KH, James SL, Jasrasaria R, Jayaraman S,
Johns N, Karthikeyan G, Kassebaum N, Keren A, Khoo JP, Knowlton LM,
Kobusingye O, Koranteng A, Krishnamurthi R, Lipnick M, Lipshultz SE,
Ohno SL, Mabweijano J, MacIntyre MF, Mallinger L, March L, Marks
GB, Marks R, Matsumori A, Matzopoulos R, Mayosi BM, McAnulty
JH, McDermott MM, McGrath J, Mensah GA, Merriman TR, Michaud
C, Miller M, Miller TR, Mock C, Mocumbi AO, Mokdad AA, Moran A,
Mulholland K, Nair MN, Naldi L, Narayan KM, Nasseri K, Norman P,
O’Donnell M, Omer SB, Ortblad K, Osborne R, Ozgediz D, Pahari B,
Pandian JD, Rivero AP, Padilla RP, Perez-Ruiz F, Perico N, Phillips D,
Pierce K, Pope CA 3rd, Porrini E, Pourmalek F, Raju M, Ranganathan
D, Rehm JT, Rein DB, Remuzzi G, Rivara FP, Roberts T, De León FR,
Rosenfeld LC, Rushton L, Sacco RL, Salomon JA, Sampson U, Sanman
E, Schwebel DC, Segui-Gomez M, Shepard DS, Singh D, Singleton J,
Sliwa K, Smith E, Steer A, Taylor JA, Thomas B, Tleyjeh IM, Towbin JA,
Truelsen T, Undurraga EA, Venketasubramanian N, Vijayakumar L, Vos
T, Wagner GR, Wang M, Wang W, Watt K, Weinstock MA, Weintraub R,
Wilkinson JD, Woolf AD, Wulf S, Yeh PH, Yip P, Zabetian A, Zheng ZJ,
Lopez AD, Murray CJ, AlMazroa MA, Memish ZA. Global and regional
mortality from 235 causes of death for 20 age groups in 1990 and 2010: a
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet.
2012;380:2095–2128.
	2.	 Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ,
Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Franco S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern
SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, Kissela BM, Kittner SJ,
Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, Marcus
GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS,
Mussolino ME, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Pandey DK, Paynter NP, Reeves
MJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo
D, Turner MB. Heart disease and stroke statistics---2014 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28–e292.
	3.	 Krishnamurthi RV, Feigin VL, Forouzanfar MH, Mensah GA, Connor
M, Bennett DA, Moran AE, Sacco RL, Anderson LM, Truelsen T,
O’Donnell M, Venketasubramanian N, Barker-Collo S, Lawes CM, Wang
W, Shinohara Y, Witt E, Ezzati M, Naghavi M, Murray C. Global and
regional burden of first-ever ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke during
1990–2010: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010.
Lancet Glob Health. 2013;1:e259–e281.
	 4.	 Koton S, Schneider AL, Rosamond WD, Shahar E, Sang Y, Gottesman RF,
Coresh J. Stroke incidence and mortality trends in US communities, 1987
to 2011. JAMA. 2014;312:259–268.
	 5.	 Feigin VL, Forouzanfar MH, Krishnamurthi R, Mensah GA, Connor M,
Bennett DA, Moran AE, Sacco RL, Anderson L, Truelsen T, O’Donnell M,

2004  Circulation  December 2, 2014

Downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Venketasubramanian N, Barker-Collo S, Lawes CM, Wang W, Shinohara
Y, Witt E, Ezzati M, Naghavi M, Murray C. Global and regional burden
of stroke during 1990–2010: findings from the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010. Lancet. 2014;383:245–254.
	6.	 Rosamond WD, Chambless LE, Folsom AR, Cooper LS, Conwill DE,
Clegg L, Wang CH, Heiss G. Trends in the incidence of myocardial infarction and in mortality due to coronary heart disease, 1987 to 1994. N Engl
J Med. 1998;339:861–867.
	 7.	 Bata IR, Gregor RD, Wolf HK, Brownell B. Trends in five-year survival
of patients discharged after acute myocardial infarction. Can J Cardiol.
2006;22:399–404.
	 8.	 Saver JL, Fonarow GC, Smith EE, Reeves MJ, Grau-Sepulveda MV, Pan
W, Olson DM, Hernandez AF, Peterson ED, Schwamm LH. Time to treatment with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator and outcome from
acute ischemic stroke. JAMA. 2013;309:2480–2488.
	 9.	 Lees KR, Bluhmki E, von Kummer R, Brott TG, Toni D, Grotta JC, Albers
GW, Kaste M, Marler JR, Hamilton SA, Tilley BC, Davis SM, Donnan
GA, Hacke W, Allen K, Mau J, Meier D, del Zoppo G, De Silva DA,
Butcher KS, Parsons MW, Barber PA, Levi C, Bladin C, Byrnes G. Time
to treatment with intravenous alteplase and outcome in stroke: an updated
pooled analysis of ECASS, ATLANTIS, NINDS, and EPITHET trials.
Lancet. 2010;375:1695–1703.
	10.	 Cuartero MI, Ballesteros I, de la Parra J, Harkin AL, Abautret-Daly A,
Sherwin E, Fernández-Salguero P, Corbi AL, Lizasoain I, Moro MA.
L-kynurenine/aryl hydrocarbon receptor pathway mediates brain damage
after experimental stroke. Circulation. 2014;130:2040–2051.

	11.	 Denison MS, Nagy SR. Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor by
structurally diverse exogenous and endogenous chemicals. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2003;43:309–334.
	12.	Opitz CA, Litzenburger UM, Sahm F, Ott M, Tritschler I, Trump S,
Schumacher T, Jestaedt L, Schrenk D, Weller M, Jugold M, Guillemin GJ,
Miller CL, Lutz C, Radlwimmer B, Lehmann I, von Deimling A, Wick W,
Platten M. An endogenous tumour-promoting ligand of the human aryl
hydrocarbon receptor. Nature. 2011;478:197–203.
13.	Hankinson O. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor complex. Annu Rev
	
Pharmacol Toxicol. 1995;35:307–340.
	14.	 Zhang N. The role of endogenous aryl hydrocarbon receptor signaling in
cardiovascular physiology. J Cardiovasc Dis Res. 2011;2:91–95.
	15.	 Vondrácek J, Umannová L, Machala M. Interactions of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor with inflammatory mediators: beyond CYP1A regulation.
Curr Drug Metab. 2011;12:89–103.
	16.	 Ichihara S, Yamada Y, Ichihara G, Nakajima T, Li P, Kondo T, Gonzalez FJ,
Murohara T. A role for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor in regulation of ischemiainduced angiogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2007;27:1297–1304.
	17.	 Moretti A, Ferrari F, Villa RF. Neuroprotection for ischaemic stroke: current status and challenges [published online ahead of print September
6, 2014]. Pharmacol Ther. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.09.003.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016372581400165X.
Accessed October 20, 2014.
Key Words: Editorials ◼ kynurenine ◼ infarction, middle cerebral artery
◼ neurons ◼ receptors, aryl hydrocarbon ◼ transcription, genetic ◼ tryptophan
oxygenase

Neuroprotection in Ischemic Stroke: AhR We Making Progress?
Arun Padmanabhan and Saptarsi M. Haldar
Circulation. 2014;130:2002-2004; originally published online October 30, 2014;
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.013533
Downloaded from http://circ.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Circulation is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2014 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0009-7322. Online ISSN: 1524-4539

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
World Wide Web at:
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/130/23/2002

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published
in Circulation can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial
Office. Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located,
click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about
this process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.
Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Circulation is online at:
http://circ.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

