A New Micro–Computed Tomography–Based
High-Resolution Blood–Brain Barrier Imaging Technique
to Study Ischemic Stroke
Jin-Yong Park, MS; Su-Kyoung Lee, BS; Jeong-Yeon Kim, MS; Kang-Hoon Je, PhD;
Dawid Schellingerhout, MBChB; Dong-Eog Kim, MD, PhD

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Background and Purpose—Micro–computed tomography (mCT) offers high-resolution images, but it suffers from low
contrast sensitivity and poor soft tissue contrast. We introduce a new mCT imaging technique with improved sensitivity
for the dynamic spatial and temporal characterization of poststroke blood–brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction in small
animals in vivo.
Methods—Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion was induced for 1 hour in 10- to 12-week-old C57BL/6 mice (n=35). At
4, 24, and 48 hours after ischemic stroke, serial in vivo mCT imaging was performed 5 minutes after intravenous infusion
(n=3) or intracarotid infusion of iopromide (240 μL) for 5 minutes (n=32). After intravenous injection of 2% Evans
blue, we performed ex vivo near-infrared fluorescent imaging of parenchymal Evans blue leakage, visual assessment of
poststroke parenchymal hematoma, triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining of the brain tissue, and quantitative mapping
of stroke-related brain lesions.
Results—Infarct-related BBB dysfunction could be demonstrated with intra-arterial but not with intravenous infusion of
iopromide. Iopromide leakage across the dysfunctional BBB showed a monophasic (not biphasic) course for 48 hours
after ischemic insult in both the parenchymal hematoma (n=5) and the non–parenchymal hematoma (n=24) groups, with
relatively severe leakiness and greater hemispheric midline shift in animals with hemorrhage. Parenchymal staining on
in vivo mCT overlapped with ex vivo fluorescent staining because of Evans blue. Multivariable analyses showed that
midline shift and the amount of iopromide leakage at each of the 3 time points predicted the final infarct size at 48 hours.
Conclusions—The new mCT BBB imaging technique, based on the intra-arterial infusion of clinically available iopromide,
allows serial quantitative visualization of poststroke BBB dysfunction in mice, with high resolution and in a sensitive
manner.   (Stroke. 2014;45:2480-2484.)
Key Words: blood-brain barrier ◼ infusion, intra-arterial ◼ iopromide ◼ ischemic stroke ◼ micro–CT

R

estoration of blood flow to ischemic brain can cause reperfusion injury that compromises the blood–brain barrier
(BBB),1 which has been reported to have a biphasic pattern of
dysfunction2: initial increase and then a significant reduction in
BBB permeability at 24 hours after reperfusion, followed by a
subsequent repeat of increased leakiness. The leaky BBB can
cause cerebral edema and hemorrhagic transformation, which
can do more harm to the patient than the initial ischemia.3
Micro–computed tomography (mCT) systems for small
animal imaging are self-contained without requiring architectural radiation shielding to be installed. mCT offers highresolution images4 and rapid data acquisition capabilities.5
However, it suffers from low contrast sensitivity and poor soft

tissue contrast. To counter these limitations, we hypothesized
that intra-arterial infusion of a clinically available iodinated
x-ray contrast agent would better visualize BBB permeability
than intravenous administration.
In this study, we develop a new in vivo mCT imaging technique to visualize the leakage of iopromide infused intra-arterially for the assessment of BBB integrity in a mouse model of
transient focal cerebral ischemia.

Methods
Detailed methods are available in the online-only Data Supplement.
Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced as previously reported (Methods and Movie in the online-only Data Supplement) by

Received May 29, 2014; accepted June 3, 2014.
From the Molecular Imaging and Neurovascular Research (MINER) Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang,
Korea (J.-Y.P., S.-K.L., J.-Y.K., K.-H.J., D.-E.K.); and Departments of Radiology and Experimental Diagnostic Imaging, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston (D.S.).
J.-Y. Park and S.-K. Lee contributed equally.
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.
114.006297/-/DC1.
Correspondence to Dong-Eog Kim, MD, PhD, Department of Neurology, Dongguk University Ilsan Hospital, 814 Siksa-dong, Goyang, Korea. E-mail
kdongeog@duih.org
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org	

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.006297

2480

Park et al   Micro-CT BBB Imaging in Mice With Stroke    2481

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

occluding the middle cerebral artery (MCA) of 10- to 12-week-old
C57BL/6 mice (n=32) for 1 hour (transient MCA occlusion, tMCAO).
To visualize the BBB dysfunction induced by tMCAO, mCT imaging was performed with a mCT small animal imager serially after intravenous (n=3) or intra-arterial (n=29) infusion of iopromide
(Ultravist; Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Berlin, Germany) for
5 minutes at 4-, 24-, and 48-hour time points. At the last 48-hour
time point, double imaging was performed with an intravenous infusion followed immediately by an intra-arterial infusion with separate
imaging for each injection in the 3 animals that had underwent mCT
imaging with prior intravenous infusions at 4 and 24 hours.
After the last mCT imaging session at 48 hours, 2% Evans blue
was injected intravenously. After examining ex vivo brain tissues (six
2-mm-thick coronal slices) for the presence of poststroke edematous hemorrhagic transformation (parenchymal hematoma [PH]; see
Methods in the online-only Data Supplement), each slice was imaged
using a near-infrared fluorescent imaging machine to detect fluorescence because of Evans blue leakage into the brain parenchyma.
Then, these slices were stained with 2% triphenyltetrazolium chloride
solution to delineate white/pale infarcted areas.
Quantitative lesion mapping6 using a template set (Figure I in
the online-only Data Supplement) and measurement of hemispheric midline shift7 were performed (Methods in the online-only Data
Supplement).

Results
Infarct-Related BBB Dysfunction Could Be
Demonstrated With Intra-Arterial But Not With
Intravenous Infusion of Iopromide
After tMCAO for 1 hour in C57BL/6 mice (n=3), serial mCT
imaging was performed with intravenous infusion of iopromide at 4, 24, and 48 hours (Figure 1). As shown in the representative animal, the venous structures were opacified at each
of these time points, but no parenchymal leakage of contrast
agent was observed. At 48 hours, the intravenous infusion
was followed by a second intra-arterial infusion of the contrast agent. After the intra-arterial infusion, brain parenchymal
staining was clearly seen in the left MCA territory.

BBB Leakage Showed a Monophasic (Not Biphasic)
Course for 48 hours After Ischemic Insult
As was demonstrated in serial mCT images of representative animals (Figure 2) and in accumulation lesion maps with

quantification of all data (Figure 3; Figure II in the online-only
Data Supplement), the reported phenomenon of biphasic BBB
opening2 was not observed in our animals. The data showed
a monophasic increasing pattern of leakage in both the PH
group (n=5) and the non-PH group (n=24; see Results in the
online-only Data Supplement).

Parenchymal Staining on mCT Overlapped With
Fluorescent Staining Because of Evans Blue
The areas of iopromide leakage on mCT images overlapped
with the areas of EB leakage; and, the iopromide leakage areas
and mCT densities on the 48-hour in vivo images correlated
with the Evans blue leakage areas and fluorescent images,
respectively (Figure IIIA and IIIB in the online-only Data
Supplement). The area of iopromide leakage or Evans blue
leakage only weakly correlated with the infarct size (Figure
IIIC and IIID in the online-only Data Supplement). However,
the area of iopromide leakage or mean mCT density in the
sensory cortex had a relatively strong correlation with the
infarct size on triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining (Figure
IV in the online-only Data Supplement).

Hemorrhagic Transformation Occurred Near
the Area With the Highest Level of Iopromide
Parenchymal Staining in Mice With Relatively
Severe Iopromide Leakage
mCT imaging did not predict which animals would undergo
hemorrhagic transformation. Compared with the non-PH
group, the PH group had wider and denser mCT sites of leakage only on the last in vivo images (Figures 2 and 3; Figure
II in the online-only Data Supplement), which were acquired
at 48 hours just before confirming the presence of hemorrhagic transformation ex vivo. In addition, infarct size on
triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining was bigger in the PH
group (mean±SE, 24.0±2.0 mm2) than in the non-PH group
(14.7±1.4 mm2; P=0.01).
In the PH group animals, hematomas were located near the
core area of infarct, in and around the sites where the mean
mCT density at 48 hours was highest (in the middle+lateral

Figure 1. In vivo micro–computed tomographic (mCT) imaging of iopromide leakage because of ischemic disruption of the blood–brain
barrier: intravenous vs intra-arterial administration of the x-ray contrast agent. After intravenous infusion of iopromide for 5 minutes at 4,
24, and 48 hours after transient occlusion of the middle cerebral artery for 1 hour, there is no parenchymal mCT hyperdensity because of
the leakage of iopromide into the middle cerebral artery territory in a representative C57BL/6 mouse. In the subsequent mCT images that
were obtained at 48 hours additionally after administering iopromide intra-arterially, hyperdense mCT lesions (arrows) are clearly observed
in the infarcted area, reflecting stroke-related blood–brain barrier dysfunction. Arrow heads represent midline shift because of cerebral
edema. Scale bar, 1 mm.

2482  Stroke  August 2014
portion of the caudatoputamen, compared with other subregions) or relatively high (in the sensory cortex of the PH
group, compared with the non-PH group; see also Results in
the online-only Data Supplement).

Hemispheric Midline Shift Was Progressively Worse
From 4 Hours to 48 Hours and Was Greater in the
PH Group Than in the Non-PH Group

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

As shown in the representative animals and quantitative data for
all animals in each group (Figure V and Results in the onlineonly Data Supplement), midline shift significantly differed
between time points (P<0.01). The overall increasing trend of
the midline shift for 48 hours did not differ between the PH and
non-PH groups (no significant interaction, P=0.30). However,
after adjusting for time, the degree of midline shift was relatively prominent in the PH group (P=0.05). In addition, midline
shift correlated with parenchymal staining near the midline but
not with global iopromide leakage in the entire hemisphere.

Midline Shift and Iopromide Leakage
Independently Predicted the Final Infarct Size
Multivariable analyses showed that midline shift and the
amount of iopromide leakage at each of the 3 time points were
independent predictors of the final infarct size at 48 hours
(Results/Table in the online-only Data Supplement).

Discussion
This is the first report on a high-resolution serial in vivo BBB
imaging technique using mCT and a clinically available iodinated contrast agent administered intra-arterially in mice with
tMCAO. Using the new BBB imaging technique, poststroke
leakage of the x-ray contrast agent could be clearly detected
with high resolution and in a sensitive manner, allowing
quantitative characterization and serial monitoring of BBB
dysfunction.
We have found that (1) it was necessary to use an intraarterial, rather than intravenous, iopromide infusion paradigm, (2) staining showed a monophasic time course at 4 to
48 hours poststroke, (3) staining correlated well with leakage
by an independently detected blood pool agent (Evans blue)
and modestly with eventual infarct size, (4) contrast staining and midline shift (surrogate for edema) correlated well,
and (5) contrast staining did not predict which animals would
undergo hemorrhagic transformation, but sites of highest leakage seemed to correlate to the locations of hemorrhage, when
it did occur.
Using this imaging technique, we could characterize the
spatial and temporal dynamic nature of poststroke BBB dysfunction. BBB opening began in subcortical periventricular
regions and expanded by spreading in and out to nearby basal
ganglia and cerebral cortex. In our experimental setting,
poststroke BBB opening was monophasic (increase-increase

Figure 2. Serial in vivo micro–computed tomographic (mCT) imaging of stroke-related blood–brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction in representative animals without vs with poststroke parenchymal hematoma (PH). In a representative animal without PH (first 2 rows) after transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) for 1 hour, mCT imaging at 4 hours shows a small amount of parenchymal staining around
the sylvian fissure (open orange arrow) because of the leakage of intra-arterially injected iopromide. At 24 hours, staining is extensively
observed in the left MCA territory, including the basal ganglia (open yellow arrow) and periventricular areas (open orange arrows). At 48
hours, the mCT densities of staining substantially increases while still sparing the upper cortical areas (blue arrows). In the ex vivo brain
tissues that were obtained at 48 hours after completion of CT imaging and intravenous injection of Evans blue (EB), bluish staining reflects
EB leakage into the brain parenchyma because of BBB dysfunction. Ex vivo near-infrared fluorescent (NIRF) imaging of the tissue sections more clearly visualizes the areas of EB leakage, which largely overlap with the areas of iopromide leakage on mCT images at 48
hours. The total infarcted area as indicated by triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining is shown in the rightmost column and again
correlates closely with the areas of iopromide and EB staining (open arrows). In the other representative animal with PH (second 2 rows),
mCT imaging at 4 hours shows a localized hyperdense lesion near the lateral margin of the caudatoputamen (red arrow). Follow-up mCT
imaging at 24 hours shows the expansion of the area of iopromide leakage and additional involvement of a lower cortical area (red arrow)
and periventricular areas (open pink arrows). At 48 hours, the iopromide leakage area further expands and involves the upper cortex (blue
arrows) as well. The density of staining looks substantially higher than before. The areas of leakage on mCT images overlap with the areas
of EB leakage on ex vivo NIRF images (arrows). These brain regions with dysfunctional BBB encompass the relatively small cortical and
subcortical infarcts that are delineated on TTC staining (arrows). Digital photographs and TTC staining show that hemorrhagic transformation complicates this MCA infarction. Of note, the hyperdense mCT lesion at 4 hours is located near the poststroke hematoma at 48 hours
(red arrows). In addition, leakage and staining are less severe in the core of the infarct (open red arrows) than in the surrounding areas.
Scale bars, 1 mm.

Park et al   Micro-CT BBB Imaging in Mice With Stroke    2483

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 3. Quantitative mapping of stroke-related left hemispheric lesions: blood–brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction because of cerebral
infarction without vs with parenchymal hematoma (PH) formation. A, Methods of constructing coronal micro–computed tomographic
(mCT) images and near-infrared fluorescent (NIRF) images to cover the brain regions with +1.3 to −0.7 mm (anterior section; pink bar
with a central blue line) and −0.7 to −2.7 mm (posterior section; green bar with a central red line) anteroposterior distance from the
Bregma. The central lines at Bregma +0.3 mm and −1.7 mm corresponded to the posterior cut surfaces (outlined with blue and red
color, respectively) of the 2 representative 2-mm-thick forebrain slices with most extensive infarct areas on triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining, performed ex vivo after the last in vivo imaging session at 48 hours. B and C, Accumulated lesion maps (B; left 4
columns for color-coded mean maps and right 2 columns for color-coded frequency maps) and quantification data (C; mean±SE for
both mCT sections) for grouped animals without (n=24) versus with (n=5) PH (confirmed ex vivo at 48 hours). There are no significant
intergroup differences in the iopromide leakage areas (C, left) and mCT densities (C, middle) at 4 hours and 24 hours. However, at 48
hours, Mann–Whitney tests show that the values of the mCT parameters are relatively high in the PH group compared with the non-PH
group (P=0.06 and 0.02, respectively). Thus, the amount of iopromide leakage (C, right), calculated as area×mCT density, was higher
in the PH group than in the non-PH group (P=0.02). Regardless of the presence of postinfarction hematoma, the parenchymal staining related to BBB dysfunction is increasing (P<0.01, repeated measures ANOVA), with a monophasic pattern. Blue-colored P values:
post hoc comparison with 4-hour time point. Scale bars, 2 mm. Please see Results in the online-only Data Supplement for additional
description about this figure.

or increase-stay).8 However, poststroke BBB dysfunction
has been reported to take a biphasic (increase-decreaseincrease) course during the acute period.2 As one of many
possible explanations (Discussion in the online-only Data
Supplement) for these contradicting results, it may be considered that unlike our study (with limitations described in
Discussion in the online-only Data Supplement) most of the
previous studies used histological methods, which do not

allow serial assessments of BBB permeability in identical
animals.
Quantitative brain mapping and multivariable analysis
showed that BBB dysfunction was linked with brain edema
and final infarct size. Thus, mCT imaging could help predict
the final infarct size by reflecting the severity of BBB dysfunction and brain edema. Despite the relatively big infarct size
in the PH group and the (weak) correlation between infarct

2484  Stroke  August 2014
size and iopromide leakage, mCT imaging could not predict
the risk of PH, but was helpful in predicting the location of
postinfarction hemorrhagic transformation, when it occurred.
In the PH group animals at 48 hours after tMCAO, midlineshifting edematous hemorrhagic transformation was observed
in the infarct core, near the areas with high levels of iopromide
leakage, such as in the lateral portion of the caudatoputamen
or in the sensorimotor cortex.

Conclusions
In summary, we have developed a new mCT imaging technique for the serial assessment of poststroke BBB integrity in
mice, which cannot be done using conventional (contrast or
noncontrast) mCT imaging.

Sources of Funding
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

This research was supported by the Bio & Medical Technology
Development Program of the National Research Foundation (20100019862) funded by the Korean government.

Disclosures
None.

References
	 1.	 Aoki T, Sumii T, Mori T, Wang X, Lo EH. Blood-brain barrier disruption
and matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression during reperfusion injury:
mechanical versus embolic focal ischemia in spontaneously hypertensive
rats. Stroke. 2002;33:2711–2717.
	 2.	 Pillai DR, Dittmar MS, Baldaranov D, Heidemann RM, Henning EC,
Schuierer G, et al. Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats–a 3 T
MRI study on biphasic blood-brain barrier opening and the dynamics
of edema formation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2009;29:1846–1855.
	3.	Rosenberg GA. Ischemic brain edema. Prog Cardiovasc Dis.
1999;42:209–216.
	 4.	 Kim DE, Kim JY, Sun IC, Schellingerhout D, Lee SK, Ahn CH, et al.
Hyperacute direct thrombus imaging using computed tomography and
gold nanoparticles. Ann Neurol. 2013;73:617–625.
	 5.	 Hayasaka N, Nagai N, Kawao N, Niwa A, Yoshioka Y, Mori Y, et al.
In vivo diagnostic imaging using micro-CT: sequential and comparative
evaluation of rodent models for hepatic/brain ischemia and stroke. PLoS
One. 2012;7:e32342.
	 6.	 Kim DE, Kim JY, Nahrendorf M, Lee SK, Ryu JH, Kim K, et al. Direct thrombus imaging as a means to control the variability of mouse embolic infarct
models: the role of optical molecular imaging. Stroke. 2011;42:3566–3573.
	 7.	 Walberer M, Blaes F, Stolz E, Müller C, Schoenburg M, Tschernatsch M, et al.
Midline-shift corresponds to the amount of brain edema early after hemispheric
stroke—an MRI study in rats. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2007;19:105–110.
	 8.	 Strbian D, Durukan A, Pitkonen M, Marinkovic I, Tatlisumak E, Pedrono E,
et al. The blood-brain barrier is continuously open for several weeks following transient focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience. 2008;153:175–181.

A New Micro−Computed Tomography−Based High-Resolution Blood−Brain Barrier
Imaging Technique to Study Ischemic Stroke
Jin-Yong Park, Su-Kyoung Lee, Jeong-Yeon Kim, Kang-Hoon Je, Dawid Schellingerhout and
Dong-Eog Kim
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Stroke. 2014;45:2480-2484; originally published online July 10, 2014;
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.006297
Stroke is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2014 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
World Wide Web at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/45/8/2480

Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2014/07/10/STROKEAHA.114.006297.DC1.html

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published
in Stroke can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office.
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.
Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

ONLINE SUPPLEMENT
A New microCT-based High-Resolution Blood-Brain
Barrier Imaging Technique to Study Ischemic Stroke
Jin-Yong Park, MS; Su-Kyoung Lee, BS; Jeong-Yeon Kim, MS; Kang-Hoon
Je, PhD; Dawid Schellingerhout, MBChB; Dong-Eog Kim MD, PhD
Molecular Imaging and Neurovascular Research (MINER) Laboratory (J.-Y.P.,
S.-K.L., J.-Y.K., K.-H.J., D.-E.K.), Department of Neurology, Dongguk
University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Korea
Departments of Radiology and Experimental Diagnostic Imaging (D.S.),
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

J.-Y.P. and S.-K.L. contributed equally to this work.

Correspondence to: Dong-Eog Kim, Neurology Department, Dongguk
University Ilsan Hospital, 814 Siksa-dong, Goyang, Korea. E-mail:
kdongeog@duih.org

Supplemental Methods
This study was approved by the Preclinical Research Institute of Dongguk
University Ilsan Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
Animal Experiments
Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced as previously reported, 1-3 with
some modifications (Supplemental Video), by occluding the middle cerebral
artery (MCA) of 10~12-week-old C57/BL6 mice (n = 54; from Orient Bio Inc,
Seongnam, Korea) for 1 h (transient MCA occlusion, tMCAO) using an
occlusive thread: standardized silicon rubber-coated 6.0 nylon monofilament
(60-2356 PK10, Doccol Corporation, MA). Mice were anesthetized with 2%
isoflurane using an inhalation mask, and cerebral blood flow (CBF) was
monitored using a laser Doppler flowmeter (LDF; Omegawave, Tokyo, Japan).
A homeothermic blanket (Panlab, Barcelona, Spain) was used to keep body
temperature at 36.5°C. The left common carotid artery (CCA), external carotid
artery (ECA) and internal carotid artery (ICA) were exposed through a midline
neck incision and dissection of the peri-vascular tissue. The ECA was ligated,
with coagulation of the origin of superior thyroid artery. The CCA was ligated
using sterile 7.0 black silk, and then the ICA was ligated after separating it
from the adjacent vagus nerve. Thereafter, the pterygopalatine artery was
ligated. After making a puncture in the ECA proximal to which it was tied, the
nylon thread was inserted via the small hole, then turned toward the ICA.
Immediately after loosening the ICA ligation, the catheter was advanced about
9mm toward the MCA―anterior cerebral artery bifurcation area. In each
animal, LDF confirmed that CBF was reduced to less than 30% of the
baseline value, which was continued for 1 h. Then, the nylon thread was
carefully removed, followed by the ligation of the ECA and untying the ligated
CCA.
Six mice were excluded because of subarachnoid hemorrhage (n = 5) or
incomplete CBF reduction (n = 1). After a randomized allocation of the other
48 animals into two groups (n = 3 vs. 45), iopromide (250 μL, see below) was
infused either intravenously (for the three animals) or intra-arterially (for the 45
animals) for 5 min at every microCT (mCT) imaging time-point except the last
48 h time-point, at which double imaging was performed with an intravenous
infusion followed immediately by an intra-arterial infusion in the three animals
that had underwent mCT imaging with prior intravenous infusions at 4 and 24
h. The aim of the double imaging was to compare the efficacy of different
routes of administration on imaging findings in the same animals. We
hypothesized that intra-arterial infusion of a clinically available iodinated X-ray
contrast agent would better visualize blood-brain barrier (BBB) permeability
than intravenous administration, by limiting the dispersion of the contrast dye,
and allowing a higher concentration gradient between the vascular
compartment and cerebral extracellular space to allow mCT-detectable
staining to develop in areas of BBB disruption. Thirteen out of the 45 (intraarterial group) animals did not survive until 48 h time-point (n = 13). Thus, 35
animals were included in the final data analyses.
After pilot experiments, we decided to infuse 250 μL iopromide into the tail

vein or left internal carotid artery over 5 min (corresponding to a dose of 10
mL/kg, about a 10-fold higher dose than in humans). At every time-point, we
used a fresh sterile PE-45 catheter (diameter of the distal end tapered
narrowly = 200 μm) connected to a remote wireless continuous pump control
system (Supplemental Video).
Following the last mCT imaging session at 48 h, 2% Evans-Blue was
injected intravenously. After animals were euthanized, the brains were
removed and freshly cut (six 2 mm-thick coronal slices at 2.3, 0.3, -1.7, -3.7,
and -5.7 mm distance from the Bregma) in a brain matrix device. After
examining for the presence of post-stroke edematous hemorrhagic
transformation4 (parenchymal hematoma, PH; see below), each of the six
pieces of the fresh brain tissues was imaged ex vivo twice, with the anterior
surface up (head-up view) and then down (tail-up view), using a near-infrared
fluorescent (NIRF) imaging machine with a charge-coupled device camera
(CoolSnap-EZ, Roper Scientific, Tucson, AZ; excitation / emission, 675 / 690
nm; 200 ms acquisition) to detect fluorescence due to Evans-Blue leakage
into the brain parenchyma.
Immediately following the NIRF imaging, fresh brain slices were stained
with 2% triphenyl-tetrazolium-chloride (TTC) solution to delineate white / pale
infarcted areas.
In Vivo mCT Imaging
The animals’ brains were imaged with a mCT small animal imager (NFR
Polaris-G90; NanoFocusRay, Jeonju, Korea), using the following imaging
parameters:5 65 kVp, 60 µA, 26.7 x 26.7 x 27.9 mm 3 field of view, 0.052 x
0.052 x 0.054 mm3 voxel size, 500 milliseconds per frame, 360 views, 512 x
512 reconstruction matrix, 600 slices. This imaging protocol was set up after
pilot experiments, in which we considered both the time required for the mCT
image acquisition (5 min) and the contrast agent dose, as extrapolated from
human arterial angiography (~ 50 mL).
In order to avoid a reduction of the MCA blood flow and / or additional BBB
dysfunction related to the intra-arterial infusion of iopromide into the left ICA,
we devised a technique to allow low pressure intra-arterial infusion through a
narrowly tapered PE-45 catheter (diameter of the distal end = 200 μm)
connected to a remote wireless continuous pump control system
(Supplemental Video). LDF showed that the procedure did not affect the MCA
cerebral blood flow (data not shown).
The final reconstructed data were converted to the Digital Imaging and
Communications in Medicine (DICOM) format to make 3-dimensionally
rendered imaging using a software package (Lucion; MeviSYS, Seoul, Korea).
Assessment of Hemorrhagic Transformation
Hemorrhagic transformation of infarcts was determined by macroscopically
inspecting coronal brain sections. This was done by two investigators who
were blinded to the mCT / NIRF imaging data. Disagreements were resolved

by consensus. The assessment was based on the ‘National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) tissue plasminogen activator
study’ definition of PH:4 discrete homogeneous collections of blood, often
associated with edema. Unlike PH, which is the only clinically relevant
subtype of hemorrhagic transformation6, 7 from a ruptured ischemic vessel that
has been subject to reperfusion pressures, hemorrhagic infarction with
petechial bleeding represents the diapedesis of blood cells through ischemic
capillaries without frank rupture of a vessel. Inter-rater reliability of classifying
our experimental animals into the PH vs. Non-PH (either petechial bleeding or
no bleeding) group was high, as judged by kappa coefficient (0.76).
Quantitative and Topographic Analyses on tMCAO-related Brain Lesions
We used ImageJ (http://rsbweb.nih.gov/ij/) and Adobe Photoshop CS3Extended (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA) to map and assess the extent and
distribution of tMCAO-related left hemispheric brain damage in a quantitative
manner.
For each animal, 72 consecutive DICOM files were chosen: 36 files per
each of the two final images. These images were designated as the Anterior
Section corresponding to +1.3 ~ -0.7 mm from the Bregma (center coordinate
+0.3mm) and the Posterior Section ranging from -0.7 to -2.7 mm from the
Bregma (center coordinate -1.7mm). The mCT images were thus centered on
the 2nd and 3rd brain cuts: i.e. the posterior surfaces of the 2nd and 3rd brain
slices, which correspond to the anterior surfaces of the 3 rd and 4th brain slices,
respectively. These cut planes were chosen based on their high frequency
and area of involvement with infarct on TTC staining. By using ImageJ, the
first 36 and the remaining 36 DICOM files were separately loaded for the
reconstruction of the Anterior and Posterior Section images.
These individual DICOM files were filtered and prepared for subsequent
analysis by the following operations. Each of the 36 DICOM files was
background subtracted (selecting 2.0 for the ‘Number of stdev from mean’
option after drawing a square region of interest of 20 x 20 pixels in the empty
space surrounding the animal). After cropping out most of the black
background and adjusting threshold values (8 and 255 for lower and upper
levels respectively), skull stripped images were generated by using the ‘Wand’
tool, which automatically finds the edge of an object and traces its shape, and
the ‘Freehand’ tool that allows the creation of irregularly shaped selections.
The high-density bony structures thus defined, were deleted out of the image
so as not to confound subsequent analysis. For mapping purposes, similar to
the removal of bony structures, high-density vascular structures were
additionally removed by using the ‘Freehand’ tool.
The stack of cleaned and prepared DICOM files were then summed
(collapsed in z-projection) to create one real image corresponding to the full
thickness of the 2 mm brain region centered on the cut planes described
above. Each of the final reconstructed (Anterior / Posterior Section) images
was transferred onto one of two template images (Supplemental Figure I;
Bregma +0.26 mm image and Bregma -1.70 mm image adapted from a

previously published mouse brain atlas8 as an overlying layer that was
transformed using the ‘Free transform and warping’ functions of Adobe
Photoshop to match the outlines and landmarks of the template. Thereafter,
the mCT image layer was additionally normalized by using the ‘Curves
adjustment’ tool in Photoshop (using the option ‘Sample in image to set black
point’ option), which fixed the background grayscale intensity value of the
contra-lesional brain parenchyma as 0 (i.e. black).
It is known that ex vivo NIRF imaging at the wavelengths used in our
experiment are surface weighted,9 and might not sample the entire 2 mm
volume of the brain slice. To counter this limitation, NIRF images of both the
back and front face of each of the adjacent slices were summed and
averaged, centered on the same cut planes as described for mCT. Thus, two
corresponding NIRF images were prepared in each animal by: 1) averaging
the tail-view NIRF image of the 2nd piece (Bregma +0.3 ~ +2.3 mm) of the six
fresh slices and the head-view NIRF image of the 3rd piece (Bregma +0.3 ~ 1.7 mm), and 2) the tail-view image of the 3rd piece (Bregma -1.7 ~ +0.3 mm)
and the head-view image of the 4th piece (Bregma -1.7 ~ -3.7 mm). Then, as
was described in the mCT lesion mapping, the reconstructed NIRF images
(centered on the 2nd and 3rd brain cuts, coordinates +0.3 mm and -1.7 mm)
were transferred onto the matching template images.
To map the frequency-distribution of ischemic brain injury,10 whitish / pale
infarct areas on the TTC-stained sections (posterior surfaces of the 2nd and 3rd
slices) were segmented and transferred onto the same template images that
were used for the Anterior / Posterior Section mCT / NIRF images.
After all images (Anterior / Posterior Section images per animal) were
registered and stored, whole (for both Section images) or a subregional
(Supplemental Figure I) lesion area and mean mCT density / fluorescent
signal intensity (0 ~ 255 grayscale intensity values) could be calculated using
the ‘Histogram’ tool of Adobe Photoshop. The amount of iopromide-leakage
was calculated as ‘area x mean mCT density’. Furthermore, using ImageJ,
color-coded maps for groups of animals were produced by summation of
multiple maps with color coding to indicate the amount of lesion overlap:
mean lesion maps11 (for NIRF images and mCT images) and accumulation
lesion (frequency) maps10 (for digital images captured from the TTC-stained
slices).
Quantification of midline-shift was performed as previously reported12 with
some modification (Supplemental Figure V), to represent the amount of brain
edema by calculating the lateral displacement of the midline venous structure,
which reflects the space-occupying effect at the selected anatomic level.
Statistical Methods
Data are presented as mean ± standard error. All statistical analyses were
conducted using a software package (SPSS 18.0, SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). A
probability value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Inter-group
differences and bivariate associations were assessed using Mann-Whitney

test and Pearson correlation test, respectively. Pared t-tests were used to
compare the values of means from two related samples. Repeated-measures
ANOVA and post-hoc multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction were
used to compare means acquired at multiple time-points in the two different
groups or within each group. Multiple linear regression analyses were
performed to identify independent imaging predictors of the size and location
of cerebral infarct or post-infarction PH complication.

Supplemental Results
BBB Leakage Showed a Monophasic (Not Biphasic) Course over 48 h
After Ischemic Insult
As measured by mean mCT density, stained area, and the amount of
iopromide-leakage (‘area x density’) of stained brain parenchyma (Figure 3 in
the main text), there was a steady increase from 4 to 24 h (P < 0.01, repeated
Measures ANOVA). Post-hoc tests showed that the mean mCT density and
the area and amount of iopromide-leakage were relatively high at 24 h
compared with 4 h time-point (P < 0.01, = 0.01, and < 0.01 for the Non-PH
group; P = 0.07, 0.13, and 0.08 for the PH group). From 24 h to 48 h, in the
PH group the leakage area tended to increase (P = 0.11), while mCT density
significantly increased (P = 0.01); however, in the Non-PH group mCT density
(P < 0.01) but not the leakage area (P = 0.85) increased. Thus, the amount of
iopromide-leakage increased in the PH group (P = 0.04) but not in the NonPH group (P = 0.27).
The final infarct distribution measured at histology with TTC-staining was
closest to the mCT imaging at the 48 h time-point for both PH and Non-PH
group animals. At 4 or 24 h, faint and inconsistent iopromide-leakage was
observed, mainly in subcortical and periventricular regions adjacent to (rather
than within) the core area of the infarct (Figures 2 and 3 in the main text and
Supplemental Figures I and II). This peri-infarct staining expanded to fill in and
out the nearby infarct core and overlying cortical areas over the course of 48 h
after tMCAO. During the 48 h period, the mean mCT density kept rising.
Quantitative Mapping of Stroke-related Left Hemispheric Lesions: BBB
Dysfunction Due To Cerebral Infarction With vs. Without PH Formation
(additional description for Figure 3 in the main text).
As was the case in the representative animals (Figure 2 in the main text),
there are close overlaps between tMCAO-related brain lesions on a combined
dataset of in vivo mCT images (for iopromide-leakage), ex vivo digital
photographs (for post-infarction hemorrhagic transformation), NIRF images
(for Evans-Blue leakage), and pictures of TTC staining (infarction), with some
discrepancies present particularly in the PH group. In the Non-PH group, the
tMCAO-related brain lesions are similarly located in mostly subcortical areas
(open arrows). In the PH group however, less precise co-localizations are
observed between the tMCAO-related brain lesions, which are somewhat
variously distributed in the cortical and subcortical areas (arrows). The
locations of hematomas overlap with the core and surrounding area of infarcts
(open arrows), in and around which the mean mCT density at 48 h is highest
(in the red-arrowed ‘lateral’ or ‘middle + lateral’ portion of the
caudatoputamen, compared with other subregions) or relatively high (in the
blue-arrowed sensory cortex of the PH group, compared with the Non-PH
group); Supplemental Figure II shows quantitative data. In the Non-PH group,
no or small petechial hemorrhages are observed without being restricted to
the infarct core. Please note that at 4 and 24 h iopromide-leakage looks less
severe in the core of the infarct (open yellow-arrows and open red-arrows)
compared with the surrounding areas. In addition, mCT densities in the pink-

arrowed (hippocampal) area at 24 h are higher in the PH group than in the
Non-PH group (yellow-arrows).
Hemorrhagic Transformation Occurred Near the Area With the Highest
Level of Iopromide Parenchymal Staining in Mice With Relatively Severe
Iopromide-leakage
In the Non-PH group animals, no or small petechial hemorrhages were
observed within the area of infarction, without being restricted to the infarct
core (Figures 2 and 3 in the main text and Supplemental Figures II and VI). At
4 and 24 h, between the animals with vs. without PH (observed at 48 h) there
was no significant difference in the total area and mean density of mCT
lesions due to iopromide-leakage. However, in the hippocampal area at 24 h,
the mean mCT density (Supplemental Figure VI) and the amount of
iopromide-leakage (Supplemental Figure II-B) were relatively high in the PH
group. In addition, the pattern of regional differences in terms of the amount of
iopromide-leakage did not appear to change over the 48 h period
(Supplemental Figure II-A-C). The patterns of regional iopromide-leakage
(Supplemental Figure II-A-C) vs. hemorrhagic transformation seemed to
correlate with each other (Supplemental Figure II-D).
Hemispheric Midline-Shift Was Progressively Worse from 4 h to 48 h,
and Was Greater in the PH Group than in the Non-PH Group
As shown in Supplemental Figure V, the average (of Anterior and Posterior
Sections) midline-shift significantly differed between time-points (P < 0.01,
repeated-measures ANOVA); post hoc tests revealed that the mean (for all
animals) value was significantly increased from 0.18 ± 0.03 mm at 4 h to 0.43
± 0.08 mm at 24 h (P < 0.01) to 0.69 ± 0.13 mm at 48 h (P < 0.01) after
tMCAO.
At 4 h after tMCAO, the midline-shift was relatively prominent in the PH
group compared with the Non-PH group, which was marginally significant (P =
0.05). At 24 h, there was no inter-group difference (P = 0.32). At 48 h
however, the midline-shift was again relatively prominent in the PH group
compared with the Non-PH group, with a marginal significance (P = 0.06).
Midline-Shift Correlated With Parenchymal Staining Near the Midline but
Not With Global Iopromide-leakage in the Entire Hemisphere
At each time-point, the average midline-shift did not correlate with the global
iopromide-leakage in the total hemispheric brain area (Supplemental Figure
VII). However, the average midline-shift at each time-point correlated with the
amount of iopromide-leakage in different brain regions at different time-points:
the caudatoputamen of the Anterior Section (r = 0.52, P < 0.01) at 4 h, no
regions at 24 h, and the sensory cortex of the Anterior Section (r = 0.57, P <
0.01) at 48 h.
Multivariable Analyses Showed that Midline-shift and/or Iopromideleakage Independently Predicted the Final Infarct Size

As shown in the Supplemental Table, the average midline-shift at 4 h (P <
0.01) was a significant independent predictor of the final infarct size at 48 h
after adjusting for the initial post-MCAO CBF (rCBF, %CBF relative to the
baseline value on LDF) at 0 h and the total amount of iopromide-leakage at 4
h. Then, the average midline-shift and the total amount of iopromide-leakage
at 24 h (P < 0.01 and = 0.04, respectively) were significant independent
predictors of the final infarct size at 48 h after adjusting for the initial rCBF at 0
h, which was a marginally significant risk factor (P = 0.07). Lastly, the average
midline-shift and the total amount of iopromide-leakage at 24 h (P < 0.01 and
= 0.04, respectively) were significant independent predictors of the final infarct
size at 48 h after adjusting for the initial rCBF at 0 h.

Supplemental Discussion
Using a small animal mCT imaging machine, which has a low sensitivity for
soft tissue, we showed that post-stroke leakage of iopromide into the brain
parenchyma could be consistently detected after intra-arterial infusion of the
contrast agent at post-stroke 4 ~ 48 h, but not after intravenous infusion. The
intra-arterial approach may have reduced contrast agent dispersion and
increased the parenchymal concentration by enabling the first pass delivery of
iopromide to the target area with ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Iopromide-leakage across the dysfunctional BBB showed a monophasic
(not the previously described biphasic)13 course over 48 h after ischemic
insult. However, most of previous studies used histological methods, which do
not allow serial assessments of BBB permeability in identical animals. A few
in vivo imaging studies were performed serially but only in small numbers of
animals. Moreover, no studies have analyzed both temporal and spatial
dynamics of BBB dysfunction by using quantitative brain mapping techniques.
Inconsistent findings between studies13, 14 may also be explained by interspecies and intra-species heterogeneity of cerebrovascular pathophysiology
as well as differences in experimental stroke models and image acquisition
timing. In addition, sensitivity of the imaging methods may differ depending on
the differences in the injection route of tracer administration and imaging
modalities as well as molecular characteristics of the tracer.13, 15, 16
It was reported that midline-shift on T2-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging at 24 h after MCA occlusion in rats correlated better with the amount
of brain edema measured by the wet-dry method rather than with the T2lesion volume.12 Edematous infarcts compress and damage normal brain
tissue, which can be prevented by performing decompressive craniectomy to
generate additional space that allows the edematous tissue to expand away
from midline structures in the hemispheres and / or from the brainstem at the
base of the brain.17 We showed that post-stroke midline-shift correlated with
regional iopromide-leakage near the hemispheric midline, instead of global
iopromide-leakage in the entire hemisphere. When clinically translated, this
suggests that the location of vasogenic edema as well as its extent is a critical
contributor to malignant cerebral edema that requires timely surgical
decompression.
Unexpectedly, mCT densities in the hippocampal area at 24 h were higher
in the PH group than in the Non-PH group. The relatively severe BBB
dysfunction in the posterior circulation territory suggests that at baseline not
only the MCA flow but also the posterior cerebral artery flow may have been
disturbed in the PH group animals. Consequently, poor collaterals from the
disturbed posterior circulation at baseline may have contributed to a more
severe (initial) ischemic insult to the anterior circulation territory of the PH
group animals compared with the Non-PH group animals.
Our study has several limitations. First, the intra-arterial approach is
invasive, which may limit a wide use of the BBB imaging method that we have
developed, particularly when long-term follow up is required. Unlike clinical CT

machines, mCT does not allow for direct visualization of cerebral infarction or
hemorrhage. Thus, it is notable that in vivo mCT findings of post-tMCAO BBB
dysfunction (iopromide-leakage) and cerebral edema (midline shift) could be
used for predicting the size and / or location of infarct and hematoma on ex
vivo tissues, only when the clinically-used contrast agent was infused intraarterially. Second, the BBB imaging itself may have affected the integrity of
the BBB. However, iopromide (300 mg/mL) is clinically indicated for intraarterial infusion in the radiographic contrast evaluation of arterial lesions of the
brain in humans, suggesting that it should not have major effects on the BBB.
Although intra-arterial catheterization might affect the blood flow to the
infarcted brain region in small animals, LDF did not show CBF reduction
during the infusion. Third, although the area of iopromide-leakage on in vivo
mCT images largely overlapped with the area of Evans-Blue leakage on ex
vivo NIRF images, less overlapping was observed when infarcts were
complicated with hemorrhagic transformation. During the hemorrhagic
transformation-related pathophysiologic alterations, low-molecular-weight
iopromide (791Da) and high-molecular-weight Evans-Blue (75.8kDa) might
have been differently affected in the delivery and/or leakage into the
hemorrhagic infarct, which could explain the less than perfect overlap
between lesions on the mCT images and NIRF images of the PH group
animals at 48 h.
Despite the limitations, by using the new mCT BBB imaging and
quantitative mapping techniques, we showed that post-stroke vasogenic
edema and hemorrhagic conversion are closely interlinked and affected by
dynamic changes of BBB dysfunction. In addition, we demonstrated that the
contrast-enhanced high-resolution mCT imaging allows for the prediction of
the size and location of cerebral infarction or the location of post-infarction
edematous hemorrhagic transformation.

Supplemental References
1. Aoki T, Sumii T, Mori T, Wang X, Lo EH. Blood-brain barrier disruption
and matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression during reperfusion injury:
mechanical versus embolic focal ischemia in spontaneously hypertensive
rats. Stroke. 2002;33:2711–2717.
2. Engel O, Kolodziej S, Dirnagl U, Prinz V. Modeling stroke in mice - middle
cerebral artery occlusion with the filament model. J Vis Exp. 2011;47:2423.
3. Kang B-T, Son Y-D, Lee S-R, Jung D-I, Kim D-E, Chang K-T, et al. FDG
uptake of normal canine brain assessed by high-resolution research
tomography-positron emission tomography and 7T-magnetic resonance
imaging. J Vet Med Sci. 2012;74:1261–1267.
4. The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke
Study Group. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. N
Engl J Med. 1995;333:1581–1587.
5. Kim D-E, Kim J-Y, Sun I-C, Schellingerhout D, Lee S-K, Ahn C-H, et al.
Hyperacute direct thrombus imaging using computed tomography and
gold nanoparticles. Ann Neurol. 2013;73:617–625.
6. Fiorelli M, Bastianello S, Kummer von R, del Zoppo GJ, Larrue V, Lesaffre
E, et al. Hemorrhagic transformation within 36 hours of a cerebral infarct:
relationships with early clinical deterioration and 3-month outcome in the
European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study I (ECASS I) cohort. Stroke.
1999;30:2280–2284.
7. Lin K. Predicting transformation to type 2 parenchymal hematoma in
acute ischemic stroke by CT permeability imaging. American Journal of
Neuroradiology. 2011;32:E124.
8. Paxinos G, Franklin KBJ. eds. The Mouse brain in stereotaxic coordinates.
Houston, TX: Gulf Professional Publishing; 2004.
9. Kim D-E, Jaffer FA, Weissleder R, Tung C-H, Schellingerhout D. Nearinfrared fluorescent imaging of cerebral thrombi and blood-brain barrier
disruption in a mouse model of cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2005;25:226–233.
10. Kim D-E, Kim JY, Nahrendorf M, Lee SK, Ryu JH, Kim K, et al. Direct
thrombus imaging as a means to control the variability of mouse embolic
infarct models: the role of optical molecular imaging. Stroke.
2011;42:3566–3573.
11. Kim D-E, Kim J-Y, Schellingerhout D, Kim E-J, Kim HK, Lee S, et al.
Protease imaging of human atheromata captures molecular information of
atherosclerosis, complementing anatomic imaging. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol 2010;30:449–456.

12. Walberer M, Blaes F, Stolz E, Müller C, Schoenburg M, Tschernatsch M,
et al. Midline-shift corresponds to the amount of brain edema early after
hemispheric stroke-an MRI study in rats. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol.
2007;19:105–110.
13. Pillai DR, Dittmar MS, Baldaranov D, Heidemann RM, Henning EC,
Schuierer G, et al. Cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury in rats—A 3T
MRI study on biphasic blood–brain barrier opening and the dynamics of
edema formation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2009;29:1846–1855.
14. Strbian D, Durukan A, Pitkonen M, Marinkovic I, Tatlisumak E, Pedrono E,
et al. The blood–brain barrier is continuously open for several weeks
following transient focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience. 2008;153:175–
181.
15. Ackerman JJH, Neil JJ. The use of MR-detectable reporter molecules and
ions to evaluate diffusion in normal and ischemic brain. NMR Biomed.
2010;23:725–733.
16. Nagaraja TN, Karki K, Ewing JR, Croxen RL, Knight RA. Identification of
Variations in Blood-Brain Barrier Opening After Cerebral Ischemia by Dual
Contrast-Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and T1sat
Measurements. Stroke. 2008;39:427–432.
17. Steiner T, Ringleb P, Hacke W. Treatment options for large hemispheric
stroke. Neurology. 2001;57:S61–68.

Supplemental Figures and Legends

Supplemental Figure I. Standard templates for mapping stroke-related brain
lesions.
Abbreviations for the subregions (please also see Figure 3 in the main text):
M (motor cortex), Sa (sensory cortex), CPu-med / -mid / -lat / -midlat (medial /
middle / lateral / middle + lateral portions of caudatoputamen), IP (insular and
piriform cortices), and VPPA (ventral pallidum and preoptic area) in the upper
template (Bregma +0.26 mm); Sb (sensory cortex), Hip (hippocampal area),
AEP (auditory, ectorhinal, perirhinal, and piriform cortices), CPu-p
(cadatoputamen), med-T (medial temporal cortex) in the lower template
(Bregma -1.70 mm). Template figures were adapted from ‘The Mouse Brain in
Stereotaxic Coordinates’ by George Paxinos and Keith B. J. Franklin. 8 Scale
bars = 1 mm.

Supplemental Figure II. Spatiotemporal distribution of iopromide-leakage
and hemorrhagic transformation in animals with (n=5; red bars) and without
(n=24; black bars) parenchymal hematoma (PH) at 48 h after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion for 1 h.
(A-D) The amount of iopromide-leakage (A-C) and the area of hemorrhagic
transformation (D) per each region of interest (ROI, see the Supplemental
Figure I). The values were calculated as ‘leakage or hemorrhagic area within
an ROI’ x ‘mean mCT density of the leakage area’ divided by the area of ROI.
Bars represent mean ± SE. Mann-Whitney tests were performed to compare
data from the PH group vs. Non-PH group; significant or marginally significant
P-values are displayed.
Abbreviations (please see Figure 3 in the main text and Supplemental Figure I
for spatial information): M (motor cortex), Sa (sensory cortex), CPu-med / -mid
/ -lat / -midlat (medial / middle / lateral / middle + lateral portions of the
caudatoputamen), IP (insular and piriform cortices), and VPPA (ventral
pallidum and preoptic area) in the Anterior Section (Bregma +1.3 ~ -0.7 mm);
Sb (sensory cortex), Hip (hippocampal area), AEP (auditory, ectorhinal,
perirhinal, and piriform cortices), CPu-p (cadatoputamen), med-T (medial
temporal cortex) in the Posterior Section (Bregma -0.7 ~ -2.7 mm).

Supplemental Figure III. Correlations between iopromide-leakage, EvansBlue leakage, and triphenyl-tetrazolium-chloride (TTC)-measured infarct size.
Quantitative mCT and near-infrared fluorescence imaging data are from both
Anterior (Bregma +1.3 ~ -0.7 mm) and Posterior (Bregma -0.7 ~ -2.7mm)
Sections of the brain (left hemisphere); please see Figure 3 in the main text
and Supplemental Figure I for spatial information. The center coordinates of
the brain regions (i.e. Bregma +0.3 mm and -1.7 mm) corresponded to the
posterior surfaces of the two representative 2 mm-thick forebrain slices with
most extensive infarct areas on TTC-staining.

Supplemental Figure IV. Correlations between iopromide-leakage and
triphenyl-tetrazolium-chloride (TTC)-measured infarct size.
Quantitative mCT and near-infrared fluorescence imaging data are from the
Anterior Section of the brain (left hemisphere); please see Figure 3 in the
main text and Supplemental Figure I for spatial information. The center
coordinates of the brain regions (i.e. Bregma +0.3 mm and -1.7 mm)
corresponded to the posterior surfaces of the two representative 2mm-thick
forebrain slices with most extensive infarct areas on TTC-staining.

Supplemental Figure V. Representative figures and quantitative data for all
animals showing higher midline-shift of the brain in mice with (n = 5) vs.
without (n = 24) parenchymal hematoma (PH) at 48 h after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion for 1 h.
The midline-shift was calculated by averaging the two measurements of the
lateral displacement of the midline venous structure (arrows) from the midline
(green dotted vertical line) at the Anterior (Bregma +1.3 ~ -0.7mm) and
Posterior (Bregma -0.7 ~ -2.7mm) Sections; please see Figure 3 in the main
text for spatial information. P-values are from Mann-Whitney tests between
the PH and Non-PH groups. Scale-bars=1mm.

Supplemental Figure VI. Quantitative data for the sub-regional iopromideleakage in animals with (n = 5) vs. without (n = 24) parenchymal hematoma at
48 h after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion for 1 h.
The stained area and mean mCT density were quantified from subregions in
the Anterior (Bregma +1.3 ~ -0.7 mm; upper and middle rows) or Posterior
(Bregma -0.7 ~ -2.7 mm; lower row) Sections of the left hemispheric brain;
please see Figure 3 in the main text and Supplemental Figure I for spatial
information. Mann-Whitney tests were performed to compare data from the

PH group vs. Non-PH group; significant or marginally significant P-values are
displayed.
Abbreviations: M (motor cortex), CPu (caudatoputamen), Sa (sensory cortex),
and Hip (hippocampal area).

Supplemental Figure VII. Correlations between parenchymal iopromideleakage and midline-shift of the brain.
The midline shift was calculated by averaging two measurements of the
lateral displacement of the midline venous structure at the Anterior (Bregma
+1.3 ~ -0.7 mm) and Posterior (Bregma -0.7 ~ -2.7 mm) Sections of the brain.
The amount of iopromide-leakage was calculated as ‘area x mCT density’ of
stained left hemispheric brain parenchyma in the left caudatoputamen or
sensory cortex of the Anterior Section as well as in the entire left hemispheric
areas of both Anterior and Posterior Sections. Please see Figure 3 in the main
text and Supplemental Figure I for spatial information.

Supplemental Table. Multivariable Analyses To Predict Triphenyltetrazolium-chloride (TTC)-measured Infarct Size at 48 h (mm2) Using In
Vivo mCT Imaging Data
Time
point
4h

Variable

B (95% CI)
2.39 (0.88 ~ 3.89)

P
value
0.003

Amount of iopromide-leakage (per 10000 mm xA.U.)

-0.76 (-4.67 ~ 3.15)

0.688

rCBF at 0 h (per 10% reduction)

1.52 (-2.21 ~ 5.25)

0.34

1.30 (0.86 ~ 1.74)

<0.001

Amount of iopromide-leakage (per 10000 mm xA.U.)

1.53 (0.02 ~ 3.04)

0.035

rCBF at 0 h (per 10% reduction)

1.87 (1.02 ~ -4.75)

0.073

0.73 (0.45 ~ 1.01)

<0.001

Amount of iopromide-leakage (per 10000 mm xA.U.)

1.56 (0.26 ~ 2.87)

0.014

rCBF at 0 h (per 10% reduction)

1.35 (1.71 ~ -4.41)

0.245

Average midline-shift (per 100μm)
2

24 h

Average midline-shift (per 100μm)
2

48 h

Average midline-shift (per 100μm)
2

The average midline shift was calculated by averaging the two measurements
of the lateral displacement of the midline venous structure (please see
Supplemental Figure V) at the Anterior (Bregma +1.3 ~ -0.7mm) and Posterior
(Bregma -0.7 ~ -2.7mm) Sections of the brain; please see Figure 3 (in the
main text) for spatial information. The amount of iopromide-leakage was
calculated as ‘area x mCT density’ of stained left hemispheric brain
parenchyma in both Sections. A.U. denotes arbitrary unit, and ‘rCBF at 0h’
denotes % cerebral blood flow at stroke onset (with reference to the baseline
value measured before the occlusion of the middle cerebral artery). P = 0.02,
< 0.01, and < 0.01 / adjusted r2 = 0.24, 0.57, and 0.58 for the 4 h, 24 h, and
48 h regression models, respectively.

Supplemental Video
Supplemental Video. Induction of focal cerebral ischemia and infusion of
iopromide into the left internal carotid artery for mCT-based blood-brain
barrier imaging in a representative mouse.

