MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 10: 2299-2305, 2014

Effect of bone marrow stromal cell transplantation
on neurologic function and expression of VEGF
in rats with focal cerebral ischemia
NAN LI1,2, PING WANG4, XUE-LING MA3, JUAN WANG1, LI-JING ZHAO1,
LI DU1, LI-YA WANG1, XIN-RUI WANG5 and KANG-DING LIU1
1

Department of Neurology; 2Neonatal Division of the Pediatric Department, The First Bethune Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021; 3Department of Neurology, The Fourth Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001; 4The Otolaryngology Research Institute, The First Bethune Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021; 5Amphixenosis Research Institute, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130000, P.R. China
Received July 31, 2013; Accepted March 5, 2014
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2502

Abstract. There is evidence that the transplantation of
mesenchymal stem cells into rat models of cerebral ischemia reduces ischemic damage; however, the mechanism
remains to be elucidated. The present study aimed to assess
the effect of transplantation of human bone marrow stromal
cells (hBMSCs) on neurologic function and the expression
of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in a rat model
of focal cerebral ischemia. The left middle cerebral artery
of adult Wistar rats was occluded for 90 min using a nylon
thread, followed by reperfusion for 1 h. hBMSCs labeled with
5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) were stereotaxically injected
into the ischemic boundary zone. Behavioral analysis using
the Neurological Severity Score (NSS) was conducted on
days 1, 3, 7 and 28, and a histologic evaluation was performed
simultaneously. VEGF was detected by immunofluorescence
staining and western blot analysis. Fifty rats were divided
equally into five groups: Normal control, sham‑operated, operated (no transplantation), Dulbecco's medium Eagle's medium
(DMEM)-injected (received only serum-free DMEM), and
hBMSC-transplanted. The hBMSC-transplanted group showed
significantly improved behavioral recovery compared with the
operated and DMEM-transplanted groups on days 3, 7 and
28. Histological examination showed that transplanted cells
migrated from the injection site into nearby areas including
the cortex. Expression of VEGF was significantly greater in
the hBMSC group compared with the other four groups on

Correspondence to: Dr Kang-Ding Liu, Department of Neurology,
The First Bethune Hospital of Jilin University, 71 Xinmin Road,
Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China
E-mail: kangdingliu@163.com

Key words: bone marrow stromal cells, middle cerebral artery

occlusion, vascular endothelial growth factor, stem cell therapy,
neurological severity score

each assessment day. The expression of VEGF was found to be
beneficial for functional recovery following cerebral ischemic
injury and hBMSC transplantation stimulated the expression
of VEGF. Transplantation of BMSCs may be a promising
therapeutic strategy for treating cerebral infarction.
Introduction
Although intrinsic progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation occur in response to cerebral ischemia in order to provide
functional benefits, this is not sufficient to prevent irreversible
brain damage. The transplantation of neural stem cells (NSCs)
into animal models of cerebral ischemia is able to produce
functional recovery; however, these cells are only available in
the fetal forebrain or the subventricular zone of the adult brain,
which raises ethical concerns and therefore, there is an inadequate supply for therapeutic use (1). Bone marrow stromal
cells (BMSCs) have attracted interest as a promising alternative for clinical application as they are easy to isolate from
bone marrow and are readily expanded in number in vitro (2).
They may also be used for autotransplantation without ethical
problems or inducing any immune response.
A number of studies have shown that BMSC transplantation is able to improve functional recovery following cerebral
ischemia (3-10). However, the mechanisms by which BMSCs
promote functional recovery remain to be elucidated. It has been
proposed that BMSCs secrete several trophic factors or stimulate the host brain to express trophic factors (11-13). Trophic
factors that have been reported to be secreted by mesenchymal
stem cells include vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), insulin-like growth
factor 1 (IGF-1), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), and brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (4). VEGF promotes angiogenesis
as well as neurogenesis (4). A stroke is able to induce angiogenesis, which is associated with improved neurologic recovery;
however, under normal circumstances, angiogenesis induced
by stroke is insufficient for functional recovery. Since BMSCs
secrete VEGF, the secretion of this trophic factor by BMSCs
or the stimulation of host cells by BMSCs to secrete VEGF

2300

LI et al: BMSCs EFFECTS IN CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA MODEL

may have an important role in the improvement of cerebral
ischemia observed following BMSC transplantation. The aim
of the present study was to investigate the changes that occur
over time in a rat model of middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) when human BMSCs (hBMSCs) are transplanted
into the brain following reperfusion with a particular focus
on the expression of VEGF. hBMSCs were selected for use
in the present study as they are relevant to clinical practice in
humans and as transplantation of hBMSCs into rodents has
been demonstrated to be histocompatible (14,15).
Materials and methods
Experimental procedures were approved by the Animal
Experimentation Ethics Committee of the Medical College of
Jilin University (Changchun, China).
Culturing of hBMSCs. hBMSCs were isolated from healthy
adult human ilium bone marrow and incubated in low-glucose
Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (L-DMEM; Gibco,
Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells subcultured
four times were characterized by flow cytometry for CD34,
CD45, CD29, and CD44 (R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis,
MN, USA), and then co-cultured (4x105 cells/µl) with
5-bromo‑2-deoxyuridine (BrdU; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA) for 48 h prior to transplantation. The total number
of transplanted cells was 2x106 cells in 5 µl medium in accordance with previous studies (14-17).
Middle cerebral artery occlusion rat model. Male Wistar
rats (Charles River Laboratories, Beijing, China) weighing
250-280  g were kept at room temperature (24˚C) with a
12-h light-dark cycle and were given free access to food
and water. The MCAO procedure was a modification of the
methods described by Koizumi et al (18) and Longa et al (19).
Briefly, under deep anesthesia induced by 10% chloral
hydrate (0.3 ml/100 g; Sigma-Aldrich), a midline cervical incision was made and the left carotid bifurcation was identified
and exposed. A probe made of nylon thread with a diameter
of 0.225 mm was inserted into the ligated external carotid
artery and advanced into the internal carotid artery to a position 18±0.5 mm from the bifurcation. Following 90 min of
ischemia, the suture was slightly withdrawn for reperfusion
for 1 h. During the surgery, the rectal temperature was maintained between 37.5 and 38˚C using a feedback heating pad
through all the surgical and postoperative procedures until
the rats regained consciousness. The sham rats were subjected
to exposure of the internal carotid artery (ICA) and external
carotid artery, and the control rats were not treated.
Transplantation. One hour following MCAO, the rats were
anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 10% chloral
hydrate (0.3 ml/100 g) and placed onto a stereotaxic frame.
A suspension of 2x106 cells in 5 µl L-DMEM (Gibco, Life
Technologies) was stereotaxically injected into the ischemic
boundary zone from 3 mm anterior to the bregma and 1 mm
lateral to the midline. Injections were given 4 mm below the
cortical surface in each case. Five groups of animals were
prepared: i), Normal control group, which did not receive any
surgery (n=10); ii) sham-operated group, in which a midline

cervical incision was made and the right carotid bifurcation was identified and exposed, but no probe was inserted
(n=10); iii) operated group, which received no transplantation
following ischemia/reperfusion (n=10); iv) DMEM-injected
group, which received only serum-free DMEM after ischemia/reperfusion (n=10); v) hBMSC-transplantated group,
which underwent transplantation of BMSCs following
ischemia/reperfusion (n=10).
Behavioral assessment. The severity of neurological damage
was evaluated using Chen's Neurological Severity Score (NSS)
system (Table Ⅰ) (5). Neurologic function was graded on a
scale of 0-18 (0, normal score; 18, maximal deficit score). The
NSS is a composite of motoric, sensory, reflex, and balance
assessments. In the severity score of injury, one point was
awarded for the inability to perform a task or for the lack of
an assessed reflex; thus, the more severe the injury, the higher
the score. The recovery of neurologic function was observed
and the scores of all rats were recorded on days 1, 3, 7, and 28
following transplantation.
Histological analysis. Rats from each group were sacrificed
following each behavioral assessment session to examine the
existence and distribution of human BMSCs and the expression
of VEGF in the brain tissue. The rats were sacrificed by administration of an overdose of 10% chloral hydrate (Sigma‑Aldrich)
and then transcardially perfused with 0.9% saline followed by
4% paraformaldehyde fixative solution (Sigma-Aldrich). The
brain was embedded in paraffin and cut into coronal blocks of
5 µm using a brain slicer (Zivic Brain Matrix; Zivic Instruments,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA). For immunofluorescence staining,
sections were incubated with a mouse monoclonal primary
antibody to BrdU (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa
Cruz, CA, USA) or a rabbit polyclonal primary antibody to
VEGF (1:100; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) at 4˚C overnight.
Following three washes with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS),
sections were incubated with an Alexa Fluor 488-labeled goat
anti-mouse immunoglobuiln G (IgG) secondary antibody
(1:400; Zhongshan Belling Biotechnology, Guangdong, China)
or an Alexa Fluor 555-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary
antibody (1:400; Zhongshan Belling Biotechnology) for 1 h at
room temperature in the dark. Following washing with PBS,
Hoechst 33342 (R&D Systems, Inc.) was used for nuclear
staining and the sections were mounted with glycerol and
examined using fluorescence microscopy. Five sequential slides
from each block were examined (magnification, x200) and the
number of VEGF-positive cells in each slide was counted. The
mean number of positive cells from the five slides was recorded.
This was considered to be representative of the total number
of VEGF-positive cells in the whole brain. BrdU-positive cells
were also observed using fluorescence microscopy.
Western blot analysis. Rats from each group were sacrificed
and perfused as described above. Brains were dissected and
frozen at -70˚C. Western blot analysis was performed using a
primary polyclonal rabbit anti-rat VEGF antibody (1:100; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology) and a secondary goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (1:400 dilution; Zhongshan Belling Biotechnology). The
primary antibody used binds to the amino acid splice variants
189, 165 and 121 of VEGF.

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 10: 2299-2305, 2014

2301

Table I. Neurological Severity Score.
Test	Points
Motor tests
Raising rat by the tail	
1 Flexion of forelimb
1 Flexion of hindlimb
1 Head moved >10˚ to vertical axis within 30 sec
Placing rat on the floor (normal=0; maximum=3)	
0 Normal walk
1 Inability to walk straight
2 Circling towards the paretic side
3 Falling down to the paretic side
Sensory tests	
1 Placing test (visual and tactile test)
2 Proprioceptive test (deep sensation, pushing the paw against the table edge to stimulate limb muscles)
Beam balance tests (normal=0; maximum=6)	
0 Balances with steady posture
1 Grasps side of beam
2 Hugs the beam and one limb falls down from the beam
3 Hugs the beam and two limbs fall down from the beam, or spins on beam (>60 sec)
4 Attempts to balance on the beam but falls off (>40 sec)
5 Attempts to balance on the beam but falls off (>20 sec)
6 Falls off: No attempt to balance or hang on to the beam (<20 sec)
Reflexes absent and abnormal movements	
1 Pinna reflex (shakes head when touching the auditory meatus)
1 Corneal reflex (blinks with eye when lightly touching the cornea with cotton)
1 Startle reflex (motor response to a brief noise from snapping a clipboard paper)
1 Seizures, myoclonus, myodystony
Maximum points	

3

3

2

6

4

18

One point is awarded for the inability to perform the tasks or for the lack of an assessed reflex; 13-18, severe injury; 7-12, moderate injury;
1-6, mild injury.

Statistical analysis. Data are presented as the mean ± standard
deviation (SD). One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the
Bonferroni post-hoc test was performed to compare the difference between groups at each time point. Statistical assessments
were all two-sided, and the statistical significance level was set
as P<0.05. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 15.0
statistics software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
Results
Culturing of hBMSCs. hBMSC cultures are shown in Fig. 1.
The BMSC cell morphology at initial plating, the third passage,
and the sixth passage are shown in Fig. 1A-C, respectively. A
representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained hBMSC
sample is shown in Fig. 1D.
Histological study. The histology of the infarction area in the
rats from the three groups that underwent MCAO is shown in
Fig. 2. The microscopy image shows that neurons had large
cytoblasts with clear nucleoli and abundant cytoplasm. In the

center of the ischemic region in MCAO rats, the staining was
light with loose tissue and mesenchymal edema (Fig. 2A).
The number of cells was decreased. Cells were swollen and
deformed with fractured cytoblasts. Aberrations in the ischemic
periphery were reduced, and there were few infiltrating inflammatory and glial cells. Fig. 2A shows the center of the infarction
area in group C, which did not receive transplantation following
ischemia/reperfusion. The staining was lighter in the infarction
area compared with the normal brain with loose tissue and
mesenchymal edema (indicated by yellow arrow). The number
of cells was decreased. Cells were swollen (indicated by black
arrow) and deformed with cracked cytoblasts (indicated by
green arrow). Fig. 2B shows the adjacent normal section of the
corresponding tissue in group C.
Behavioral testing. The NSS for the five groups are shown in
Fig. 3. The NSS in group A remained stable from day one to
day 28. In group B, the NSS decreased from day one to day three
and then remained stable from day seven to day 28. The NSS
in the three groups that underwent reperfusion decreased from

LI et al: BMSCs EFFECTS IN CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA MODEL

2302
A

B

C

D

Figure 1. Cultured hBMSCs. (A) Cell morphology of hBMSC at initial plating. (B) Third generation of hBMSC cells are uniform with spindle shapes and a
fibroblast-like morphology. (C) Sixth generation of hBMSC cells become more fusiform and evenly distributed. (D) Second generation of hBMSC cells were
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Clear nuclei with large nucleoli were observed. hBMSCs, human bone marrow stromal cells.

A

B

Figure 2. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of brain tissue sections of rat models of cerebral ischemia. (A) Center of the infarction area in group C, which
did not receive transplantation following ischemia/reperfusion (magnification, x400). Staining was lighter in the infarction area compared with that in normal
brain tissue due to the presence of vacuolation and mesenchymal edema (indicated by yellow arrow). The nuclei were small (indicated by black arrow) and
deformed with cracked cytoblasts (indicated by green arrow). (B) Adjacent normal part of corresponding tissue in group C (magnification, x400).

The differences between the groups at each time-point
are summarized as follows: On day one, the NSS in the
groups with reperfusion (groups C-E) were significantly
higher than those in groups A and B, and similar results were
observed on days three, seven, and day 28. In addition, the
NSS in group E was significantly lower than that in group D
on day three (8.75 versus 9.88), and the NSS in group E was
significantly lower than that in groups C and D on both days
seven and 28.

Figure 3. NSS in the five treatment groups. *Significant difference compared
with group A and B. †Significant difference compared with groups A, B and
D. ‡Significant difference compared with groups A-D. NSS, Neurological
Severity Score.

day one to day 28, among which group E showed the most
significant decrease.

VEGF. Fig. 4A shows representative western blot images and
Fig. 4B shows the number of VEGF-positive cells for each
group during the experiment. The number of VEGF‑positive
cells in groups A and B remained stable from day one to
day 28. In the other three groups with reperfusion, similar
trends in the number of VEGF-positive cells were observed
in groups C and D, but the number of VEGF-positive cells in
group E was significantly higher than that in groups C and D
from day one to day 28. Amounts of VEGF-positive cells
initially increased from day one to day three, and steeply
decreased to day seven, followed by stabilization in
groups C and D. However, in group E, the levels increased

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 10: 2299-2305, 2014

A

2303

B

Figure 4. VEGF expression levels in the five groups. (A) Representative western blots for VEGF at the indicated time-points. (B) Number of VEGF-positive cells
for the indicated time-points as determined by immunofluorescence staining. *Significant difference compared with groups A and B. †Significant difference
compared with groups A, B and D. ‡Significant difference compared with groups A-D. VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; d, day.

Figure 5. Immunostaining images of BrdU- and VEGF-positive cells seven days following transplantation of BrdU-labeled hBMSCs into the cortex of rat brains
(bar, 20 µm). The cell nuclei are dark blue. VEGF is stained red and was expressed around the karyotheca or in the cytoplasm. The hBMSCs (yellow arrows
in the non-merged image, white arrows in the merged image) were smaller than the neurocytes, with elliptical or round nuclei that were stained green due to
BrdU labeling. Orange arrows point to VEGF-positive cells, which tended to have dark blue‑stained nuclei, indicating a lack of BrdU staining and therefore,
that these were original host cells. VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor, hBMSCs, human bone marrow stromal cells. BrdU, 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine.

from day one to day three and then continuously decreased.
The differences between the groups at each time-point are
summarized as follows: On days one and three, the number
of VEGF-positive cells in the groups with reperfusion
(groups C-E) was greater than that in groups A and B, and the
number of VEGF-positive cells in group E was significantly
higher than that in groups C and D. On days seven and 28, the

number of VEGF-positive cells in group E was significantly
higher that in the other four groups.
Immunostaining images of BrdU- and VEGF-positive
cells seven days following transplantation of BrdU-labeled
hBMSCs into the cortex of rat brains are shown in Fig. 5. The
cell nuclei were stained blue, whereas VEGF was stained red
and was localized around the karyotheca or in the cytoplasm.

2304

LI et al: BMSCs EFFECTS IN CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA MODEL

The hBMSCs were smaller than the neurocytes, with elliptical or
round nuclei, and they were stained green due to BrdU labeling.
Discussion
In the present study, hBMSCs were injected into the brain of a
rat model of MCAO following reperfusion. A histological study
revealed that hBMSCs labeled with BrdU were predominantly
located at the boundary between intact tissue and the infarction
area. From day three the NSS of the rats that received BMSCs
was significantly lower than the score of rats that underwent
MCAO but did not receive BMSCs. From day one, the group
that received BMSCs had significantly higher expression levels
of VEGF than the other two groups that underwent MCAO.
These results appear to support the hypothesis that the secretion
of VEGF by BMSCs or the stimulation of host cells (rat cells)
to secrete VEGF has an important role in the recovery from
cerebral ischemia.
The present study appears to confirm the findings of
previous studies in which BMSCs were transplanted into the
rat cerebral ischemia model. Wakabayashi et al (9) found that
rats injected with a human mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) line
exerted a functional improvement compared with the controls
and VEGF expression in the host cells was markedly increased,
as well as epidermal growth factor (EGF) and bFGF expression. The only neurotrophic factor expressed by the MSCs
appeared to be IGF-1. He et al (6) transplanted BMSCs and
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) and found that the combination produced significantly greater functional improvement
than BMSCs or EPCs transplanted alone. Furthermore, the
BMSC/EPC group showed a significantly higher expression of
VEGF, bFGF and BNDF. Bao et al (4) transplanted hBMSCs
into rats with cerebral ischemia and found that following 14 days
the rats that received hBMSCs had increased levels of VEGF,
BDNF and NT-3. Wei et al (10) used hypoxia preconditioned
BMSCs for transplantation. Hypoxia functionally improved
BMSCs for transplantation, which may be due to an enhanced
expression of trophic factors.
Compared with other cell types, BMSCs are good candidates
for cell transplantation therapy. They are able to be obtained
easily from patients or a bone marrow bank, and are able to be
cultured and expanded in number with fewer ethical concerns
than fetal stem cells. Furthermore, autologous transplantation
of BMSCs or transplantation of BMSCs with the same human
leukocyte antigen (HLA) subtype from a healthy donor may
minimize the risk of rejection. For clinical application of cell
transplantation therapy for the injured brain, transvenous or
intrathecal cell injection is preferable as it is less invasive (20).
However, the cell distribution into the ischemic brain is uncertain. Therefore, stereotaxic injection was used in the present
study, and the results suggest that this method was successful.
With the advancement of imaging technologies, the damaged
tissue is able to be visualized easily. The present study suggests
that the direct injection of cells has great potential in BMSC
transplantation therapy for neurologic disorders.
Therapeutic angiogenesis is considered to be crucial for
functional recovery following stroke. Angiogenesis requires
a stimulus such as ischemia, tumor and inflammation. VEGF
is known to be one of the most effective trophic factors that
induces angiogenesis following stroke, which contributes to the

recovery of the blood supply and functional recovery. In the
present study, the hBMSC-injected group showed significant
improvement in the score of the behavioral assessment tests
compared with all the control groups. Findings of previous
studies have shown hBMSC transplantation into the ischemic
brain leads to improvement of the behavioral outcome (12,13,19).
However, in these studies, the survival rate of BMSCs in the host
brain was >10%, and the proportion showing neuronal differentiation was only 1-2%. The functional recovery in behavior
following MSC transplantation is thought to be mediated by
neurotrophic factors produced by BMSCs or by intrinsic parenchymal cells stimulated by BMSCs (21-23). The histological
analysis in the present study revealed that the BrdU-labeled
hBMSCs survived and migrated to the nearby intact tissue. The
brains of BMSC‑transplanted animals had a larger proportion
of VEGF‑positive cells, which may have contributed to the
improvement in behavior. These results suggest that hBMSCs
cultured in vitro followed by transplantation are able to survive
and distribute widely following transplantation into the brain
via stereotaxic injection. This procedure is effective for functional recovery from cerebral ischemia. Inducing the expression
of VEGF may have an important role in this process.
Another explanation for the improved recovery following
transplantation of hBMSCs is endogenous neurogenesis.
Bao et al (4) reported that rats treated with hBMSCs showed
enhanced endogenous cell proliferation in the hippocampal
subventricular and subgranular zones, and an increased number
of neuronal progenitor cells had migrated to the ischemic
boundary zone from the subventricular zone and then differentiated into mature neurons with decreased levels of apoptosis.
Neurogenesis and angiogenesis induced by trophic factors may
have a role in the functional recovery following treatment with
hBMSCs.
One limitation of the present study was that the sample size
decreased at each assessed time-point. There were 10 animals
in each group on day one, but only eight on day three, six on
day seven and four on day 28. Another limitation was that the
expression of only one trophic factor, VEGF, was assessed.
Further studies are required to examine other potentially
important underlying changes, including activation of VEGF
signalling, phosphorylation of the VEGF receptor, as well as
any changes in processes associated with angiogenesis and
neurogenesis.
In conclusion, transplantation of hBMSCs into a rat model of
MCAO appeared to improve neurologic recovery and increase
the expression of VEGF in the ischemic region. VEGF may
have an important role in functional recovery by stimulating
angiogenesis. Transplantation of hBMSCs appears to be a
promising stem cell therapy for treatment of acute stroke. Future
investigations should focus on elucidating and confirming the
mechanisms of the positive effect of transplantation of hBMSCs
on functional recovery following cerebral ischemia.
References
 1.	Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Lu M, Zhang X and Chopp M: Therapeutic
benefit of intracerebral transplantation of bone marrow stromal
cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. J Neurol Sci 189: 49-57, 2001.
 2.	Krebsbach PH, Kuznetsov SA, Bianco P and Robey PG: Bone
marrow stromal cells: characterization and clinical application.
Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 10: 165-181, 1999.

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 10: 2299-2305, 2014

 3.	Bang OY, Lee JS, Lee PH and Lee G: Autologous mesenchymal
stem cell transplantation in stroke patients. Ann Neurol 57:
874-882, 2005.
 4.	Bao X, Wei J, Feng M, et al: Transplantation of human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells promotes behavioral
recovery and endogenous neurogenesis after cerebral ischemia
in rats. Brain Res 1367: 103-113, 2011.
 5.	Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Lu D, Lu M and Chopp M:
Therapeutic benefit of intravenous administration of bone
marrow stromal cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 32:
1005-1011, 2001.
 6.	He XY, Chen ZZ, Cai YQ, et al: Expression of cytokines
in rat brain with focal cerebral ischemia after grafting with
bone marrow stromal cells and endothelial progenitor cells.
Cytotherapy 13: 46-53, 2011.
 7.	Li Y, Chen J, Chen XG, et al: Human marrow stromal cell
therapy for stroke in rat: neurotrophins and functional recovery.
Neurology 59: 514-523, 2002.
 8.	Li Y, Chopp M, Chen J, Wang L, Gautam SC, Xu YX and
Zhang Z: Intrastriatal transplantation of bone marrow nonhematopoietic cells improves functional recovery after stroke in adult
mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 20: 1311-1319, 2000.
 9.	Wakabayashi K, Nagai A, Sheikh AM, Shiota Y, Narantuya D,
Watanabe T, Masuda J, Kobayashi S, Kim SU and Yamaguchi S:
Transplantation of human mesenchymal stem cells promotes
functional improvement and increased expression of neurotrophic factors in a rat focal cerebral ischemia model. J Neurosci
Res 88: 1017-1025, 2010.
10.	Wei L, Fraser JL, Lu ZY, Hu X and Yu SP: Transplantation of
hypoxia preconditioned bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
enhances angiogenesis and neurogenesis after cerebral ischemia
in rats. Neurobiol Dis 46: 635-645, 2012.
11.	 Chen J, Zhang ZG, Li Y, Wang L, Xu YX, Gautam SC, Lu M,
Zhu Z and Chopp M: Intravenous administration of human
bone marrow stromal cells induces angiogenesis in the ischemic
boundary zone after stroke in rats. Circ Res 92: 692-699, 2003.
12.	Hess DC, Hill WD, Martin-Studdard A, Carroll J, Brailer J and
Carothers J: Bone marrow as a source of endothelial cells and
NeuN-expressing cells after stroke. Stroke 33: 1362-1368, 2002.
13.	Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q and Chopp M: Bone marrow‑derived
endothelial progenitor cells participate in cerebral neovascularization after focal cerebral ischemia in the adult mouse. Circ
Res 90: 284-288, 2002.

2305

14.	Azizi SA, Stokes D, Augelli BJ, DiGirolamo C and Prockop DJ:
Engraftment and migration of human bone marrow stromal cells
implanted in the brains of albino rats - similarities to astrocyte
grafts. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 95: 3908-3913, 1998.
15.	Zhao LR, Duan WM, Reyes M, Keene CD, Verfaillie CM
and Low WC: Human bone marrow stem cells exhibit neural
phenotypes and ameliorate neurological deficits after grafting
into the ischemic brain of rats. Exp Neurol 174: 11-20, 2002.
16.	Gutiér rez-Fernández M, Rodríguez-Fr utos B, RamosCejudo J, Teresa Vallejo-Cremades M, Fuentes B, Cerdán S
and Díez‑Tejedor E: Effects of intravenous administration of
allogenic bone marrow- and adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal
stem cells on functional recovery and brain repair markers in
experimental ischemic stroke. Stem Cell Res Ther 4: 11, 2013
(Epub ahead of print).
17.	Mitkari B, Kerkelä E, Nystedt J, Korhonen M, Mikkonen V,
Huhtala T and Jolkkonen J: Intra-arterial infusion of human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells results in transient
localization in the brain after cerebral ischemia in rats. Exp
Neurol 239: 158-162, 2013.
18.	Koizumi J, Yoshida Y, Nakazawa T and Ooneda G: Experimental
studies of ischemic brain edema, I: a new experimental model
of cerebral embolism in rats in which recirculation can be
introduced in the ischemic area. Jpn J Stroke 8: 1-8, 1986.
19.	Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R: Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20: 84-91, 1989.
20.	Dezawa M, Ishikawa H, Hoshino M, Itokazu Y and Nabeshima Y:
Potential of bone marrow stromal cells in applications for
neuro‑degenerative, neuro-traumatic and muscle degenerative
diseases. Curr Neuropharmacol 3: 257-266, 2005.
21.	Chen X, Li Y, Wang L, Katakowski M, Zhang L, Chen J,
Xu Y, Gautam SC and Chopp M: Ischemic rat brain extracts
induce human marrow stromal cell growth factor production.
Neuropathology 22: 275-279, 2002.
22.	Jin K, Minami M, Lan JQ, Mao XO, Batteur S, Simon RP and
Greenberg DA: Neurogenesis in dentate subgranular zone and
rostral subventricular zone after focal cerebral ischemia in the
rat. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98: 4710-4715, 2001.
23.	Kurozumi K, Nakamura K, Tamiya T, et al: BDNF gene-modified
mesenchymal stem cells promote functional recovery and reduce
infarct size in the rat middle cerebral artery occlusion model.
Mol Ther 9: 189-197, 2004.

