Inflammation, Vol. 38, No. 4, August 2015 ( # 2015)
DOI: 10.1007/s10753-015-0133-1

The Neuroprotective Effect of Glycyrrhizic Acid on an
Experimental Model of Focal Cerebral Ischemia in Rats
Tarık Akman,1,6 Mustafa Guven,1 Adem Bozkurt Aras,1 Adile Ozkan,2 Halil Murat Sen,2
Ali Okuyucu,3 Yildiray Kalkan,4 Ibrahim Sehitoglu,4 Coskun Silan,5 and Murat Cosar1

Abstract—Cerebral ischemia is still one of the most important topics in neurosciences. Our study aimed
to investigate the neuroprotective and anti-oxidant effects of glycyrrhizic acid on focal cerebral ischemia
in rats. Twenty-four rats were divided equally into three groups. A middle cerebral artery occlusion
model was performed in this study where sham and glycyrrhizic acid were administered intraperitoneally
following middle cerebral artery occlusion. Group I was evaluated as control. Malondialdehyde (MDA),
superoxide dismutase (SOD), and nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1) levels were analyzed biochemically on the right cerebral hemisphere, while ischemic histopathological studies were completed to
investigate the anti-oxidant status. Biochemical results showed that SOD and NRF1 levels were
significantly increased in the glycyrrhizic acid group compared with the sham group while MDA levels
were significantly decreased. On histopathological examination, cerebral edema, vacuolization, degeneration, and destruction of neurons were decreased in the glycyrrhizic acid group compared with the
sham group. Cerebral ischemia was attenuated by glycyrrhizic acid administration. These observations
indicate that glycyrrhizic acid may have potential as a therapeutic agent in cerebral ischemia by
preventing oxidative stress.
KEY WORDS: brain ischemia; glycyrrhizic acid; middle cerebral artery; caspase-3; apoptosis.

brain tissue has high metabolism and rapid glutamic acid
cycle, it is very sensitive to ischemic damage. In order,
disruption of protein synthesis, brain edema, mitochondrial
damage, oxidative stress, increase in free radicals, and cell
necrosis and apoptosis play a role in permanent, irreversible brain tissue damage [1].
Polyphenolic compounds are described as chemopreventive agents [2]. In previous years, the discovery of the
biological activity of these compounds has increased research into flavonoids and their importance [3].
Glycyrrhizic acid (GA) is a flavonoid group compound
isolated from the roots of the Glycyrrhiza glabra
(licorice) plant. It has been reported that major bioactive
components of licorice are saponins, triterpenes, and flavonoids such as GA and glycyrrhetinic acids [4]. GA is a
triterpenesaponin glycoside. Licorice has been used as
medicine or food for thousands of years. In fact, licorice
root, known as Bsweet root,^ contains the GA compound
that is 50 times sweeter than sucrose [5]. GA salt is widely
used in sweets, drugs, beverages, chewing gums, chewing
tobacco, and toothpastes as flavoring and sweetener [6]. It

INTRODUCTION
Brain ischemia is still a serious clinical problem. It
may cause permanent neurological disorders and complications. Treatment of brain ischemia is an important topic
in neurology. The edema and compression caused by ischemic damage may cause permanent death of brain cells.
Understanding the physiopathology of cerebral ischemia is
important in terms of taking protective precautions. As
1

Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz
Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey
2
Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart
University, Canakkale, Turkey
3
Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Ondokuz
Mayıs University, Samsun, Turkey
4
Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Recep
Tayyip Erdogan University, Rize, Turkey
5
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz
Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey
6
To whom correspondence should be addressed at Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University,
Canakkale, Turkey. E-mail: tarkakman@yahoo.com.tr

1581
0360-3997/15/0400-1581/0 # 2015 Springer Science+Business Media New York

1582

Akman, Guven, Aras, Ozkan, Sen, Okuyucu, Kalkan, Sehitoglu, Silan, and Cosar

has been shown that high doses of GA can induce hypertension [7]. However, GA possesses numerous pharmacological effects like anti-inflammatory [8, 9], neuroprotective [10], anti-viral [2], anti-allergic [11], anti-tumor [12],
anti-oxidant [13], and hepatoprotective [14] activities.
In our study, the anti-oxidant and neuroprotective
effects of GA on focal cerebral ischemia in rats were
researched. With this aim, the effects of GA on MDA
and NRF1 levels and SOD activity after focal cerebral
ischemia were studied. Additionally, the dead neurons
and the immunopositive cells were counted in the histopathological samples. Toluidine blue staining was used to
evaluate general histological examination; caspase-3 and
caspase-9 primary antibodies were used to label and evaluate these proteins immunohistochemically.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
The rats were supplied from Canakkale Onsekiz
Mart University Experimental Research Center. Male
Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 300 ± 25 g from 8 to
12 weeks old were used in the experiment. Rats were
kept for a week before the experiment to adapt to the
environment. This study was conducted in Canakkale
Onsekiz Mart University Experimental Research Center. A standard pellet diet (Bil-Yem Ltd., Ankara, Turkey) and tap water were provided ad libitum. Rats were
provided with a photoperiodic medium with temperature (23 ± 2 °C), humidity (60 ± 5 %), and white fluorescent tube lighting (hours 8:00 a.m.–8:00 p.m. bright,
8:00 p.m.–8:00 a.m. dark). Experiments were carried
out with the permission of Canakkale Onsekiz Mart
University Animal Ethics Committee in accordance
with the BGuide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals (8th edition, 2011)^ (number 2013/03–04).
Rats were randomly divided into three equal groups
(consisting of eight rats each):
Group 1 Control group (n=8, no medication or surgical
procedure)
Group 2 Sham group (n=8, focal cerebral ischemia was
performed via a middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) model. Single-dose, 1 ml, 20 % ethanol
was administered intraperitoneally at the fifth
minute. Rats were sacrificed at the 24th hour)
Group 3 GA group (n=8, intraperitoneal 80 mg/kg GA
administered following MCAO at the fifth minute. Rats were sacrificed at the 24th hour)

Before the rats were sacrificed, a craniotomy was
performed and the complete brain was obtained. At the
end of the experiment, all animals were deeply anesthetized with ketamine (50–60 mg/kg) and sacrificed.
Brain tissue was investigated histopathologically,
immunohistochemically, and biochemically.

Surgical Procedure
A Biopac MP36 (BIOPAC Systems, Inc. Goleta, CA,
USA) device was used as a monitor. Mean arterial pulse
was 375 per minute during surgery. Body temperature was
monitored with a rectal probe and was adjusted to 37.1 to
37.4 °C with a heating pad during surgery. All groups were
anesthetized with intramuscular xylazine (5 mg/kg) (Bayer,
Istanbul, Turkey) and ketamine hydrochloride (50 mg/kg)
(Parke Davis, Istanbul, Turkey) at room temperature with
spontaneous respiration. Anesthesia was continued with
ketamine injections at intervals without intubation or mechanical ventilation. The rat’s neck was incised under
sterile conditions on the operating table in supine position
with a right paramedian skin and subdermis incision. Focal
cerebral ischemia via the MCAO model was induced with
intraluminal filament technique as previously described by
Hata et al. [15]. To induce MCAO, 4/0 nylon monofilament suture material (Ethilon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA)
was threaded intraluminally through a small incision in the
carotid artery bifurcation until 18–22 mm distal to the right
internal carotid artery. Five minutes after MCAO, group 3
rats were given intraperitoneal 80 mg/kg GA. Animals
were fed a standard diet and water ad libitum in their cages
after surgery. At the end of the 24th hour, all rats were
anesthetized with intramuscular ketamine (50 mg/kg). Immediately before sacrifice, the brains of the rats were
obtained by craniotomy. As soon as the brain was obtained,
the intraluminal monofilament suture advancing to the
anterior cerebral artery and occluding the MCA was observed. The brain was washed with ice-cold 0.9 % saline
and then dried with filter paper. Half of the right hemisphere was stored in sterile plastic tubes at −80 °C for
tissue biochemistry investigations. The other half of the
right hemisphere was fixated in 4 % paraformaldehyde
solution for histopathological and immunohistochemical
investigation.
Dosage
The dosage was determined as 80 mg/kg body
weight based on preliminary studies with various doses

1583

Effect of Glycyrrhizic Acid on a Model of Focal Cerebral Ischemia
(10, 25, 50, and 70 mg) to reveal the biological effects
of GA [4, 16].
Reagents
GA (Catalog No. 50531) was obtained from SigmaAldrich’s Turkey distributor (Interlab, Istanbul, Turkey).
GA was dispersed with 20 % ethanol. Modified Lowry
Protein Assay Kit (Catalog No. 23240) was obtained from
Thermo Scientific Inc. (Waltham, MA, USA). SOD Assay
Kit (Catalog No. 706002) was obtained from Cayman
Chemical Company (Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Rat
Malondialdehyde ELISA Kit (Cat. No. CK-E30266) and
Rat Nuclear Respiratory Factor 1 ELISA Kit (Cat. No. CKE90555) were obtained from Hangzhou Eastbiopharm Co.
Ltd. (Hangzhou, China). Anti-caspase-3 antibody
(ab4051) and anti-caspase-9 antibody (ab32539) were obtained from Abcam plc (Cambridge, UK).
Evaluation of Neurological Status
Neurological status of animals was assessed blindly
by a neurologist at the 1st, 12th, and 24th hour after
ischemia. To assess the motor function of rats after ischemia, rats were scored by Bederson [17] as follows: scale 0,
no deficit; 1, mild forelimb weakness; 2, severe forelimb
weakness, consistently turns to side of deficit when lifted
by tail; 3, compulsory circling; 4, unconscious; and 5,
dead.
Tissue Biochemical Examination
Tissue samples were pulverized with liquid nitrogen
and then homogenized with 1 ml cold PBS on ice at
20,000 rpm for 30 s. The homogenate was centrifuged at
10,000 rpm and 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was
removed to another tube. All samples were stored at
−80 °C until examined. On the day of study, the samples
were defrosted to 2–8 °C.
Estimation of Levels of Protein, SOD, MDA, and NRF1
Levels
The protein content was measured by the method of
Lowry et al. with bovine serum albumin as the standard.
Results are presented as milligrams per milliliter [18].
Tissue SOD activity was measured with a modified
spectrophotometric method at 560 nm as described by Sun
et al. [19]. SOD activity is reported as U/ml/mg protein.
MDA levels were analyzed for lipid peroxidation
products, and results are expressed as nmol/ml/mg tissue.

Tissue MDA levels were determined according to Buege’s
ELISA method [20].
NRF1 activates the expression of some key genes
regulating cell growth and nuclear genes necessary for both
mitochondrial DNA transcription and replication, not only
heme biosynthesis but also respiration. NRF1 controls the
apoptosis, proliferation, migration, and cellular distribution
and adhesion of target genes. NRF1 levels were measured
with the ELISA method [21, 22]. Results are reported as
ng/ml/mg protein.
Histopathologic Examination
The brains were fixed with 10 % neutral formaldehyde solution. After 24 h in fixative, they were washed for
6–8 h in running water and rinsed with ethanol-xylene
series for automatic tissue tracking (Citadel 2000, Thermo
Fisher Scientific Shandon, England) and they were submerged in liquid paraffin. To stain the tissues with hematoxylin and eosin and luxol fast blue, 4–6-μm-thickness
sections were made. For immunohistochemical staining,
3–4-μm-thickness sections were made. In the evaluation of
hematoxylin and eosin- and luxol fast blue-stained sections, the dead neurons which were characterized by
karyolitic, karyorectic nucleus, and vacuolated cytoplasm
were counted in 15 different random areas under a ×20
objective magnification. Each area was 1200 μm2 with
remaining neuronal cells in the area counted to determine
cell density. All the sections were evaluated under a light
microscope (Eclipse E-600 Nikon, Japan) and
photographed.
Sections made for immunohistochemical staining
were left in xylene for 20 min, after rinsing with alcohol
(70–99 %), then left in 3 % H2O2 solution for 10 min.
After washing with PBS, they were heated four times at
700–800 W for 5–10 min in citrate buffer solution and
Table 1. The Activity of Superoxide Dismutase and Level of Malondialdehyde and Nuclear Respiratory Factor-1 in Control, Sham, and GA
Groups in Ischemic Brain Tissue
Groups

SOD (U/ml)

MDA (nmol/ml)

NRF1 (ng/ml)

Control
Sham
GA
p value

6.90 ± 1.20
2.25 ± 0.51a
5.45 ± 1.10a,b
<0.05

0.53 ± 0.22
2.46 ± 0.61a
1.15 ± 0.31a,b
<0.05

2.68 ± 0.66
0.57 ± 0.22a
1.77 ± 0.23a,b
<0.05

Data are expressed as mean ± SD. The significant difference between
groups is analyzed by one-way ANOVA test
a
p < 0.05, compared to control group
b
p < 0.05, compared to sham group

1584

Akman, Guven, Aras, Ozkan, Sen, Okuyucu, Kalkan, Sehitoglu, Silan, and Cosar

Fig. 1. Representative photomicrographs showing neurons stained with hematoxylin and eosin in the ischemic brain area of rats: a control group, b sham
group, and c GA group. rc red cells, di vascular dilatation, v vacuolization, de cellular degeneration. Scale bars = 20 μm.

left in a secondary blocking material for 20 min. Different primary antibody dilutions (1/200–1/250) of every preparation (anti-caspase-3 antibody (ab4051) and
anti-caspase-9 antibody (ab32539), Abcam plc, Cambridge, UK) were left for 60–75 min. Chromogeneous
diaminobenzidine (DAB) solution was used for contrast
staining and Mayer’s hematoxylin (Thermo Scientific
Inc. Waltham, MA, USA) stain was also used. PBS was
used for negative controls. The preparations were covered with an appropriate covering material and
photographed. Results of immunohistochemical staining tissues were evaluated as percent area of
immunopositive reaction, in four different categories
as mild (+), moderate (++), severe (+++), and very
severe (++++).

Statistical Analysis
A computer program (SPSS 19.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for statistical analysis. Statistical
analysis data are expressed as mean±SD. The comparisons
among the three groups were made using one-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) followed by Bonferroni post tests.
Histopathological findings and neurological scores were
evaluated with the Kruskal-Wallis test. Statistical significance was accepted at p<0.05.

RESULTS
Results of Biochemical Estimations
MDA levels were found to be significantly higher in
the sham group compared to control group (p<0.05). Also,
it was determined that spinal cord SOD and NRF1 levels
decreased in the sham group (p < 0.05). When the GA
group was compared with the sham group, a significant
decrease in MDA levels was observed (p<0.05). SOD and
NRF1 levels of the GA group were significantly higher
than those of the sham group (p<0.05) (Table 1).
Hematoxylin and Eosin and Luxol Fast Blue Staining
Results
Histopathological examination of hematoxylin and
eosin and luxol fast blue staining in the control group
showed normal morphology. In the sham group, necrotic
areas, edema, red neuron clusters with eosinophilic degeneration, and peripheral vacuolization were very intense
(Fig. 1).
Cells in the sham group stained with luxol fast blue
showed a slightly darker blue color for pyramidal neurons
compared to those in the control group, and severe
vacuolization and edema were observed to form around
both granular and pyramidal neurons. Red neuron cells

Fig. 2. Representative photomicrographs showing neurons stained with luxol fast blue in the ischemic brain area of rats: a control group, b sham group, and c
GA group. rc red cells, di vascular dilatation, v vacuolization, de cellular degeneration. Scale bars = 20 μm.

1585

Effect of Glycyrrhizic Acid on a Model of Focal Cerebral Ischemia
Table 2. Degree and Frequencies of Histopathological Findings Obtained Through HE and LFB Staining
Groups

Necrosis

Control
Sham
GA

–
++
+

Red neuron
5
50
35

+
+++
++

Vacuolization
60
70
65

–
++++
++

10
70
35

Cellular degeneration

Edema

–
+++
++

+
+++
++

10
70
35

5
70
55

Neuronal cells in the area counted to determine cell density

were lengthened compared to the control group cells,
though sizes were smaller, and clustering was identified
(Fig. 2).
In the GA group, the dead neurons in necrotic areas
increased and staining intensity was increased compared to
the control group. The chromatin intensity in the nucleus of
neurons was not observed. Acidophilic cytoplasma,
piknotic nucleus, and some red neurons were observed.
The layers where these neurons were found had
karyorhexis and appeared damaged. While the red neurons
were less than in the control group, they were increased
compared to the sham group. In the GA group, the number
of red neuron cells was observed to be slightly increased
compared to the control group. Compared to the sham
group, there was a decrease in the amount and in the
intensity of basophilic staining (Table 2).
Caspase-3 Immunoperoxidase Staining
Morphological characteristics of neuronal degeneration formed after ischemia are deemed different immunoreactivity. While more intense areas were observed in the
periphery of the nucleus and the nucleus of granular neurons, while the nuclei of some cells were slightly positive,
there were intense immunopositive areas with ring shape
and diffuse appearance.
In the sham group, caspase-3 immunopositivity
was increased especially in the cortex. Caspase-3
immunopositivity formed widely in the ischemic area

of the tissue and intense presence of apoptotic cells
were located in these regions. Toward the white matter,
caspase-3 positivity began to decrease in the GA group.
In the sham group, edema and dilatation areas were
observed in the periphery of cells surrounding areas of
necrosis and intense vacuolization caused by cellular damage. Especially, microglial cells had intense basophilic
staining with hematoxylin together with intense caspase-3
immunopositivity. When the GA group was compared
with the sham group, there was a decrease in caspase-3
immunopositivity (Fig. 3).
Caspase-9 Immunoperoxidase Staining
In the sham group, caspase-9 positivity in neuronal
degeneration produced less immunoreactivity than in
the control and GA groups. In the peripheral region of
large cortical neurons, caspase-9 staining showed
immunopositivity in the shape of rings. While this reactivity was observed to be less in the cytoplasm, there
was more observed in the nucleus (Fig. 4) (Table 3).
Neurological Examination Results
After cerebral ischemia, animals subsequently exhibit
a variety of neurological deficits. Treatment with GA did
not prevent the development of hemiparesis. The neurological scores in the GA group were significantly decreased
after 24 h of ischemia compared to those in the sham group

Fig. 3. Effects of GA on caspase-3 expression in the ischemic brain site by immunohistochemical methods at the 24th hour. Representative examples of
caspase-3 immunohistochemical images in ischemic brain section in the control group (a), sham group (b), and GA group (c). Caspase-3 expression in
neurons (black arrows) is shown. Scale bars = 20 μm.

1586

Akman, Guven, Aras, Ozkan, Sen, Okuyucu, Kalkan, Sehitoglu, Silan, and Cosar

(p<0.05). Our results revealed that GA could improve
neurological deficit scores. No score was found in the
control rats or in the hemisphere contralateral to the ischemic side.

DISCUSSION
In spite of the developments in treatment of acute
stroke, deaths due to stroke are still second place in many
countries. Additionally, the first cause of morbidity, stroke,
causes large economic losses. As a result, the importance
of timely and successful stroke treatment is great [23]. To
reduce the neuron damage caused by cerebral ischemia,
experimental studies on many possible protective agents
have been completed. Polyphenolic compounds are described as chemopreventive agents. In previous years, the
discovery of the biological activity of these compounds has
increased research into flavonoids and their importance
[11].
The aim of this study is to investigate the preventive
effect against oxidative damage of the active material GA,
in the polyphenol group known to be anti-oxidants, on
ischemic damage in the brain. In the cerebral ischemia
model induced in rats, the protective effect of GA on the
ischemic brain was shown histopathologically. Additionally, after treatment, biochemical tests showed a reduction in
MDA levels and increase in SOD and NRF1 activity,
indicating a reduction in oxidative stress.
GA shows secretolytic, secretomoric, and expectorant
effects on the upper respiratory tract in bronchial diseases.
Its bacteriostatic and anti-viral effects have been shown in
this way [24]. GA occurs (up to 14 %) as the potassium and
the calcium salt in the roots of the liquorice plants
G. glabra, G. glandulifera, and G. typica which are cultivated in Europe and the Near East. The glycyrrhizin-

Table 3. Percentage Values of Anti-caspase-3 and Anti-caspase-9
Immunoperoxidase Staining Results in Control, Sham, and GA Groups
in Ischemic Brain Tissue
Groups

Control
Sham
GA

Caspase-3 (%)

Caspase-9 (%)

+

++

+++

++++

+

++

+++

++++

65
35
25

25
5
65

5
50
5

5
10
5

35
55
25

45
25
65

10
10
5

10
10
5

According to percentile values in each area of immunopositive reaction in
the tissues as a result of immunohistochemical staining: mild (+), moderate
(++), severe (+++), and very severe (++++)

containing liquorice juice extracted from plants serves as
the raw material for the production of liquorice products
[11].
The excess amount of free oxygen radicals formed
due to the process of cerebral ischemia enters a reaction
with polyunsaturated fatty acids and creates lipid peroxidation. Çırak et al. showed that in the first 2 h after severe
head trauma, the levels of MDA increased in the brain
tissue of rats, then reduced over time, and the serum
MDA levels used in melatonin reduced [25]. In our study,
after GA treatment, rats with induced cerebral ischemia had
a reduction in MDA values.
SOD, an endogenous mitochondrial anti-oxidant enzyme, is a free radical scavenger that turns superoxide
radicals formed by cerebral ischemia into the less reactive
hydrogen peroxide form. İşlekek et al. found that there was
a clear reduction in SOD activity after experimental cerebral ischemia in rats. After treatments with flavonoids and
tirofiban, they reported the tissue SOD activity increased
again [26]. In our study, the increase in SOD activity with
GA treatment after cerebral ischemia indicates a reduction
in oxidative stress. This supports the knowledge that GA
has anti-oxidant properties.

Fig. 4. Effects of GA on caspase-9 expression in the ischemic brain site by immunohistochemical methods at the 24th hour. Representative examples of
caspase-9 immunohistochemical images in ischemic brain section in the control group (a), sham group (b), and GA group (c). Caspase-9 expression in
neurons (black arrows) is shown. Scale bars = 20 μm.

Effect of Glycyrrhizic Acid on a Model of Focal Cerebral Ischemia
NRF1 is a mitochondrial transcription factor activating the majority of genes coding subunits of the respiratory
complex. Kumari et al. showed the NRF1 levels increased
after the reperfusion period in normoglycemic and hyperglycemic rats with reperfusion of cerebral ischemia [27]. In
our study, consistent with this, the NRF1 levels in the sham
group reduced and increased again with GA treatment.
Apoptosis in cerebral ischemic stroke begins in two
ways, intrinsic and extrinsic. The stimulation of caspase-3
release from the mitochondria forms the intrinsic path. It is
known that caspase-3 and caspase-9 are important in apoptosis caused by ischemia in neuronal cells. In a temporary
focal cerebral ischemia model in rats by Abas et al.,
caspase-3 and caspase-9 activity clearly increased compared to the control group but, statistically, this was not
significant [28]. In our study, intense caspase-3 immunoreactivity was found in neurons with more intense activity
in the cytoplasm. Caspase-9 was determined to be intense
in neuronal degeneration after cerebral ischemia. Especially in ischemia groups, the immunopositivity for caspase-9
was increased compared to the control group.
In conclusion, this study proposes that administration
of GA can reduce cerebral ischemia in an experimental
model of focal cerebral ischemia. In this manner, dietary
supplementation with GA may be beneficial to preserve or
ameliorate focal cerebral ischemia. In conclusion, GA has
neuroprotective and anti-oxidant effects on biochemical
and histopathological parameters of focal cerebral ischemia
injury.

Conflict of Interest. The authors declare no conflicts of
interest.Financial Support. No financial support.

REFERENCES
1. Amantea, D., G. Nappi, G. Bernardi, G. Bagetta, and M.T. Corasaniti.
2009. Post-ischemic brain damage: pathophysiology and role of inflammatory mediators. The FEBS Journal 276: 13–26.
2. Harada, S. 2005. The broad anti-viral agent glycyrrhizin directly
modulates the fluidity of plasma membrane and HIV-1 envelope.
The Biochemical Journal 392: 191–199.
3. Kabra, D.G., M. Thiyagarajan, C.L. Kaul, and S.S. Sharma. 2004.
Neuroprotective effect of 4-amino-1,8-napthalimide, a poly(ADP ribose) polymerase inhibitor in middle cerebral artery occlusioninduced focal cerebral ischemia in rat. Brain Research Bulletin 62:
425–433.
4. Rasool, M., J. Iqbal, A. Malik, et al. 2014. Hepatoprotective effects of
Silybum marianum (Silymarin) and Glycyrrhiza glabra (Glycyrrhizin)
in combination: a possible synergy. Evidence Based Complementary
Alternative Medicine 2014: 597–641.

1587

5. Armanini, D., C.B. De Palo, M.J. Mattarello, et al. 2003. Effect of
licorice on the reduction of body fat mass in healthy subjects. Journal
of Endocrinological Investigation 26: 646–650.
6. Fenwick, G.R., J. Lutomski, and C. Nieman. 1990. Liquorice,
Glycyrrhiza glabra L.—composition, uses and analysis. Food Chemistry 38: 119–143.
7. Ma, S.K., E.H. Bae, I.J. Kim, et al. 2009. Increased renal expression of
nitric oxide synthase and atrial natriuretic peptide in rats with
glycyrrhizic-acid-induced hypertension. Phytotherapy research :
PTR 23: 206–211.
8. Barone, F.C., and G.Z. Feuerstein. 1999. Inflammatory mediators and
stroke: new opportunities for novel therapeutics. Journal of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism 19: 819–834.
9. Rackova, L., V. Jancinova, M. Petrikova, et al. 2007. Mechanism of
anti-inflammatory action of liquorice extract and glycyrrhizin. Natural
Product Research 21: 1234–1241.
10. Kim, S.W., Y. Jin, J.H. Shin, et al. 2012. Glycyrrhizic acid affords
robust neuroprotection in the postischemic brain via antiinflammatory effect by inhibiting HMGB1 phosphorylation and secretion. Neurobiology of Disease 46: 147–156.
11. Park, H.Y., S.H. Park, H.K. Yoon, M.J. Han, and D.H. Kim. 2004.
Anti-allergic activity of 18beta-glycyrrhetinic acid-3-O-beta-D-glucuronide. Archives of Pharmacal Research 27: 57–60.
12. Smolarczyk, R., T. Cichon, S. Matuszczak, et al. 2012. The role of
glycyrrhizin, an inhibitor of HMGB1 protein, in anticancer therapy.
Archivum Immunologiae et Therapiae Experimentalis 60: 391–399.
13. Li, X.L., A.G. Zhou, L. Zhang, and W.J. Chen. 2011. Antioxidant
status and immune activity of glycyrrhizin in allergic rhinitis mice.
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 12: 905–916.
14. Orazizadeh, M., F. Fakhredini, E. Mansouri, and L. Khorsandi. 2014.
Effect of glycyrrhizic acid on titanium dioxide nanoparticles-induced
hepatotoxicity in rats. Chemico-Biological Interactions 220C: 214–
221.
15. Hata, R., G. Mies, C. Wiessner, et al. 1998. A reproducible model of
middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice: hemodynamic, biochemical,
and magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of cerebral blood flow and
metabolism : official journal of the International Society of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism 18: 367–375.
16. Fakhari, S., K. Abdolmohammadi, Y. Panahi, et al. 2014. Glycyrrhizin
attenuates tissue injury and reduces neutrophil accumulation in experimental acute pancreatitis. International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Pathology 7: 101–109.
17. Bederson, J.B., L.H. Pitts, M. Tsuji, et al. 1986. Rat middle cerebral
artery occlusion: evaluation of the model and development of a
neurologic examination. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation 17:
472–476.
18. Lowry, O.H., N.J. Rosebrough, A.L. Farr, and R.J. Randall. 1951.
Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. The Journal of
Biological Chemistry 193: 265–275.
19. Sun, Y., L.W. Oberley, and Y. Li. 1988. A simple method for clinical
assay of superoxide dismutase. Clinical Chemistry 34: 497–500.
20. Buege, J.A., and S.D. Aust. 1978. Microsomal lipid peroxidation.
Methods in Enzymology 52: 302–310.
21. Gutsaeva, D.R., M.S. Carraway, H.B. Suliman, et al. 2008. Transient
hypoxia stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis in brain subcortex by a
neuronal nitric oxide synthase-dependent mechanism. The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 28:
2015–2024.
22. Yin, W., A.P. Signore, M. Iwai, et al. 2008. Rapidly increased neuronal
mitochondrial biogenesis after hypoxic-ischemic brain injury. Stroke;
a journal of cerebral circulation 39: 3057–3063.
23. Pascual, O., S. Ben Achour, P. Rostaing, A. Triller, and A. Bessis.
2012. Microglia activation triggers astrocyte-mediated modulation of

1588

Akman, Guven, Aras, Ozkan, Sen, Okuyucu, Kalkan, Sehitoglu, Silan, and Cosar

excitatory neurotransmission. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 109: E197–205.
24. Shamsa, F., K. Ohtsuki, E. Hasanzadeh, and S.H. Rezazadeh. 2010.
The antiinflammatory and anti-viral effects of an ethnic medicine:
glycyrrhizin. J Med Plants 9: 1–28.
25. Cirak, B., N. Rousan, A. Kocak, et al. 1999. Melatonin as a free radical
scavenger in experimental head trauma. Pediatric Neurosurgery 31:
298–301.
26. Islekel, S., H. Islekel, G. Guner, and N. Ozdamar. 1999. Alterations in
superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase activities in

experimental cerebral ischemia-reperfusion. Research in experimental
medicine. Zeitschrift fur die gesamte experimentelle Medizin
einschliesslich experimenteller Chirurgie 199: 167–176.
27. Kumari, S., L. Anderson, S. Farmer, S.L. Mehta, and P.A. Li. 2012.
Hyperglycemia alters mitochondrial fission and fusion proteins in
mice subjected to cerebral ischemia and reperfusion. Translational
stroke research 3: 296–304.
28. Abas, F., T. Alkan, B. Goren, et al. 2010. Neuroprotective effects of
postconditioning on lipid peroxidation and apoptosis after focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats. Turkish Neurosurgery 20: 1–8.

