REGENERATIVE MEDICINE
Effect of HMGB1 on the Paracrine Action of EPC
Promotes Post-Ischemic Neovascularization in Mice
CHAO CHEN,a,b XIAOJIE LIN,b JIXIAN WANG,a,b GUANGHUI TANG,a ZHIHAO MU,a,b XIAOYAN CHEN,b
JIN XU,b YONGTING WANG,b ZHIJUN ZHANG,b GUO–YUAN YANGa,b
Key Words. Endothelial progenitor cell • High mobility group box1 • Microglia • Neovascularization
• Stroke

a

Department of Neurology,
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, People’s
Republic of China;
b
Neuroscience and
Neuroengineering Center,
Med-X Research Institute
Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, People’s
Republic of China

Correspondence: Guo-Yuan
Yang, Ph.D., M.D., Room 213,
Education Building 3, 1954 Hua
Shan Road, Med-X Research
Institute and School of Biomedical Engineering Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai
200030, People’s Republic of
China. Telephone: 86-2162933186; Fax: 86-21-62932302;
e-mail: gyyang0626@gmail.com;
or Zhijun Zhang, Ph.D., Room
211, Education Building 3, 1954
Hua Shan Road, Med-X Research
Institute and School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai
200030, People’s Republic of
China. Telephone: 86-2162933186; Fax: 86-21-62932302;
e-mail: zhangzhij@gmail.com
Received January 10, 2014;
accepted for publication May
10, 2014; ﬁrst published online
in STEM CELLS EXPRESS May 31,
2014.
C AlphaMed Press
V

1066-5099/2014/$30.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/stem.1754

ABSTRACT
Transplantation of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) leads to better outcomes in experimental
stroke, but the mechanism remains unclear. It was reported that astrocytic-high mobility group
box1 (HMGB1) promoted endogenous EPC-mediated neurovascular remodeling during stroke
recovery. It is unclear whether HMGB1 involves in exogenous EPC-mediated stroke recovery. In
this study, we aim to explore whether microglial HMGB1 contributes to human peripheral
blood-derived (hPB)-EPCs-mediated neurovascular remodeling by modulating the paracrine function of exogenous hPB-EPCs. Coculturing hPB-EPCs with lipopolysaccharides stimulated BV2 cells
upregulated Interleukin-8 expression in hPB-EPCs; this was blocked by treating BV2 cells with
HMGB1 inhibitor Glycyrrhizin. Conditioned medium (CM) of hPB-EPCs cocultured with BV2 cells
promoted the viability and tube formation of human umbilical cord vein cells. Inhibiting either
HMGB1 or IL-8 could block the effect of hPB-EPCs CM. In vivo study showed hPB-EPCs transplantation improved neurobehavioral outcomes, reduced brain atrophy volume, and enhanced
neovascularization in transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) mice. Intraperitoneally
administration of HMGB1 inhibitor glycyrrhizin blocked the beneﬁcial effect of hPB-EPC transplantation. We did not observe the integration of green ﬂuorescent protein-labeled hPB-EPCs
with microvessels in peri-infarct areas at day-14 after tMCAO. In summary, the result suggested
that HMGB1 upregulation in postischemic brain could promote exogenous hPB-EPC-mediated
stroke recovery by modulating paracrine function of hPB-EPCs. STEM CELLS 2014;32:2679–2689

INTRODUCTION
Stroke is among the most common causes of
death and severe disability in the world [1].
Ischemic stroke accounts for 70%–80% of all
stroke cases. To date, thrombolytic therapy is
the only effective treatment for ischemic
stroke, but only a few of patients beneﬁt from
this therapy due to the narrow time window
[2]. Effort has continued looking for alternatives and stem cell transplantation has become
an attractive option. Endothelial progenitor
cells (EPCs) are a novel stem cell type that can
be used in cell transplantation for ischemic
stroke. EPCs have been found to participate in
postnatal neovascularization, and EPC transplantation leads to improved outcomes in animal models of ischemia, including stroke [3–5].
These results suggest that human peripheral
blood-derived-EPCs (hPB-EPCs) could be an
ideal cell type for treating ischemic stroke. In
spite of the high prospects for EPCs in stroke
treatment, some important aspects have not
been thoroughly explored. First, umbilical-cord
blood-derived EPCs, rather than hPB-EPC, have
been used in most studies [5, 6]. Autologous

STEM CELLS 2014;32:2679–2689 www.StemCells.com

transplantation of patient-speciﬁc hPB-EPCs
showed many advantages over UC-EPC transplantation, including a lack of immune-rejection
and ethical concerns [2]. Whether the hPBEPCs, particularly patient-speciﬁc hPB-EPCs, are
efﬁcacious for treating ischemic stroke needs
further investigation. Second, the therapeutic
mechanism of EPC transplantation remains
unclear [7]. Direct integration of exogenous
EPCs with new vessels may not be enough to
account for its therapeutic effects since few
exogenous EPCs could be detected in the periinfarct region [5]. Increasing evidence suggests
that transplanted stem cells may have beneﬁcial effects via the paracrine mechanism [7]. In
addition, the fate of exogenous EPCs was
affected by the focal or systemic microenvironment, which will have a signiﬁcant impact on
the therapeutic effects of EPCs [8]. Therefore,
when therapeutic effects of EPCs were investigated, the host brain’s response to ischemic
injury, including activation of microglia, release
of proinﬂammatory cytokines, and endogenous
neurogenesis, should be considered.
High mobility group box1 (HMGB1) is an
important proinﬂammatory cytokine released
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

EPC Transplantation in Cerebral Ischemia

2680

by most eukaryotic cells during injuries including stroke [9, 10].
A recent study demonstrated that astrocytic-HMGB1 could promote endogenous EPC-mediated neurovascular remodeling during stroke recovery [11], indicating that HMGB1 may be an
important mediator linking poststroke inﬂammation and neurovascular remodeling. Microglia activation is one important characteristic of the post-ischemic brain and activated microglia is
an abundant source of extracellular HMGB1 [12]. How HMGB1
modulates the function of exogenous EPCs is unknown. We
hypothesize that exogenous EPCs contribute to stroke recovery
via the paracrine function of EPCs modulated by HMGB1 in the
post-ischemic brain.
In this study, a coculture system in vitro and a transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) mouse model in vivo
are used to explore: (a) whether transplantation of hPB-EPC
promotes stroke recovery in the tMCAO model; (b) whether
HMGB1 contribute to hPB-EPC-mediated post-ischemic neurovascular remodeling by modulating the paracrine function of
exogenous EPCs.

MATERIALS

AND

METHODS

Isolation of hPB-EPCs
Approved by the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, hPB-EPC was isolated from the
peripheral blood of ﬁve stroke patients after the written consents were obtained. The procedure for cell isolation was
described in our previous study [6]. In brief, mononuclear
cells isolated by density gradient centrifugation were resuspended in EGM2 (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) and seeded on
ﬁbronectin-coated plate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). The medium
was changed every 3–4 days. After 10–14 days, cells with a
round, cobblestone-like shape appeared and rapidly expanded.
The EPCs of passages 5–7 were used. Human umbilical cord
vein cells (HUVEC) were isolated according to the protocol
reported previously [13] and cultured using ECM medium (ScienCell, Carlsbad, CA).

Flow Cytometric Analysis
hPB-EPCs were identiﬁed via ﬂow cytometric analysis and
immunoﬂuorescent staining. In ﬂow cytometric analysis EPCs
were incubated with ﬂuorescence-conjugated mouse antihuman monoclonal antibodies of CD34-PE, CD31-PE, KDR-APC,
CD133-PE, IgG isotype-APC, and IgG isotype-PE (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Then the cells were washed with PBS
and analyzed by ﬂow cytometry (BD Biosciences). For each
test, 5,000 events were analyzed.

tMCAO Models
The procedures for animal studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Adult male ICR mice weighting 25–30 g were used for tMCAO. A total of 60 mice were
used in the whole study. Number of animals used in each
step was summarized in method section in Supporting Information. The tMCAO surgery was performed as we previously
described [6]. Mice were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine
(100 mg/10 mg/kg; Sigma). A median incision on the neck of
the mice was made, followed by dissection of left common
carotid artery (CCA), left external carotid artery (ECA), and left
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

internal carotid artery (ICA). The CCA and ECA were ligated
with 6-0 suture. An incision was made on the ECA. The occlusion of middle cerebral artery (MCA) was achieved by inserting a silicone-coated 6-0 nylon suture from the incision on
ECA with an advancement of 9.5 6 1 mm toward MCA. Successful occlusion of MCA was conﬁrmed using Laser Doppler
Flowmetry (Moor Instruments, Devon, U.K.) as a decline in
the regional blood ﬂow by more than 80% compared to the
contralateral hemisphere. The suture was withdrawn completely and reperfusion was achieved after 90 minutes of
tMCAO. Raw data showing the outcomes of tMCAO surgery
were summarized and presented in the result section as well
as Supporting Information Table S2.

Administration of Cells and Glycyrrhizin
Animals were divided into four groups treated with PBS,
HUVEC, hPB-EPC, or hPB-EPC plus glycyrrhizin (GL). 1 3 106
EPCs or HUVEC in 100 ml PBS were administered slowly
through the left jugular vein after 90 minutes of tMCAO. The
speed of injection was 20 ml per minute. Injection of 100 ml
PBS alone at the same speed was performed for the control
group. GL (Sigma), a HMGB1 inhibitor, is a natural product of
the licorice plant Glycyrrhizaglabra [14]. For the hPB-EPC plus
GL group, GL (10 mg/kg per day) was administered by intraperitoneal injection 4–14 days after tMCAO.

Neurobehavioral Tests
Neurobehavioral functions were assessed by rotarod test
before surgery and at 1, 3, 7, and 14 days after tMCAO [15].
Before surgery, mice were trained for 3 consecutive days. The
time the mice stayed on the rod was recorded (latency to
fall). The mean value of three tests was used for analysis. The
modiﬁed neurological severity score (mNSS) was also evaluated at 1, 3, 7, and 14 days following tMCAO. The mNSS is
comprised of test scores testing motor skills (ﬂexion of limbs
and walking on the ﬂoor), balance (beam walking), and reﬂex
(pinna and cornea reﬂexion). Scores range from 1 to 14 (normal: 0, severe deﬁcit: 14). The mean scores of three evaluations at each time point were analyzed.

Brain Infarct and Atrophy Measure
The brain infarct and atrophy volume were evaluated by cresyl violet staining. A series of 20-mm-thick coronal sections
were cut and mounted on slides, with an interval of 200 mm
between each section. A total of 18–25 sections from each
mouse were used for measuring infarct or atrophy volume.
The infarct or atrophy volume between two adjacent sections
was calculated as 1/3 3 [S1 1 S2 1 (S1 3 S2)22]. The S1, S2
were the infarct or atrophy volume of the upper section and
the lower section, respectively. The h was the interval
between two adjacent sections. Total infarct or atrophy volume was derived as the sum of all infarct or atrophy between
each adjacent section.

Immunocytochemistry and Immunohistochemistry
Immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry were performed as previously described [6]. Brieﬂy, cells growing on
slides or brain sections were incubated with primary antibodies of CD34, CD133, CD31, KDR (R&D systems, Minneapolis,
MN), vWF, HMGB1, Iba1 (Abcam, Cambridge, U.K.), CD31
(R&D systems) at 4 C overnight, followed by incubation with
STEM CELLS

Chen, Lin, Wang et al.

2681

secondary antibodies (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for 1 hour the
next day. The results were examined using a microscope
(Leica, Solms, Germany).

according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 6 hours of
transfection, the medium was replaced with EGM2 and the
hPB-EPCs were used for further experiments within 48 hours.

BV2 Cell Culture

Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation and Cell Viability Test

BV2 cells were purchased from the China Center for Type Culture Collection (CCTCC Wuhan, China) and were grown in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagles’s medium (DMEM, Gibico, Carlsbad,
CA) with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibico). Lipopolysaccharide (LPS, Sigma) was diluted to 0.2 mg/ml with DMEM before
being used to activate the BV2 cells.

HUVECs were seeded in 96-well plates and incubated with FBSfree CM of hPB-EPCs at 5% CO2 and 95% N2 atmosphere using
an airtight chamber. The experiment was performed using six
groups differentiated by adding different CM of hPB-EPCs as follows: hPB-EPCs cocultured with BV2 cells alone (control), hPBEPCs cocultured with BV2 cells stimulated with LPS (LPS), hPBEPCs cocultured with LPS-activated BV2 cells in the presence of
2 mmol/l GL (LPS-GL), hPB-EPCs cocultured with LPS-activated
BV2 cells with the addition of 2 mmol/l GL to the CM collected
after coculturing (LPS 1 GL), IL-8-siRNA pretreated hPB-EPCs
cocultured with LPS-activated BV2 cells (IL-8 siRNA), and controlsiRNA pretreated hPB-EPCs cocultured with LPS-activated BV2
cells (control siRNA). The LPS1GL group was used to control for
the effects of GL on hPB-EPCs and HUVECs. Oxygen-glucose
deprivation (OGD) was performed for 24 hours and the viability
of HUVEC was examined using a Cell Counting Kit (CCK-8,
Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Cell viability was determined by light absorbance at
450 nm of the medium using a microplate reader (BioTek, Chicago, IL). The viability of HUVEC in different OGD groups was
compared after being normalized to that of the HUVEC incubated under normoxic conditions with EGM2 medium.

Coculture and Condition Medium Collection
hPB-EPCs and BV2 cells were cocultured using a transwell system (Corning, New York, NY). BV2 cells (1 3 105) were
seeded in an upper chamber. Coculturing was performed by
inserting the upper chamber into a six-well plate lower chamber where 1 3 105 hPB-EPCs were seeded. The BV2 cells
were stimulated with 0.2 mg/ml LPS for 18 hours before
coculturing with hPB-EPCs. Then the medium was changed
with DMEM containing no LPS before transferring the chamber to the coculture system. The purpose of doing this was to
prevent the LPS from affecting the hPB-EPCs. It was demonstrated that LPS stimulation could lead to the secretion of
HMGB1 from BV2 cells in a delayed manner, which occurred
18 hours after LPS stimulation [16]. In the present experiment
EPCs in the lower chamber grew in EGM2 medium without
FBS or any growth factors. After 24 hours of coculturing, the
conditioned medium (CM) in the lower chamber was collected
and centrifuged before being used for other experiments.

Real-Time PCR
Total RNA was extracted from hPB-EPCs using a Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen) and transcribed to cDNA using PrimeScript RT reagent kit (Takara, Dalian, China) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Quantitative real-time PCR was conducted
with a SYBR Premix Ex Taq Kit (Takara) on an ABI7900HT system (ABI, Foster, CA) with the following condition: 95 C for
30 seconds, followed by 40 cycles of 95 C for 5 seconds each
and 60 C for 30 seconds. mRNA expression level of the targeted genes was normalized using the endogenous GADPH
mRNA expression, and calculated based on the 22DDt method.
The experiments were performed in triplicate for each sample. The sequence of each primer used in the experiment is
summarized in Supporting Information (Table S1).

Western Blot Analysis
The CM of BV2 cells was concentrated by 50 times using an
Amicon Ultra-15 concentrator (Millipore, Tullagreen, IRL)
before use. Then the membrane was incubated with primary
antibodies of HMGB1 and b-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Inc, Santa Cruz, CA) at 4 C overnight followed by incubation
with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 hour the next
day. The results were visualized and analyzed using an imaging
system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).

IL-8 Knockdown
Human IL-8 siRNA (50 to 30 :, 30 to 50 :) and control siRNA (50 to
30 :, 30 to 50 :) were purchased from GenePharma (Shanghai,
China). hPB-EPC cultured in FBS-free medium was transfected
with siRNA using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA)

www.StemCells.com

HUVEC Tube Formation Assay
The tube formation assay of HUVEC was performed using
matrigel (BD Bioscience) as we previously reported [6]. The
assay was performed for six groups (control, LPS, LPS-GL,
LPS1GL, IL-8 siRNA, and control siRNA) as described in the
OGD experiment. HUVEC (1.5 3 104) suspended in CM of
hPB-EPCs was seeded on the matrigel and incubated at 37 C
and an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and 95% for 8 hours. The
result was examined and photographed with a microscope
(Leica, Solms, Germany). The numbers of formed tubes were
compared between different groups after being normalized to
the control. All experiments were done in triplicate.

Synchrotron Radiation Angiography in Living Animals
The microvessel density of tMCAO mice was assessed in living
mice using synchrotron radiation angiography (SRA) at the
Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The procedure for SRA
imaging was performed as previously described [17]. In brief,
after 14 days of reperfusion, mice were anesthetized with 20%
ketamine and placed perpendicular to the X-ray beam. A total
of 100 ml of nonionic iodine contrast agent (350 mg I/ml, Omnipaque, GE, Shanghai, China) was injected with a syringe pump
through the external carotid artery at a rate of 2 ml/min. The
X-ray energy used for the imaging was 33.3 keV. The dynamic
images of the brain vessels were obtained by a CCD camera
every 300 ms, with a resolution of 9 mm/pixel.

RESULTS
hPB-EPC Isolation and Characterization
Clinical characteristics of stroke patients recruited for EPC isolation were presented in supporting information. hPB-derived
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

2682

EPC Transplantation in Cerebral Ischemia

Figure 1. EPC culture and identiﬁcation. (A): Microphotographs showing endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) in culture. (a) Mononuclear
cells were seeded in ﬁbronectin-coated plate. (b) Spindle-shaped, attached cells appeared from days 3 to 5. (c) Cobblestone-like late
EPCs grew into conﬂuence. Bar 5 50 mm. (B): Immunoﬂuorescent staining showed these cells were CD341 (a), KDR1 (b), vWF1 (d), and
CD311 (e). Most of the cells were CD341/KDR1 (c) and CD1332 (f). Bar 5 50 mm. (C): Flow cytometry analysis showed the percentage
of cells that were CD341 (d), KDR1 (d), and CD311 (e). A blank sample without cells (a) and samples added with APC or PE-labeled IgG
isotypes (b, c) were used as controls.

mononuclear cells were seeded in six-well plates at the 1 3
107 cells/well density (Fig. 1A). After 3 days, spindle-shaped
cells appeared. These cells were of limited proliferating
capacity and disappeared within 2 weeks, which were termed
early EPCs [18]. Round, cobblestone-like late EPCs were seen
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

after 14 days of culturing. The late EPCs soon grew into conﬂuence and expanded rapidly. Immunocytochemical staining
showed that the late hPB-EPCs expressed stem cell marker
CD34 and endothelial cell markers KDR, vWF, and CD31, but
not stem cell marker CD133 (Fig. 1B). In addition, most of the
STEM CELLS

Chen, Lin, Wang et al.

2683

cells were CD341/KDR1, which is considered to be the best
combined marker for EPC characterization [19]. hPB-EPC characterization was further conﬁrmed by ﬂow cytometry analysis
(Fig. 1C). It was shown that 52.0%, 70.8%, and 91.8% of the
cells were CD341, KDR1, and CD311, respectively. Cells
(46.5%) were CD341/KDR1 and only 0.3% cells were CD1331,
which was similar to the immunostaining results. These results
were in accord with the deﬁnition of late EPCs [19, 20].

expression of VEGF, HGF, and FGF on hPB-EPCs in a dosedependent manner (p < .05, Supporting Information Fig. S2A–
S2C), the increase of these cytokines was not observed in the
coculturing experiment. This result suggests that the expression of these factors/cytokines may be inﬂuenced by a more
complex mechanism in the coculture system, whereas the
increase of IL-8 in hPB-EPCs is exclusively due to HMGB1
released from activated microglia.

LPS Stimulation Induces the Translocation and Release
of HMGB1 in BV2 Cells

CM of EPCs Promoted HUVEC Viability and Tube
Formation

Immunostaining showed the translocation of HMGB1 from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm in LPS-stimulated BV2 cells (Supporting
Information Fig. S1A). The cytoplasmic accumulation of HMGB1
was not observed in the BV2 cells stimulated by LPS with 2
mmol/l GL. A signiﬁcant decrease in the nucleus optical density
of HMGB1 was observed in LPS-stimulated BV2 cells compared
to the control and LPS-stimulated BV2 cells treated with 2
mmol/l GL (p < .05, Supporting Information Fig. S1B). This indicates that 0.2 mg/ml LPS stimulation induces the translocation of
HMGB1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. This translocation
was signiﬁcantly suppressed by the GL. To examine whether
HMGB1 is secreted to supernatant by LPS-stimulated BV2 cells,
the presence of HMGB1 in the CM of BV2 cells was determined
using Western blot. After 18 hours of LPS stimulation, the BV2
cells’ medium was replaced with DMEM without LPS, and the
BV2 cells were cultured for another 24 hours before the CM was
collected and used for Western blot analysis. The results showed
HMGB1 in CM of LPS-stimulated BV2 cells, but not in CM of BV2
cells or LPS-stimulated BV2 cells treated with GL (Fig. 2A). This
indicates that HMGB1 is released from activated microglia and
GL (2 mmol/l) completely blocked HMGB1 secretion, which is
consistent with previous studies [16].

To explore whether hPB-EPCs produce beneﬁcial effects on
mature endothelial cells in a paracrine manner, CM of EPC was
added to HUVECs treated with OGD. Cell proliferation assay
showed OGD treatment decreased viability of HUVEC regardless
of whether CM of hPB-EPCs was added or not (p < .05). A
higher viability was observed for HUVECs treated with CM of
hPB-EPCs cocultured with LPS-activated BV2 cells compared to
HUVEC treated with CM of hPB-EPC cocultured with BV2 cells
alone (p < .05). Inhibition of HMGB1 release using GL diminished the protective effect of EPC CM, this result was not
observed when GL was added after CM collection. IL-8 expression was signiﬁcantly suppressed for hPB-EPC treated with IL-8
siRNA (Supporting Information Fig. S3). IL-8 knockdown in hPBEPCs also reversed the beneﬁcial effects of hPB-EPC CM (Fig.
2F). In vitro HUVEC tube formation showed that HUVECs treated
with CM of hPB-EPCs cocultured with LPS-stimulated BV2 cells
(LPS) formed more tubes on matrigel compared to HUVEC
treated with control CM (p < .05). Adding GL to BV2 cells during
coculturing (GL-LPS), but not after CM collection (LPS 1 GL),
blocked the effects of hPB-EPCs CM on HUVEC. This indicated
that GL did not affect tube formation in HUVEC. IL-8 knockdown
in hPB-EPCs also diminished the positive effects of hPB-EPC CM
on HUVEC, this result was not observed in the control siRNA
group (Fig. 2D, 2E). Taken together, these results indicate that
HMGB1 is a key mediator between hPB-EPCs and BV2 cells.
HMGB1 induced the expression of IL-8 in hPB-EPCs, which further produced protective effects on mature endothelial cells.

HMGB1 Regulates Cytokines Expression of hPB-EPC in
Coculture
We explored whether activated microglia could promote the
expression of these angiogenic factors/cytokines in hPB-EPCs
via HMGB1. After being stimulated with 0.2 mg/ml LPS for 18
hours, BV2 cells were cocultured with hPB-EPCs for an additional 24 hours. In order to exclude the impact of LPS on
angiogenic factor/cytokine expressed in hPB-EPCs, the BV2
cell medium was replaced with DMEM without LPS before
coculturing. Results showed that coculturing signiﬁcantly
increased IL-8 and hepatic growth factor (HGF) in hPB-EPCs
compared to the control (p < .05). However, coculturing did
not inﬂuence vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) or
IGF-1 expression. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) expression
was decreased in hPB-EPCs cocultured with BV2 cells (Fig.
2B). To further investigate whether LPS-activated BV2 cells
affect the paracrine function of hPB-EPCs via HMGB1, we
treated BV2 cells with HMGB1 inhibitor GL. It was found that
the upregulation of IL-8, not HGF, was signiﬁcantly suppressed
by the 2 mmol/l GL treatment. This indicates that HMGB1
exclusively affects IL-8 expression. To conﬁrm that HMGB1
affects the paracrine proﬁle of hPB-EPCs, we stimulated hPBEPCs with HMGB1 and measured the mRNA expression of
angiogenic factors/cytokines in hPB-EPCs. We found that a
0.1–1.0 ng/ml HMGB1 treatment induced a three- to ﬁvefolds
increase of IL-8 expression in hPB-EPCs compared to the control (Fig. 2C). HMGB1 also caused a signiﬁcant increase in the

www.StemCells.com

HMGB1 Releases from Microglia in the Mouse Brain
After tMCAO
We double-stained post-ischemic mice brain for HMGB1 and
other cell-speciﬁc markers, including Iba1, glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), MAP2, and CD31 for microglia, astrocyte, neuron, and endothelial cells, respectively. The results showed
that cytoplasmic HMGB1 was mostly detected in the Iba11
cells in post-ischemic mouse brain at day-14 after tMCAO,
although some GFAP1 and a few CD311 cells were positive
for cytoplasmic HMGB1. No MAP21 cells were positive for
cytoplasmic HMGB1. The result suggested microglia was the
main source of extracellular HMGB1 in postischemic mouse
brain (Fig. 3A). Western blot analysis demonstrated that
HMGB1 was signiﬁcantly upregulated in the post-ischemic
brain at 14 days after tMCAO, this effect was suppressed to
the level of sham operation mice by intraperitoneal administration of GL at 10 mg/kg (Fig. 3B, 3C).

hPB-EPCs Transplantation Reduced Brain Atrophy and
Improved Neurobehavioral Functions in tMCAO Mice
Rotarod tests showed that the fall latency was comparable
among all groups at baseline, 1, 3, and 7 days post-ischemic.
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

2684

EPC Transplantation in Cerebral Ischemia

Figure 2. HMGB1 from BV-2 cells enhanced the angiogenic property of endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) by upregulating IL-8 expression in EPCs. (A): Western blot demonstrated the presence of HMGB1 in the CM of LPS-stimulated BV2 cells but not in the CM of BV2
cells or LPS-stimulated BV2 cells treated 2 mM/l glycyrrhizin. (B): Bar graph showing the expression of IL-8, VEGF, HGF, and FGF in EPCs
cocultured with DMEM medium alone (control), BV2 cells (BV2), LPS-stimulated BV2 cells (LPS), and LPS-stimulated BV2 cells treated
with glycyrrhizin (GL-LPS). Data are mean 6 SD, n 5 3 per group, *, p < .05, compared to the control. (C): Bar graphs showing the induction of IL-8 expression by treating EPCs with HMGB1 at different concentrations. Data are mean 6 SD, n 5 3 per group, *, p < .05, compared to the control. (D): Photomicrographs showed the tube formation of human umbilical cord vein cell (HUVEC) treated with CM of
different groups. Bar 5 100 mm. (E): Bar graph showed quantiﬁcation of tube formation of HUVECs. Data are mean 6 SD, n 5 3/group, *,
p < .05, as compared to the control. (F): Bar graph showing cell viability of HUVEC treated with CM of different groups. Data are
mean 6 SD, n 5 3 per group, *, p < .05, as compared to the normoxia; **, p < .05, as compared to the control. Data are mean 6 SD,
n 5 3 per group. Abbreviations: CM, conditioned medium; GL, glycyrrhizin; HMGB1, high mobility group box1; IL-8, interleukin-8; LPS,
lipopolysaccharide.

At 14 days following tMCAO, the time on the rod was signiﬁcantly longer in the hPB-EPC group compared to the PBS,
HUVEC, and hPB-EPC plus GL groups (p < .05, Fig. 4A). The
results of mNSS scoring indicated that the neurobehavioral
function signiﬁcantly improved in hPB-EPC group compared to
the other groups 14 days after the surgery (p < .05, Fig. 4B).
Our results suggest that transplantation of late hPB-EPCs
improves the behavioral recovery of mice subjected to
tMCAO.
The infarct volume and brain atrophy volume were evaluated using cresyl violet staining. Results showed that there
was no difference in infarct volume among PBS, HUVEC, and
EPC groups at day-3 after tMCAO (p > .05, Supporting Information Fig. S4A, S4B). Atrophy volume was signiﬁcantly
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

smaller for EPC-treated mice compared to that in PBS, HUVEC,
and EPC1GL-treated mice at day-14 after tMCAO (p < .05,
Fig. 4C, 4D). These results indicated that EPC transplantation
led to better outcomes at day-14.

hPB-EPCs Transplantation Promotes Angiogenesis in
the Post-Ischemic Brain
Postischemic angiogenesis was measured using the density of
CD311 microvessels in the peri-infarct region at 14 days following tMCAO. The number of CD311 microvessels was
61 6 8/ﬁeld, 70 6 7/ﬁeld, 99 6 10/ﬁeld, and 58 6 7/ﬁeld for
the PBS, HUVEC, hPB-EPC, and hPB-EPC plus GL groups,
respectively (Fig. 5A, 5B). The result showed that EPC transplantation signiﬁcantly enhanced post-ischemic angiogenesis
STEM CELLS

Figure 3. HMGB1 is upregulated in postischemic mice brain. (A): Double-labeled immunoﬂuorescent staining showed cytoplasmic distribution of HMGB1 in Iba11 microglia (a), GFAP1 astrocyte (b), CD311 endothelial cells (d) but not MAP21 neurons (c). Bar 5 50 mm.
(B): Western blot showed that increased release of HMGB1 in the mouse brain at 14 days following tMCAO. (C): Bar graph showing the
increase of HMGB1 in the ipsilateral hemisphere at 14 days following tMCAO. Data are mean 6 SD, n 5 3 per group, *, p < .05, as compared to the sham group. Abbreviations: HMGB1, high mobility group box1; tMCAO, transient middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Figure 4. EPC transplantation led to improved outcomes in tMCAO mice. (A): Time stay on the rotarod is longer for mice treated with
EPC compared to mice treated with PBS, HUVEC or EPC1GL at day-14 after tMCAO. Data are mean 6 SD. n 5 6 per group. (B): mNSS
assessment showed better neurobehavioral function for mice treated with EPC compared to mice treated with PBS, HUVEC, or EPC1GL
at day-14 after tMCAO. Data are mean 6 SD. n 5 6 per group. (C): Photographs showed brain atrophy volume for mice treated with
PBS, HUVEC, EPC, or EPC1GL at day-14 after tMCAO. (D): Bar graph showed brain atrophy volume was signiﬁcantly smaller for mice
treated with EPC compared to mice treated with PBS, HUVEC, or EPC1GL at day-14 after tMCAO. Data are mean 6 SD. n 5 6/group.
Abbreviations: EPC, endothelial progenitor cell; GL, glycyrrhizin; HUVEC, human umbilical cord vein cell; mNSS, modiﬁed neurological
severity score; PBS, phosphate buffered saline; tMCAO, transient middle cerebral artery occlusion.

EPC Transplantation in Cerebral Ischemia

2686

Figure 5. HMGB1 involved in exogenous EPC-mediated poststroke angiogenesis. (A): Photomicrography of CD311 microvessels in periinfarct region for mice treated with PBS, HUVEC, EPC, and EPC plus glycyrrhizin at 14 days following transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion (tMCAO). Bar 5 50 mm. (B): Bar graph showing increased number of CD311 microvessels in peri-infarct region for mice treated
with EPCs compared to mice treated with PBS, HUVEC, and EPC plus glycyrrhizin at 14 days following tMCAO. *, p < .05. Data are
mean 6 SD. n 5 6 per group. (C): Synchrotron radiation angiography showed microvessels in peri-infarct region for mice treated with
PBS (a), EPC (c), and EPC plus GL (e). Figures (b, d, f) represent the selected areas of (a, c, e), respectively, in which a greater number
of functional microvessels (white arrow) are shown in mice from the EPC group compared with those of the PBS and EPC plus glycyrrhizin groups. Bar 5 1.0 mm. Abbreviations: EPC, endothelial progenitor cell; GL, glycyrrhizin; HUVEC, human umbilical cord vein cell; ICA,
internal carotid artery; PBS, phosphate buffered saline.

in the EPC group compared to the PBS and HUVEC groups.
This effect was blocked by GL treatment. To examine the postischemic angiogenesis in vivo, SRA of mice subjected to
tMCAO was performed at 14 days after tMCAO. More microvessels were observed in the left middle cerebral artery
(MCA) in the hPB-EPC group compared to the PBS or hPB-EPC
plus GL groups (Fig. 5C). This suggests that EPC transplantation induces the formation of new, functional vessels around
the ischemic area, and that this effect is blocked by GL.

Tracking hPB-EPC in Post-Ischemic Mouse Brain
hPB-EPCs were labeled with green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP)
using lentivirus and tracked at day 14 after tMCAO. Endogenous
EPCs were tracked using mouse CD34 antibody. Although exogenous EPCs (GFP1) accumulated in peri-infarct areas, none of
the exogenous EPC (GFP1) integrated with CD31 microvessels
(Fig. 6A), indicating that the newly formed vessels are not from
exogenous EPCs. Interestingly, we detected CD341/CD311
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

vessels in peri-infarct areas. This suggests that the increased
vessels in peri-infarct areas were from endogenous EPCs
(Fig. 6B–6D).

DISCUSSION
In this study, we found that (a) coculturing late hPB-EPCs with
activated microglia promoted the expression of various angiogenic factors in hPB-EPCs; (b) CM of hPB-EPCs cocultured with
activated microglia promoted HUVEC cells viability and tube
formation, which was blocked by suppressing HMGB1 release
in microglia or IL-8 knockdown in hPB-EPCs; (c) administration
of GL blocked the beneﬁcial effects of hPB-EPCs transplantation in tMCAO mice.
It was demonstrated that bone marrow-derived circulating
EPCs play a key role in postischemic neovascularization [21].
Human studies found that low circulating EPC levels predict
STEM CELLS

Chen, Lin, Wang et al.

2687

Figure 6. Endogenous endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) but not exogenous EPC participated in the formation of new vessel s in periinfarct areas. (A): Photomicrographs showed accumulation of GFP1 exogenous EPCs in peri-infarct areas at day-14 after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO). (B–D): Showed CD311/CD341 microvessels in peri-infarct areas at day-14 after tMCAO. Bar 5 25 mm.
Abbreviation: GFP, green ﬂuorescent protein.

Figure 7. The summary of the role of HMGB1 in exogenous EPC-mediated poststroke neurovascular remodeling. In the ischemic mice
brain, microglia is activated, leading to extracellular release of HMGB1. Exogenous EPCs migrate to ischemic hemisphere and expressed
IL-8 under the modulation of microglial HMGB1. IL-8 from EPCs then promotes postischemic neovascularization by affecting the function
of brain endothelial cells in peri-infarct area. Abbreviations: EC, endothelial cell; EPC, endothelial progenitor cell; HMGB1, high mobility
group box 1; IL-8, interleukin-8.

an increased risk of future cerebrovascular disease [22, 23].
Higher level of circulating EPCs indicated better outcomes for
patients of ischemic stroke [24]. These ﬁndings encouraged
exogenous EPC transplantation for stroke treatment. Most
studies used umbilical cord blood-derived late EPCs [5, 6].
This may be due to the difﬁculty in isolating late EPCs from
peripheral blood. Transplantation of autologous EPCs had several advantages over xenogeneic EPCs from umbilical cord
blood such as being lack of immune-rejection or ethical concerns. In addition, signiﬁcant differences in biological function
between EPCs of stroke patients and healthy controls were
observed, which shows the potential difference in their effect
on neovascularization [21]. It was reported that EPCs were
mobilized from bone-marrow when cerebrovascular diseases

www.StemCells.com

were present and high circulating EPC level remained for several weeks [21]. We successfully isolated late hPB-EPCs from
stroke patients instead of from healthy controls and found
that transplantation of hPB-EPCs from stroke patients could
lead to beneﬁcial outcomes in tMCAO mice model. These
results have provided important evidence that patient-speciﬁc
EPCs could be used for autologous transplantation in the
future. The other strength of our study is that we have investigated the mechanism of hPB-EPC transplantation treatment
and considered the impact of the host’s response to ischemia
on paracrine function of hPB-EPCs. Although the beneﬁcial
effects of hPB-EPC transplantation, including enhanced postischemic neovascularization and better neurobehavioral outcomes, have been observed in stroke models in previous
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

EPC Transplantation in Cerebral Ischemia

2688

studies, the mechanism of the therapeutic effects remains
unclear [5, 6]. Direct participation in the forming of new vessels may not be sufﬁcient to account for the beneﬁcial
effects, since few integrated exogenous EPCs can be found in
peri-infarct regions, especially in long-term follow-ups [5]. In
this study, we did not observe integration of GFP-labeled hPBEPC with microvessels in peri-infarct areas, suggesting an
alternative mechanism involved in exogenous EPC-mediated
stroke recovery. Accumulating evidence suggests that exogenous cells may induce beneﬁcial effects in a paracrine manner
[7, 25]. In addition, the function of exogenous EPCs could be
inﬂuenced by host cells in a contradictory manner. The activation of astrocyte and microglia was previously thought to be
injurious to the ischemic brain [26, 27] but more and more
evidence shows that they may play important roles during
stroke recovery [28, 29]. The proposal of the concept of the
neurovascular unit emphasized that neurons, endothelial cells,
and glia cells all contribute to neurovascular remodeling after
stroke [30]. Recently, it was found that HMGB1 released by
reactive astrocytes could promote EPC-mediated neurovascular remodeling during stroke recovery [11]. The study not only
demonstrated the beneﬁcial aspect of reactive astrocytes for
stroke recovery, it also suggested HMGB1 could be an important mediator of exogenous EPC function. Activated microglia
was found to be another abundant source of HMGB1. Receptors for HMGB1, such as TLR2/4 and RAGE, were found to be
expressed on EPCs [31] and their activation is responsible for
the increased expression of various factors that play important roles in neovascularization [32]. We found that HMGB1
stimulation upregulated VEGF, IL-8, IGF-1, HGF, and FGF
expression in EPCs. But only IL-8 and HGF upregulation were
found in hPB-EPCs cocultured with LPS-stimulated microglia.
Further investigation revealed that inhibition of HMGB1 suppressed IL-8 expression, but not HGF expression in hPB-EPCs.
These results suggest that the hPB-EPC expression of VEGF,
IGF-1, HGF, and FGF is affected by mediators other than
HMGB1 in cocultures, and hPB-EPC expression of IL-8 was
exclusively affected by HMGB1. IL-8 was demonstrated to be
an angiogenic factor in previous studies [33]. We used HUVEC
to model mature endothelial cells in vitro and explore whether
EPCs can induce angiogenic effects in a paracrine mechanism.
When the CM from hPB-EPCs cocultured with BV2 was added
to HUVEC, a positive effect in terms of promoting the viability
and enhancing the tube formation was observed. The effect
was blocked by inhibiting HMGB1 release from BV2 cells or IL-8
knockout in hPB-EPCs by siRNA. In the in vivo study, we also
found that hPB-EPC transplantation increased the number of
microvessels in the peri-infarct region 14 days after ischemia in
tMCAO mice, which was reversed by HMGB1 inhibitor GL.
Taken together, these results revealed that HMGB1 would be
an important regulator for EPC-mediated stroke recovery, and
IL-8 secretion by hPB-EPCs is associated with therapeutic mechanism of EPC transplantation for ischemic stroke (Fig. 7).

REFERENCES
1 Strong K, Mathers C, Bonita R. Preventing stroke: Saving lives around the world.
Lancet Neurol 2007;6:182–187.
2 Chen C, Wang Y, Yang GY. Stem cellmediated gene delivering for the treatment
C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

We have focused on the impact of activated microglia on
exogenous hPB-EPC because microglia activation is among the
hallmarks in postischemic brain. But HMGB1 is also released by
other types of cells such as reactive astrocytes [11]. Although
the GL is used to suppress HMGB1 release, the effect is not
exclusive for microglia in vivo. So the HMGB1-mediated crosstalk between exogenous EPC and other cells may also contribute to the therapeutic mechanism of EPC transplantation.
Although we observed that IL-8 knockdown diminishes the
angiogenic effect of hPB-EPCs, demonstration of this effect is
difﬁcult to achieve in vivo without the use of transgenic mice.
Apart from its angiogenic properties, IL-8 is also a proinﬂammatory factor, which may induce injuries to the brain, especially in the acute phase of stroke [34]. Transplantation of IL-8
knockdown exogenous EPC may additionally lead to some beneﬁcial effects that compensate its deﬁciency in angiogenic
property. In this regard, mice underwent IL-8 receptor knockout
should be used to conﬁrm the role of exogenous EPC-derived
IL-8 in postischemic angiogenesis in the future.

CONCLUSION
In conclusion, we demonstrated that the transplantation of
patient-speciﬁc hPB-EPCs promotes stroke recovery in tMCAO
mouse, and IL-8 upregulation in hPB-EPCs induced by microglial
HMGB1 play important role in EPC-mediated stroke recovery.
However, to determine the extent to which IL-8 secreted by
EPCs has contributed to the poststroke neurovascular remodeling, further investigation with transgenic mice is needed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by China 973 Program
2010CB834306 and 2011CB504405 (G.Y.Y. and Y.W.), NSFC
81070939 (G.Y.Y.), and U1232205 (G.Y.Y.).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C.C.: conception and designing, collection and assembly of
data, data analysis and interpretation, and manuscript writing;
X.L.: synchrotron radiation angiography and data analysis and
interpretation; J.W.: manuscript revising; G.T. and Z.M.: animal
surgery; X.C.: administrative support and manuscript revising;
J.X.: ﬂow cytometric analysis; Y.W.: administrative support, data
analysis and interpretation, and manuscript revising; Z.Z.: conception and design, data analysis and interpretation, and manuscript writing; G.-Y.Y.: conception and design, ﬁnancial support,
administrative support, and ﬁnal approval of manuscript.

DISCLOSURE

OF

POTENTIAL CONFLICTS

OF INTEREST

The authors indicate no potential conﬂicts of interest.

of cerebral ischemia: Progress and prospectives. Curr Drug Targets 2013;14:81–89.
3 Asahara T, Murohara T, Sullivan A et al.
Isolation of putative progenitor endothelial
cells for angiogenesis. Science 1997;275:964–
967.

4 Fan Y, Shen F, Frenzel T et al. Endothelial
progenitor cell transplantation improves
long-term stroke outcome in mice. Ann Neurol 2010;67:488–497.
5 Moubarik C, Guillet B, Youssef B et al.
Transplanted late outgrowth endothelial pro-

STEM CELLS

Chen, Lin, Wang et al.

2689

genitor cells as cell therapy product for
stroke. Stem Cell Rev 2011;7:208–220.
6 Li Q, Tang G, Xue S et al. Silica-coated
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
targeting of epcs in ischemic brain injury.
Biomaterials 2013;34:4982–4992.
7 Borlongan CV, Glover LE, Tajiri N et al.
The great migration of bone marrow-derived
stem cells toward the ischemic brain: Therapeutic implications for stroke and other neurological disorders. Prog Neurobiol 2011;95:
213–228.
8 Droetto S, Viale A, Primo L et al. Vasculogenic potential of long term repopulating
cord blood progenitors. FASEB J 2004;18:
1273–1275.
9 Hayakawa K, Qiu J, Lo EH. Biphasic
actions of hmgb1 signaling in inﬂammation
and recovery after stroke. Ann N Y Acad Sci
2010;1207:50–57..
10 Kim JB, Sig Choi J, Yu YM et al. Hmgb1,
a novel cytokine-like mediator linking acute
neuronal death and delayed neuroinﬂammation in the postischemic brain. J Neurosci
2006;26:6413–6421.
11 Hayakawa K, Pham LD, Katusic ZS et al.
Astrocytic high-mobility group box 1 promotes
endothelial progenitor cell-mediated neurovascular remodeling during stroke recovery.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2012;109:7505–7510.
12 Hayakawa K, Mishima K, Nozako M
et al. Delayed treatment with minocycline
ameliorates neurologic impairment through
activated microglia expressing a high-mobility
group box1-inhibiting mechanism. Stroke
2008;39:951–958.
13 Jaffe EA, Nachman RL, Becker CG et al.
Culture of human endothelial cells derived
from umbilical veins. Identiﬁcation by morphologic and immunologic criteria. J Clin
Invest 1973;52:2745–2756.
14 Mollica L, De Marchis F, Spitaleri A et al.
Glycyrrhizin binds to high-mobility group box
1 protein and inhibits its cytokine activities.
Chem Biol 2007;14:431–441.
15 Miao J, Shen LH, Tang YH et al. Overexpression of adiponectin improves neurobeha-

vioral outcomes after focal cerebral ischemia
in aged mice. CNS Neurosci Ther 2013;19:
969–977.
16 Kim SW, Jin Y, Shin JH et al. Glycyrrhizic
acid affords robust neuroprotection in the
postischemic brain via anti-inﬂammatory
effect by inhibiting hmgb1 phosphorylation
and secretion. Neurobiol Dis 2012;46:147–
156.
17 Lu H, Wang Y, He X et al. Netrin-1
hyperexpression in mouse brain promotes
angiogenesis and long-term neurological
recovery after transient focal ischemia.
Stroke 2012;43:838–843.
18 Hur J, Yoon CH, Kim HS et al. Characterization of two types of endothelial progenitor
cells and their different contributions to neovasculogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
2004;24:288–293.
19 Fadini GP, Baesso I, Albiero M et al.
Technical notes on endothelial progenitor
cells: Ways to escape from the knowledge
plateau. Atherosclerosis 2008;197:496–503.
20 Resch T, Pircher A, Kahler CM et al.
Endothelial progenitor cells: Current issues
on characterization and challenging clinical
applications. Stem Cell Rev 2012;8:926–939.
21 Navarro-Sobrino
M,
Rosell
A,
Hernandez-Guillamon M et al. Mobilization,
endothelial differentiation and functional
capacity of endothelial progenitor cells after
ischemic stroke. Microvasc Res 2010;80:317–
323.
22 Yip HK, Chang LT, Chang WN et al. Level
and value of circulating endothelial progenitor cells in patients after acute ischemic
stroke. Stroke 2008;39:69–74.
23 Schmidt-Lucke C, Rossig L, Fichtlscherer
S et al. Reduced number of circulating endothelial progenitor cells predicts future cardiovascular events: Proof of concept for the
clinical importance of endogenous vascular
repair. Circulation 2005;111:2981–2987.
24 Bogoslovsky T, Chaudhry A, Latour L
et al. Endothelial progenitor cells correlate
with lesion volume and growth in acute
stroke. Neurology 2010;75:2059–2062.

25 Morancho A, Hernandez-Guillamon M,
Boada C et al. Cerebral ischaemia and matrix
metalloproteinase-9 modulate the angiogenic
function of early and late outgrowth endothelial progenitor cells. J Cell Mol Med 2013;
17:1543–1553.
26 Ito D, Tanaka K, Suzuki S et al. Enhanced
expression of iba1, ionized calcium-binding
adapter molecule 1, after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rat brain. Stroke 2001;32:
1208–1215.
27 Anderson MF, Blomstrand F, Blomstrand
C et al. Astrocytes and stroke: Networking
for survival? Neurochem Res 2003;28:293–
305.
28 Thored P, Heldmann U, Gomes-Leal W
et al. Long-term accumulation of microglia
with proneurogenic phenotype concomitant
with persistent neurogenesis in adult subventricular zone after stroke. Glia 2009;57:835–
849.
29 Dheen ST, Kaur C, Ling EA. Microglial
activation and its implications in the brain
diseases. Curr Med Chem 2007;14:1189–
1197.
30 Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA. Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities in
stroke. Nat Rev Neurosci 2003;4:399–415.
31 He J, Xiao Z, Chen X et al. The expression of functional toll-like receptor 4 is associated with proliferation and maintenance of
stem cell phenotype in endothelial progenitor cells (epcs). J Cell Biochem 2010;111:
179–186.
32 Abarbanell AM, Wang Y, Herrmann JL
et al. Toll-like receptor 2 mediates mesenchymal stem cell-associated myocardial recovery
and vegf production following acute
ischemia-reperfusion injury. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 2010;298:H1529–1536.
33 Lattanzio L, Tonissi F, Torta I et al. Role
of il-8 induced angiogenesis in uveal melanoma. Invest New Drugs 2013;31:1107–1114.
34 Schomig K, Busch G, Steppich B et al.
Interleukin-8 is associated with circulating
cd1331 progenitor cells in acute myocardial
infarction. Eur Heart J 2006;27:1032–1037.

See www.StemCells.com for supporting information available online.

www.StemCells.com

C AlphaMed Press 2014
V

