Enabling Technologies for Cell-Based Clinical Translation

ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR CELL-BASED CLINICAL
TRANSLATION
Extracellular Vesicles Improve Post-Stroke
Neuroregeneration and Prevent
Postischemic Immunosuppression
THORSTEN R. DOEPPNER,a,b,* JOSEPHINE HERZ,a,c,* ANDRÉ GÖRGENS,b JANA SCHLECHTER,a
ANNA-KRISTIN LUDWIG,b STEFAN RADTKE,b KYRA DE MIROSCHEDJI,b PETER A. HORN,b
BERND GIEBEL,b DIRK M. HERMANNa
Key Words. Adult stem cells x Angiogenesis x Cellular therapy x Clinical translation x
Mesenchymal stem cells x Nervous system x Tissue regeneration

Department of Neurology,
Institute for Transfusion
Medicine, and cDepartment
of Pediatrics I, University
Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen,
Germany
b

*

Contributed equally.

Correspondence: Thorsten
R. Doeppner, M.D., Department
of Neurology, University Hospital
Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, Essen
45147, Germany. Telephone:
201-723-83586; E-Mail: thorsten.
doeppner@uk-essen.de; or
Bernd Giebel, Ph.D., Institute for
Transfusion Medicine, University
Hospital Essen, Virchowstrasse
179, Essen 45147, Germany.
Telephone: 201-723-4204;
E-Mail: bernd.giebel@uk-essen.de
Received April 20, 2015; accepted
for publication June 24, 2015;
published Online First on
September 3, 2015.
©AlphaMed Press
1066-5099/2015/$20.00/0
http://dx.doi.org/
10.5966/sctm.2015-0078

ABSTRACT
Although the initial concepts of stem cell therapy aimed at replacing lost tissue, more recent evidence
has suggested that stem and progenitor cells alike promote postischemic neurological recovery by
secreted factors that restore the injured brain’s capacity to reshape. Specifically, extracellular
vesicles (EVs) derived from stem cells such as exosomes have recently been suggested to mediate
restorative stem cell effects. In order to define whether EVs indeed improve postischemic neurological impairment and brain remodeling, we systematically compared the effects of mesenchymal stem
cell (MSC)-derived EVs (MSC-EVs) with MSCs that were i.v. delivered to mice on days 1, 3, and 5 (MSCEVs) or on day 1 (MSCs) after focal cerebral ischemia in C57BL6 mice. For as long as 28 days after
stroke, motor coordination deficits, histological brain injury, immune responses in the peripheral
blood and brain, and cerebral angiogenesis and neurogenesis were analyzed. Improved neurological
impairment and long-term neuroprotection associated with enhanced angioneurogenesis were noticed in stroke mice receiving EVs from two different bone marrow-derived MSC lineages. MSC-EV
administration closely resembled responses to MSCs and persisted throughout the observation period. Although cerebral immune cell infiltration was not affected by MSC-EVs, postischemic immunosuppression (i.e., B-cell, natural killer cell, and T-cell lymphopenia) was attenuated in the
peripheral blood at 6 days after ischemia, providing an appropriate external milieu for successful
brain remodeling. Because MSC-EVs have recently been shown to be apparently safe in humans,
the present study provides clinically relevant evidence warranting rapid proof-of-concept studies
in stroke patients. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2015;4:1131–1143

SIGNIFICANCE
Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) offers an interesting adjuvant approach next to thrombolysis for treatment of ischemic stroke. However, MSCs are not integrated into residing neural networks
but act indirectly, inducing neuroprotection and promoting neuroregeneration. Although the mechanisms by which MSCs act are still elusive, recent evidence has suggested that extracellular vesicles
(EVs) might be responsible for MSC-induced effects under physiological and pathological conditions.
The present study has demonstrated that EVs are not inferior to MSCs in a rodent stroke model. EVs induce
long-term neuroprotection, promote neuroregeneration and neurological recovery, and modulate peripheral post-stroke immune responses. Also, because EVs are well-tolerated in humans, as previously
reported, the administration of EVs under clinical settings might set the path for a novel and innovative
therapeutic stroke concept without the putative side effects attached to stem cell transplantation.

INTRODUCTION
The delivery of somatic stem cells induces unique restorative responses in the adult brain, reducing brain
injury and promoting functional neurological recovery in animal models of cerebral ischemia [1–12].
The beneficial effects are not restricted to single stem
cell lineages but have been reported for a huge

variety of adult stem cells and progenitor cells alike.
In terms of clinical feasibility, the transplantation of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is particularly attractive because they can be easily obtained and thus offer the opportunity for autologous and allogeneic
stem cell transplantation [13]. Consequently, the first
clinical trials using MSC transplantation for ischemic
stroke treatment have been initiated [14–18].

STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2015;4:1131–1143 www.StemCellsTM.com

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

a

1132

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental Setting and Animal Groups
All studies were performed with governmental approval according
to NIH guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. Male
C57BL6 mice aged 10 weeks (Harlan Laboratories, Darmstadt,

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Germany, http://www.harlan.com) were kept under circadian
rhythm with free access to food and water. The mice were randomly assigned to the treatment groups. At all stages of the study,
the researchers were kept unaware of the experimental conditions
chosen.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) was induced, as described previously [22]. In brief, a silicon-coated monofilament
(Doccol Corp., Sharon, MA, http://www.doccol.com) was inserted
into the left common carotid artery (CCA) and then gently pushed
forward toward the offspring of the left middle cerebral artery
(MCA). During the experiment, the laser Doppler flow (LDF) was
recorded with a flexible probe (Perimed AB, Järfälla, Sweden,
http://www.perimed-instruments.com) above the core of the left
MCA territory. Thirty minutes after monofilament insertion, reperfusion was initiated by monofilament removal, and the LDF recordings were continued for an additional 15 minutes before the
wounds were carefully sutured.
The first set of mice was exposed to MCAO followed by administration of normal saline (control), MSCs (1 3 106 cells per
250 ml of saline), or MSC-EVs (EVs released by 2 3 106 MSCs
diluted in 250 ml of saline). The cells were transplanted
24 hours after stroke via cannulation of the right femoral vein
in the anesthetized mice. The injections of the saline-treated
and MSC-EV-treated groups were repeated 3 and 5 days after
ischemia (DPI). The mice in the MSC group received saline
injections at 3 and 5 DPI. All samples were injected at a rate
of 250 ml/10 min. The mice were allowed to survive for 28
DPI (12 mice per group). These mice were used for the behavioral analyses and histochemical studies of brain injury and
angioneurogenesis.
The second set of mice underwent sham surgery or MCAO followed by delivery of saline (control) or MSC-EVs of 1 of the MSC
lines at 24 hours after ischemia. In the sham-operated mice, all
the procedures were performed exactly as for MCAO except
for occlusion of the MCA. As such, the left CCA and external carotid artery were isolated and ligated, and a small incision was
made in the left CCA, followed by immediate ligation without introducing a filament. The sham-operated mice received saline
injections. All these groups were allowed to survive for 48 hours
after ischemia (8 mice per group). The peripheral blood cells of
these mice were harvested and analyzed by flow cytometry.
The brains were used for histochemical analysis of infarct volumes
and for determination of brain inflammation.
The third set of mice underwent sham surgery or MCAO, followed by delivery of saline (control) or MSC-EVs at 24 hours after
ischemia and 3 and 5 DPI. These mice were allowed to survive for
6 DPI (12 mice per group). These mice were used for flow cytometry analysis of leukocyte subsets within the blood and within the
brain at 6 DPI.
The fourth set of mice was subjected to focal cerebral ischemia, followed by delivery of saline (control) or MSC-EVs at
24 hours after ischemia and 3 and 5 DPI. These mice were allowed
to survive for 6 DPI (8 mice per group). The brains of these mice
were prepared and used for histochemical analysis to determine
the infarct volumes and brain inflammation at 6 DPI.
Thus, a total of 116 animals were included in the present study
protocol. Of these mice, 8 mice (3 saline treated, 2 MSC treated,
and 3 EV treated) had to be excluded from the study because of
predefined exclusion criteria, including surgery duration longer
than 15 minutes, a lack of reperfusion after filament withdrawal,
or spontaneous animal death.
S TEM C ELLS T RANSLATIONAL M EDICINE

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Although the initial concepts aimed to replace lost brain tissue,
recent evidence has suggested that stem cells exert their restorative effects via indirect bystander actions. These include a variety
of different processes such as the prevention of secondary neuronal degeneration, modulation of peripheral and central immune responses, and promotion of cerebral angioneurogenesis [1, 12,
19–21]. In line with this, most systemically grafted MSCs are trapped within the lungs, again suggesting a paracrine method of action
for the transplanted cells [22, 23]. Conditioned MSC media exert
similar beneficial effects in a model of myocardial infarction-like
MSCs [24]. Consistently, MSCs have been reported to secrete
survival-promoting factors that enhance angioneurogenesis
[25–27]. On processing of conditioned MSC media, small extracellular vesicles (EVs) such as exosomes (70–160 nm in diameter) were
identified. The latter have subsequently been proved to exert beneficial therapeutic effects in models of myocardial ischemia, liver
fibrosis, kidney injury, and cerebral ischemia [28–32].
Exosomes are defined as derivatives of the late endosomal
compartment. They correspond to the intraluminal vesicles of
multivesicular bodies, which, on fusion with the plasma membrane, release these vesicles as exosomes into the environment.
Together with other small EVs such as microvesicles (100–1,000 nm),
which bud off from the plasma membrane, exosomes can be
highly enriched by processing cell culture supernatants or body
liquids [33, 34]. Exosome-enriched EV fractions in turn contain
coding and noncoding RNAs, lipids, and proteins [35] and play
pivotal roles in intercellular communication processes [36].
Although no experimental evidence has been obtained that
administration of MSCs causes any critical side effects in treating
cerebral ischemia in rats [37], it cannot be excluded that MSCs
might cause occlusions of small vessels [38]. Also, although evidence regarding the malignant transformation of grafted MSCs
does not yet exist, a theoretic malignant transformation, such
as is already known from embryonic and related stem cells, cannot be excluded [39–41]. Because malignant transformation after
EV administration is extremely unlikely, EV therapies could provide a number of advantages over conventional stem cell therapies, provided they are as effective as cellular therapies.
After showing that MSC-EVs exert immunosuppressive functions
in vitro, we recently treated a patient with steroid-refractory graft-vs.host-disease (GvHD) with MSC-EVs [42]. As previously reported for
MSC therapy in GvHD patients [43], MSC-EV treatment suppressed
GvHD symptoms without inducing any side effects [42]. To evaluate
the therapeutic potential of MSC-EVs for treatment of ischemic
stroke, we systematically compared the effects after MSC-EV and
MSC administration on neurological recovery and brain remodeling
in a mouse model of transient focal cerebral ischemia. Our data show
that MSC-EV administration closely mimics the beneficial effects after
MSC treatment in stroke. Furthermore, by studying the mechanistic
effects of MSC-EVs, we obtained evidence that MSC-EVs attenuate
peripheral immunosuppression and promote both neuronal survival
and angioneurogenesis. Our data thus support the use of MSC-EVs
for stroke treatment.

MSC-EVs Induce Post-Stroke Regeneration

Doeppner, Herz, Görgens et al.

Expansion and Characterization of MSCs

filtration through 0.22-mm pore filters (TPP Techno Plastic Products AG, Trasadingen, Switzerland, http://www.tpp.ch). CM were
stored at 220°C until processing. After thawing, CM were unified
and supplemented with 3 U/ml heparin (Ratiopharm GmbH, Ulm,
Germany, http://www.ratiopharm.de) and 3 mg/ml Actilyse
(Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany, http://
www.boehringer-ingelheim.com) and incubated for 3 hours at
37°C. EVs were concentrated by a polyethyleneglycol (PEG) precipitation method as previously described [42]. In brief, PEG precipitation was performed at a final concentration of 10% PEG6000
(50% wt/vol; Sigma-Aldrich) and 75 mM NaCl. After incubation for
8–12 hours at 4°C, the EVs were concentrated by centrifugation
for 30 minutes at 1,500g. EV pellets were resolved in normal saline (B. Braun Melsungen, Melsungen, Germany, http://www.
bbraun.com), filled with saline (if not explicitly stated, using
normal saline) to a total volume of 45 ml and precipitated by
ultracentrifugation for 2 hours at 110,000g. EV pellets were
resolved and diluted in saline to a concentration of 1 ml containing EVs obtained from CM of 4 3 107 MSCs. Aliquots of 1 ml each
were stored at 280°C until usage.
EV samples were tested for bacterial contamination via polymerase chain reaction and infectious serology, as described previously [42]. All EV samples used were negative in all assays.
For the characterization of EV samples, nanoparticle tracking
analyses were performed with the ZetaView platform (Particle
Metrix, Meerbuch, Germany, http://www.particle-metrix.com).
As shown previously, 1:500 or 1:1,000 water-diluted samples
were measured in duplicate [44].
Protein concentrations of EV samples were determined using
the micro- bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Dreieich, Germany, http://www.thermofisher.com). Western
blots were performed with 5 mg of the concentrated EV fractions,
which were treated with sample buffer (dithiothreitol, 0.1% SDS,
0.1 M Tris HCl; pH 7.0) and boiled for 5 minutes at 95°C before
separation on 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis gels.
The samples were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany, http://www.
merckmillipore.com). Membranes were stained with antibodies
recognizing either the exosomal marker proteins Tsg101
(Sigma-Aldrich) or CD81 (BD Biosciences).

Analysis of Post-Stroke Motor Coordination Deficits
The mice were trained on days 1 and 2 before induction of stroke
to ensure proper test behavior. The actual tests for analysis of motor coordination were performed at the time points given using
the rotarod, tightrope, and corner turn test, as previously described [45]. Both the rotarod and tightrope tests were performed twice on each test day and the mean values calculated.
For the rotarod test, the readout parameter was the time until
the mice dropped off, with a maximal testing time of 300 seconds.
Assessment of tightrope test results was done using a validated
score ranging from 0 (minimum) to 20 (maximum). The corner
turn test included 10 trials per test day, during which the laterality
index (number of right turns per 10 trials) was calculated. High
laterality indexes approximating a score of 1 indicate severe motor coordination impairment.

Enrichment and Infusion of EVs From Conditioned
MSC Media

Immunohistochemical Tissue Processing and Staining

After passage 3, MSC-conditioned media (CM) were collected
every 48 hours. Larger vesicles and debris were removed by

For the measurement of infarct volumes and immunohistochemical analysis, the mice were transcardially perfused with

www.StemCellsTM.com

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Bone marrow (BM) was obtained from human donors after informed
consent according to the Declaration of Helsinki. Cells were fractioned by Ficoll (Biocoll Separating Solution; Biochrom AG, Berlin,
Germany, http://www.biochrom.de) density gradient centrifugation
and seeded into tissue culture 6-well plates (2 3 106 cells per well) in
MSC basal media (Pan-Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany, http://www.
pan-biotech.de) supplemented with 5% human thrombocyte lysate,
1% glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany, http://www.lifetechnologies.com). After 24 hours,
nonadherent cells were removed by medium exchange. After cell
confluence, the cells were continuously passaged. MSCs were characterized by flow cytometric analysis.
The MSCs were stained with fluorescein isothiocyanateconjugated, phycoerythrin-conjugated or allophycocyaninconjugated anti-CD90 (clone 2G5; Beckman Coulter, Fullerton,
CA, http://www.beckmancoulter.com), anti-CD105 (clone sN6/
N1-3A1; Ancell, Bayport, MN, http://www.ancell.com), antiCD14 (clone M5E2; BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany, http://
www.bd.com), anti-CD31 (clone WM59; BD Biosciences), antiCD73 (clone AD2; BD Biosciences), anti-CD146 (clone TEA1134;
Beckman Coulter), anti-CD44 (clone G44-26; BD Biosciences), or
anti-CD45 (clone J33; Beckman Coulter) antibodies for 20 minutes
at 4°C. Propidium iodide was used for exclusion of dead cells.
Appropriate isotype-matched control monoclonal antibodies
were used to determine the level of background staining in
all experiments. Flow cytometric analyses were performed on
a FC500 flow cytometer equipped with CXP, version 2.2, software (Beckman Coulter).
To test for osteogenic differentiation patterns (supplemental
online Fig. 1), 4 3 104 MSCs were plated onto 12-well plates and
raised until they reached 80%–90% confluence. Osteogenic differentiation was induced by the addition of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s
medium (DMEM) high glucose medium (PAA Laboratories, Cölbe,
Germany, http://www.atmp-ready.com) supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biochrom GmbH, Berlin, Germany, http://
www.biochrom.de), 1% sodium pyruvate (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany,
http://www.sigmaaldrich.com), 1% glutamine, 1% penicillinstreptomycin (Invitrogen), 0.1 mM dexamethasone, 10 mM
b-glycerol-phosphate, and 300 mM ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich).
The medium was exchanged twice a week. After 2 weeks, the cells
were fixed at room temperature (RT) for 20 minutes in 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich) and stained with alizarin red (2% wt/vol in water, pH 4.2; Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany, http://www.carlroth.com).
Adipocyte differentiation (supplemental online Fig. 1) was induced by the addition of DMEM high-glucose medium (PAA Laboratories) supplemented with 10% FBS (Biochrom), 1% sodium-pyruvate
(Sigma-Aldrich), 1% glutamine, 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen), 0.1 mM dexamethasone, and 200 mM indomethacin (SigmaAldrich). The medium was exchanged twice a week. After the first
medium exchange, the adipocyte differentiation medium was
additionally supplemented with 2 mM insulin and 500 mM
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (Sigma-Aldrich). After fixation (4%
paraformaldehyde for 20 minutes at RT), the cells were stained
with 0.4% Oil Red O (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in isopropanol.

1133

MSC-EVs Induce Post-Stroke Regeneration

1134

discarded and the pellets resuspended in 15 ml of 37% Percoll
in 0.01 M HCl/PBS and centrifuged at 2,800g for 20 minutes. Myelin was removed, and the remaining cell pellet was washed twice
in 0.01 M PBS.

Flow Cytometry
Isolated cells were incubated with the blocking antibody rat antimouse CD16/CD32 (Fc fragment) for 15 minutes at 4°C, followed
by incubation with the antibodies listed in supplemental online
Table 1 for an additional 30 minutes. Absolute cell numbers in
the blood were calculated by the multiplication of the WBC count
per microliter and the percentage of individual subpopulations.
Total counts of brain-infiltrating leukocytes were determined using TrueCount beads (BD Biosciences) on the basis of CD45positive events.
Blood- and brain-derived leukocyte subsets were identified and
differentiated by their antigen expression using multichannel flow
cytometry (supplemental online Fig. 2). Single cells were identified
by forward and side scatter (area vs. width) parameters, followed
by gating for CD45-positive cells in the blood (supplemental online
Fig. 2A, 2B) and for CD45high cells in the brain (supplemental online
Fig. 2C). These cells were further divided into lymphoid cells
(B cells [B220], natural killer [NK] cells, and CD4 and CD8 T cells;
supplemental online Fig. 2B) and myeloid cells, including neutrophils
(lineage-negative, Ly6G+), macrophages (lineage-negative, Ly6G2,
SSClow, CD1152, CD11b+), monocytes (lineage-negative, Ly6G2,
SSClow, CD115+), and dendritic cells (lineage-negative, Ly6G2, SSClow,
CD1152, CD11chigh; supplemental online Fig. 2A). Two panels of antibodies were used (supplemental online Table 1). Panel 1 enabled
analysis of myeloid-derived leukocytes, which further allowed the determination of activation levels of monocytes and dendritic cells via
major histocompatibility class II (MHCII) expression and the differentiation between monocyte subsets according to their Ly6C expression
level (supplemental online Fig. 2A). Panel 2 divided lymphocytes and
further enabled examination of lymphocyte subset activation via
CD69 expression (supplemental online Fig. 2B). For each panel, a negative control (panel 1, stained for all antigens except for MHCII; panel
2, stained for all antigens except for CD69) was included to define the
positive populations.

Statistical Analysis
Processing of Peripheral Blood and Brain Tissue for
Flow Cytometry
Single cell suspensions for flow cytometry were performed, as
described previously [47]. In brief, the mice were killed via i.p. injection of chloral hydrate. Blood samples were collected into
EDTA-coated tubes by puncture of the inferior vena cava followed
by transcardial perfusion with ice-cold 0.1 M PBS and brain removal. Absolute white blood cell (WBC) counts of whole blood
samples were determined using a veterinary hematology analyzer (scil Vet abc Plus; scil animal care co., Vierhnheim, Germany,
http://www.scilvet.com). Erythrocytes were lysed by incubation
with lysis buffer (155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, 3 mM EDTA) for
5 minutes followed by 2 washing steps with 0.1 M PBS. The brains
were dissected and hemispheres divided into ipsilesional and
contralesional parts. For each measurement, 4 hemispheres were
pooled and homogenized through a 70-mm cell strainer (BD Biosciences) by continuous rinsing with 50 ml of cold HEPES-buffered
Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640. The samples were centrifuged at 286g for 5 minutes at 18°C. The supernatants were

©AlphaMed Press 2015

For comparison of two groups, two-tailed independent Student’s
t tests were used. For comparison of three or more groups, oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post hoc
test and, if appropriate, two-way ANOVA were used. Unless otherwise stated, data are presented as mean 6 SD values. P # .05
was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
Delivery of MSC-EVs Reduces Postischemic Motor
Coordination Impairment as Effectively as MSC Delivery
Because MSC-EVs are proposed to be critically involved in MSCinduced therapeutic effects after stroke, we systematically compared the recovery-promoting effects of two independent MSC
lines and their corresponding MSC-EV fractions on neurological
recovery after stroke. MSCs were raised from BM samples of
two different human BM donors (supplemental online Fig. 1),
and their MSC-EV fractions were characterized according to current standards. MSCs or their corresponding EVs were i.v. infused
S TEM C ELLS T RANSLATIONAL M EDICINE

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) after having been anesthetized
with 7% chloral hydrate (200 mg/kg body weight). The brains
were removed, shock frozen, and cut into 20-mm-thick coronal
sections. To determine the infarct volumes, every 20th section
(i.e., sections at 400-mm distance) was stained with cresyl violet,
followed by a computer-based analysis of the infarct volumes. Infarct volumes were determined, as described previously [46], by
subtracting the nonlesioned volume of the ipsilateral hemisphere
from the total volume of the contralateral side.
Long-term neuronal survival was evaluated in 20-mm sections
stained with a mouse monoclonal anti-NeuN antibody (1:1,000;
Merck Millipore), which was detected by a goat anti-mouse Alexa
Fluor 488 antibody (Invitrogen). For analysis, the regions of interests (ROIs) were defined at anteroposterior +0.14 mm, mediallateral 61.5 to 2.25 mm, and dorsal-ventral 22.5 to 3.25 mm.
Two sections per mouse were analyzed, and in each section, three
ROIs were examined. The mean neuronal densities were determined for all ROIs. Leukocyte infiltrates were analyzed in
20-mm sections stained with a rat anti-mouse CD45 antibody
(clone IBL-5/25, 1:100; Merck Millipore), which was detected
with a donkey anti-rat Alexa Fluor 488 antibody (Invitrogen). The
density of CD45+ leukocytes was evaluated in the same ROI as
above, again using two sections per mouse. The mean densities
of leukocytes were determined for all ROIs.
Endogenous cell proliferation and differentiation of newborn
cells were analyzed after daily single i.p. injection of 5-bromo-2deoxyuridine (BrdU; 50 mg/kg body weight; Sigma-Aldrich) on
days 8–18. The sections were counterstained for BrdU and doublecortin (Dcx; immature neuronal marker), NeuN (mature neuronal marker), or CD31 (endothelial marker). A monoclonal
mouse anti-BrdU (1:400; Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland,
http://www.roche-applied-science.com), a monoclonal rat antiBrdU (1:400; Abcam, Cambridge, U.K., http://www.abcam.
com), a polyclonal goat anti-Dcx (1:50; Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Heidelberg, Germany, http://www.scbt.com), a monoclonal
mouse anti-NeuN (1:1,000; Merck Millipore), and a monoclonal
rat CD31 (1:200, BD Biosciences) antibody were used. All primary
antibodies were detected using appropriate Cy-3-labeled,
Alexa Fluor 594-labeled, or Alexa Fluor 488-labeled secondary
antibodies.

Doeppner, Herz, Görgens et al.

in mice at 1 DPI (MSCs) or at 1, 3, and 5 DPI (MSC-EVs). Using the
rotarod, tightrope, and corner turn tests, we found that administration of both MSC lines and their MSC-EV fractions significantly enhanced motor coordination performance (Fig. 1). In all 4
experimental settings, the effects persisted over the entire observation period (i.e., 4 weeks after stroke induction; Fig. 1). We did
not detect any significant differences in improved motor coordination impairment among the 4 treatment groups (i.e., the delivery of
MSC-EVs was as effective as the transplantation of MSCs; Fig. 1).

MSC and MSC-EV Delivery Comparably Induce
Postischemic Long-Term Neuroprotection

MSC and MSC-EV Delivery Similarly Increases
Postischemic Angioneurogenesis
To elucidate whether MSC-EVs promote neurogenesis, we compared the effects of MSC and MSC-EV administration on cell proliferation 4 weeks after ischemia via BrdU incorporation. Compared
with saline-treated stroke mice, more BrdU+ cells were identified
within the ischemic striatum of those mice treated with either MSCs
or MSC-EVs (Fig. 3). The numbers of immature (Dcx) and mature
(NeuN) BrdU-labeled neuronal cell populations were both increased
after MSC and MSC-EV treatment (Fig. 4A, 4B). Similarly, the numbers of CD31+ BrdU+ cells were elevated, indicating that new endothelial cells had also formed (Fig. 4C). Thus, MSC-EVs, like MSCs
themselves, are able to induce postischemic angioneurogenesis.
Again, no significant differences between the MSC-treated and
MSC-EV-treated groups were recognized.

MSC-EVs Modulate Postischemic Peripheral
Immune Responses
Evidence is emerging for an interaction between peripheral
immune responses and postischemic inflammation in the brain
that contributes to the development of ischemic brain injury
[48]. Furthermore, the immune regulatory functions of MSCs
and MSC-EVs are well established [42, 49]. Considering systemically administered MSC-EVs as the therapeutically active component of MSCs, we investigated whether stroke-induced
peripheral immune responses are regulated by MSC-EVs. Therefore, we first determined the absolute cell counts of circulating
leukocyte subsets in the blood. Because stroke-induced systemic
immune responses are regulated in a time-dependent manner involving rapid acute activation [50] followed by suppression at subacute time points [51], we evaluated two time points (i.e., 2 and 6
DPI). The MSC-EV-treated stroke mice analyzed at 2 DPI had received a single MSC-EV injection at 24 hours after ischemia.
The mice analyzed at 6 DPI had received 3 MSC-EV injections at
24 hours and 3 and 5 days.

www.StemCellsTM.com

Compared with sham-operated mice, absolute cell numbers
of the total WBC count and neutrophil, dendritic cell, macrophage, monocyte (including different subsets), and lymphocyte
subsets (including different T-lymphocyte subsets) were not altered at 2 DPI, neither in saline-treated nor in MSC-EV-treated
mice (Fig. 5A–5H). However, we observed a twofold increase in
the activation of CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes in saline-treated
stroke mice that was attenuated in the MSC-EV-treated mice, albeit the difference in the latter was not significant (Fig. 5J). A similar trend was observed in the activation of dendritic cells at this
time point (Fig. 5F).
In contrast to these rather subtle changes at this early time
point, we observed striking differences at 6 DPI. Saline-treated
stroke mice (control) revealed only 50% of total WBCs in the
peripheral blood compared with the level in the shamoperated mice (Fig. 6A). Mainly, the numbers of monocytes
(75%) and the different lymphocyte subsets (60%–65%) were
significantly decreased (Fig. 6E, 6G–6I). This phenomenon corresponds to stroke-induced immunosuppression and has been
associated with poor neurological outcomes [52, 53]. The
numbers of neutrophils, dendritic cells, and macrophages
were not affected by focal cerebral ischemia (Fig. 6B–6D). In
contrast to the saline-treated mice, the MSC-EV-treated mice
showed almost normal numbers of B cells, NK cells, and T cells.
However, the monocyte content was still reduced (Fig. 6E). Although the dendritic cell numbers were not significantly altered by focal cerebral ischemia, the content of MHC class II
expressing dendritic cells (DCs) were significantly decreased
in the saline-treated but not in the MSC-EV-treated mice
(Fig. 6F). Similarly, a statistically significant increase in the
numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells expressing the activation
marker CD69 was observed in saline-treated, but not in the
MSC-EV-treated, mice (Fig. 6J). Thus, MSC-EV administration
attenuates the effects of focal cerebral ischemia on the cellular composition of the peripheral blood system and the activation state of its cells.

Cerebral Immune Cell Infiltration Is not Modulated
by MSC-EVs
Cerebral inflammatory processes contribute to secondary brain
injury after stroke, involving numerous types of immune cells that
infiltrate the brain at variable numbers exhibiting cell typespecific temporal and spatial distribution [54]. In order to characterize the effect of MSC-EVs on local brain inflammatory
responses, we first performed an immunohistochemical analysis
for CD45+ leukocytes to exclude potential confounding effects
due to different sizes of evolving brain infarcts. With this approach, we did not detect any significant changes related to
MSC-EV delivery, neither at 2 DPI nor at 6 DPI (Fig. 6A).
Because CD45 staining itself is not sufficient to discriminate
cells of different hematopoietic subsets, we next performed
multiparametric flow cytometric analysis of minced brain cells
at 6 DPI (supplemental online Fig. 2). Peripheral blood leukocytes are known to express higher levels of CD45 than do microglial cells [54]. Quantification of total leukocyte numbers
demonstrated a 4 times higher abundance in the ischemic tissue
compared with the levels in the contralesional hemispheres (n = 3
experiments, each containing 4 pooled hemispheres; p , .05;
Fig. 7B) and sham-operated mice. In line with immunohistochemical data, no effect of MSC-EV administration was observed

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Because functional recovery does not necessarily imply an effect on brain tissue injury and vice versa, we subsequently analyzed neuronal survival in the ischemic striatum at 4 weeks
after stroke. In line with the reduction of neurological impairment,
increased densities of NeuN+ neurons (i.e., neuronal density) were
found in the ischemic striatum of mice receiving MSCs or MSC-EV
fractions. No statistically significant differences were observed between the mice treated with either MSCs or MSC-EVs (Fig. 2). On
the contrary, MSC-EVs did not induce acute neuroprotection as
assessed by determination of infarct volumes on days 2 and 6
post-stroke (supplemental online Fig. 3). The latter, however,
might be due to the experimental paradigm chosen.

1135

1136

MSC-EVs Induce Post-Stroke Regeneration

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 1. MSC-EVs reduce postischemic neurological impairment. Motor coordination, evaluated using the rotarod test (A), tightrope test (B),
and corner turn test (C) at 7, 14, and 28 days after ischemia (DPI). Mice (n = 12 per condition) were exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion,
followed by delivery of normal saline (control), cells of 2 independent bone marrow-derived MSC lines (MSC I and MSC II), or EVs harvested from
supernatants of both MSC lines (MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II). MSCs were infused at 1 DPI and MSC-EVs at 1, 3, and 5 DPI. MSC-EV-treated mice
showed very similar neurological performance to that of MSC-treated mice. Data are mean 6 SD. p, p , .05 compared with control. Abbreviations: EVs, extracellular vesicles; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; MSC I and MSC II, group I and II of bone marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively;
MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines.

on the recruitment of leukocytes into the infarcted brain hemispheres (Fig. 7B).
The absolute numbers of neutrophils, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, and lymphocyte subtypes were determined for characterization of immune cell infiltration. The

©AlphaMed Press 2015

most pronounced stroke-induced immune cell infiltration was
observed for neutrophils and monocytes (Fig. 7C, 7F). The number of neutrophils in infarcted hemispheres was increased
12-fold compared with the number after sham surgery and in
the contralesional hemispheres. The monocyte numbers had
S TEM C ELLS T RANSLATIONAL M EDICINE

Doeppner, Herz, Görgens et al.

1137

Figure 3. MSC-EVs increase postischemic cell proliferation. Cell proliferation was assessed by BrdU incorporation analysis in the ischemic striatum at 28 days after ischemia in mice (n = 12 per condition) exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion followed by i.v. delivery of normal saline
(control), cells of two independent bone marrow-derived MSC lines (MSC I and MSC II), or EVs harvested from supernatants of both MSC lines
(MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II). Representative microphotographs of BrdU+ cells counterstained with DAPI are also shown. Scale bars = 100 mm.
Data are mean 6 SD values. p, p , .05 compared with control. Abbreviations: BrdU, 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine; DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;
EVs, extracellular vesicles; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; MSC I and MSC II, group I and II of bone marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively;
MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines.

increased by sixfold (n = 3 experiments, each containing
4 pooled hemispheres; p , .05). Less pronounced changes were
observed for dendritic cells and macrophages. Similarly, T and
B lymphocytes increased by 1.5-fold to 3-fold (n = 3 experiments,
each containing 4 pooled hemispheres; p , .05; Fig. 7H). MSCEV administration did not modulate infiltration of any of these
cell types (Fig. 7C–7F, 7H). Moreover, the proportions of monocyte and T-cell subsets and activation of monocytes, dendritic
cells, B cells, and CD8+ T cells were not influenced by the administration of MSC-EVs (Fig. 7F, 7G, 7I).

DISCUSSION
We have shown that MSC-EVs improve postischemic neurological impairment very similarly to MSCs and induce long-term neuroprotection

www.StemCellsTM.com

associated with enhanced angioneurogenesis. The latter persisted
throughout the observation period of 4 weeks. In line with previous
reports on transplanted MSCs, our data have shown that MSCs exert
their restorative properties in a paracrine manner rather than by direct
cellular interaction [23, 24, 30]. Consequently, our data have identified
EVsas a keycomponent via whichMSCs promotepost-strokerecovery.
In good agreement with previous reports showing MSCs and
MSC-EVs as modulators of immune functions [42, 49], we found
that postischemic immunosuppression (i.e., B-cell, NK-cell, and
T-cell lymphopenia) is attenuated in the peripheral blood by
MSC-EVs. Our data thus suggest that MSC-EVs’ immunomodulatory effects might contribute to establish an appropriate external
milieu for successful brain remodeling.
MSCs have been repeatedly shown to induce neuroprotection,
most likely via indirect mechanisms in various stroke models. As

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 2. MSC-EVs induce postischemic long-term neuroprotection. Neuronal survival as examined by immunohistochemistry in the ischemic striatum
at 28 days after ischemia in mice (n = 12 per condition) exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion followed by i.v. delivery of normal saline (control), two
different MSC lines (MSC I and MSC II), or their corresponding EVs (MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II). Representative microphotographs are also shown. Scale
bars = 50 mm. Data are mean 6 SD values. p, p , .05 compared with control. Abbreviations: EVs, extracellular vesicles; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; MSC
I and MSC II, group I and II of bone marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively; MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines.

1138

MSC-EVs Induce Post-Stroke Regeneration

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 4. MSC-EVs stimulate postischemic neurogenesis and angiogenesis. Double-immunohistochemistry for the proliferation marker BrdU
and the immature neuronal marker Dcx (A), the proliferation marker BrdU and the mature neuronal marker NeuN (B), and the proliferation
marker BrdU and the endothelial marker CD31 (C), evaluated in the ischemic striatum at 28 days after ischemia. Mice (n = 12 per condition)
were exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion followed by i.v. delivery of normal saline (control), cells of two independent bone marrowderived MSCs lines (MSC I and MSC II), or EVs harvested from supernatants of both MSC lines (MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II). Representative microphotographs of double-labeled cells counterstained with DAPI are also shown. Scale bars = 20 mm. Data are mean 6 SD values. p, p , .05
compared with control. Abbreviations: BrdU, 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine; DAPI, 49,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; Dcx, doublecortin; EVs, extracellular vesicles; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; MSC I and MSC II, group I and II of bone marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively; MSC-EVs I and MSCEVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines.

such, the beneficial effects of MSC-EV administration on motor coordination deficits after focal cerebral ischemia in rats have recently been demonstrated [32]. The present study goes beyond
the latter study, demonstrating equivalence of EVs and BMderived MSCs. Whether MSCs and/or EVs from other tissue sources
such as adipose tissue, which facilitates MSC generation compared
with BM, might have similar effects was beyond the scope of the
present work. We found delayed neuroprotection and a possible

©AlphaMed Press 2015

mechanism of EV action (i.e., the reversal of postischemic immunosuppression, most specifically of B-cell, NK-cell, and T-cell lymphopenia). Both MSC-EVs and MSCs increased neuronal survival in the
peri-infarct tissue, as revealed at the end of the observation period
at 28 DPI. Because long-term neuronal survival might be a consequence of both early and delayed neuroprotection, we also analyzed ischemic injury at 2 and 6 DPI but failed to detect an effect of
EVs on infarct volume at these early time points. Although MSC
S TEM C ELLS T RANSLATIONAL M EDICINE

Doeppner, Herz, Görgens et al.

1139

transplantation has previously been shown to reduce infarct volume [55–57], this effect on infarct size strongly depends on cell
transplantation timing [58]. Hence, the delivery of MSC-EVs at 1
DPI was obviously too late to prevent the progression of brain infarction. That MSC-EV delivery nonetheless promoted neurological
recovery and prevented secondary neurodegeneration emphasizes its therapeutic potential in the subacute and postacute stroke
phase (e.g., as add-on treatment to thrombolysis). That i.v. EV delivery was sufficient to induce post-stroke neuroprotection and
neurological recovery again highlights the putative clinical impact
of EVs in future stroke treatment, albeit other delivery routes were
not studied in the present work. In this context, systemic poststroke delivery such as i.v. injection is most feasible in clinical terms
and not inferior to local stereotactic delivery, which has been previously observed by our group in a model of post-stroke neural progenitor cell transplantation in mice (unpublished data).
Although stem and progenitor cells are integrated to a very
limited extent into residing neural networks [1, 7, 58, 59], grafted
cells such as MSCs and neural progenitor cells are known to

www.StemCellsTM.com

stimulate brain remodeling and to promote angioneurogenesis
via indirect bystander effects [1, 5, 22, 60]. MSC-EVs share this
MSC property, inducing angioneurogenesis as we have shown
and as was also demonstrated previously [32]. The precise mechanisms underlying stimulation of angioneurogenesis due to
grafted stem cells or EVs are still elusive. Yet, transplanted cells,
such as neural progenitor cells, have been described to modify
the post-stroke microenvironment in terms of growth factor
contents and enhanced post-stroke neurogenesis [22]. In this
sense, EVs might have similar effects that might depend on
their content’s composition. Defining the precise composition
of EVs was, however, beyond the scope of the present study. It
is unlikely that a single EV mediator such as growth factors or
microRNAs, which also induce post-stroke neurogenesis per se
[61], is responsible for these effects. Rather, we hypothesized
that a complex interplay between hitherto not fully elucidated
EV contents and host responses are crucially involved in this process. Nevertheless, the shared mechanisms of action reveal the
high similarity of MSC-EVs and MSCs, suggesting that MSC-EVs

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 5. MSC-EVs do not influence acute immune responses at 2 days after ischemia. Absolute counts and relative proportions of peripheral
blood leukocytes and leukocyte subsets at 48 hours after ischemia or sham surgery (n = 8 per condition). Sham-operated mice underwent the
same operation procedure as for ischemia, except for occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. Normal saline (control) or EVs harvested from
supernatants of MSC line I (MSC-EVs I) were i.v. delivered to mice exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion at 24 hours after ischemia; sham
mice received saline injections. (A): Total white blood cell counts were analyzed using a veterinary hematology analyzer. The absolute cell numbers of neutrophils (B), dendritic cells (C), macrophages (D), monocytes (E), and monocyte subsets [B lymphocytes (G), NK cells (H), and T lymphocytes (I)] were determined by flow cytometry. The proportion of inflammatory (Ly6Chigh) and resident (Ly6Cneg) monocytes (E, right) and that
of CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes (I, right) was also calculated. Activation of myeloid cells (monocytes and dendritic cells) (F) and lymphocytes (J)
was evaluated by MHCII and CD69 expression analysis, respectively. Specifications of leukocyte subset identification according to their specific
antigen expression are listed in the supplemental online Table 1 and show in supplemental online Figure 2. Data are mean 6 SD values. p, p , .05
compared with sham surgery. Abbreviations: EVs, extracellular vesicles; MHCII, major histocompatibility class II; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell;
MSC I and MSC II, group I and II of bone marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively; MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines;
NK, natural killer.

1140

MSC-EVs Induce Post-Stroke Regeneration

might represent the therapeutically active component of MSCs.
Recent data have suggested that stimulation of angiogenesis
is critical for MSC-induced postischemic neuroprotection
[62]. It is therefore not surprising that neurological improvement, neuroprotection, and angiogenesis went in line with
each other.
MSCs are called immunologically inert but able to modulate
both peripheral and cerebral immune responses. Immunological
responses rather than direct intercalation of MSCs with brain structures have been made responsible for restorative effects of MSCs
[63, 64]. Thus, injection of conditioned media obtained from MSC
cultures suppressed inflammation as efficiently as MSCs in models
of kidney and myocardial injury [24, 65]. Based on these observations, we hypothesized that MSC-EV delivery modulated the postischemic peripheral and cerebral immune responses. Stroke is
followed by a phase of immunosuppression [66] that predisposes
the body to infection and neurological deterioration [51, 53].
With this knowledge, we suspected that the anti-inflammatory
actions of MSC-EVs might have aggravated postischemic

©AlphaMed Press 2015

immunodeficiency, which might have led to detrimental stroke
outcomes. In contrast to this assumption, our results showed that
MSC-EVs did not exacerbate, but attenuated, postischemic lymphopenia at 6 DPI, which is a hallmark of post-stroke immunosuppression [51, 52]. Thus, the total numbers of B cells, NK cells, and
T cells were consistently elevated by EV delivery (i.e., to levels
very similar to those of the sham-operated mice).
Concomitant with the normalization of B cells, NK cells, and
T cells, a deactivation of DCs and residual T cells, which were activated in normal saline-treated stroke mice, was observed in the
MSC-EV-treated stroke mice. Although an increased activation of
immune effector cells might initially appear to be contradictory to
the phenomenon of postischemic immunosuppression, a similar
coincidence has been observed in human stroke patients [67]. As
such, these data are consistent with our previous observation that
MSC-EVs reversed T-cell responses derived from a steroid refractory GvHD patient toward allogeneic target cells, independent of
whether they were treated with MSC-EVs in vitro or were taken
from the patient during MSC-EV therapy [42].
S TEM C ELLS T RANSLATIONAL M EDICINE

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 6. MSC-EVs reverse postischemic lymphopenia at 6 days after ischemia. Absolute counts and relative proportions of peripheral blood
leukocytes and leukocyte subsets at 6 days after ischemia or after sham surgery (n = 12 per condition). Sham-operated mice underwent the same
operation procedure as for ischemia except for occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. Normal saline (control) or EVs harvested from supernatants of MSC line I (MSC-EVs I) were i.v. delivered to mice exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) at 1, 3, and 5 days after ischemia; sham mice received saline injections. (A): Total white blood cell counts were analyzed using a veterinary hematology analyzer. Absolute
cell numbers of neutrophils (B), dendritic cells (C), macrophages (D), monocytes (E), B lymphocytes (G), NK cells (H), and T lymphocytes (I) were
determined by flow cytometry. The proportion of inflammatory (Ly6Chigh) and resident (Ly6Cneg) monocytes (E, right) and of CD4 and CD8 T
lymphocytes (I, right) was also calculated. Activation of myeloid cells (monocytes and dendritic cells) (F) and lymphocytes (J) was evaluated by
MHCII and CD69 expression analysis, respectively. Specifications of leukocyte subset identification according to their specific antigen expression
are listed in supplemental online Table 1 and show in in supplemental online Figure 2. Data are mean 6 SD. p, p , .05 or ppp, p , .001 compared
with sham surgery or MCAO. Abbreviations: EVs, extracellular vesicles; MHCII, major histocompatibility class II; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell;
MSC I and MSC II, group I and II of bone marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively; MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines;
NK, natural killer.

Doeppner, Herz, Görgens et al.

1141

Although recent studies have documented that MSC transplantation dampens cerebral inflammation [59, 68], we did
not observe differences in stroke-induced brain immune cell
infiltrates after EV delivery. This is in contrast to previous studies, in which MSCs were transplanted in stroke mice, resulting in
reduced brain leukocyte infiltration [69]. However, in the absence of proinflammatory cytokines and sufficient nitric oxide
production, MSCs instead have immune-stimulatory effects
(e.g., through stimulation of T-cell proliferation) [70]. Because
the EV fractions used in the present study were derived from
nonstimulated MSC cultures, it is conceivable that their antiinflammatory action was too low to prevent brain leukocyte
infiltration.

CONCLUSION
Because of the desirable translation of MSC-EVs from bench to
bedside and considering the clinical trials with MSC-EVs in human
stroke patients, additional studies are urgently required to define
whether MSC-EVs (and in EVs in general) are able to enter the
brain. If (as we have postulated) EVs indeed mediate their restorative action by equilibrating peripheral immune responses, blood
measurements might provide an elegant strategy for monitoring
the therapeutic responses to MSC-EVs. We predict that with

www.StemCellsTM.com

stringent proof-of-concept strategies, it might be possible to
translate MSC-EV therapy from rodents to human patients, because MSC-EVs are more suitable for clinical application than is
transplantation of (undifferentiated) stem cells. After a myriad of study failures, the stroke field might greatly benefit from
a clinically applicable therapeutic strategy, for which the scientific
community has eagerly waited.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Volkswagen Foundation (to T.R.D.,
D.M.H., and B.G.), the Forschungsförderung Essen program of the
Medical Faculty of the University of Duisburg-Essen (to T.R.D.),
and the German Research Council (Grants HE3173/2-2 and
HE3173/3-1 to D.M.H.). We thank Britta Kaltwasser for excellent technical assistance and Dr. Lambros Kordelas and the
Stem Cell Department of the Red Cross Blood Service West
for kindly providing bone marrow samples to raise mesenchymal stem cells.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
T.R.D.: conception/design, financial support, collection and/or
assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 7. Cerebral immune cell infiltration is not modulated by MSC-EVs. (A): Density of leukocytes in the ischemic striatum at 2 and 6 days after
ischemia (DPI) evaluated by CD45 immunohistochemistry (n = 8 per condition). Total number of CD45+ leukocytes (B), neutrophils (C), dendritic cells
(D), macrophages (E), monocytes (F), and lymphocytes (H) in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemisphere at 6 DPI as determined by flow cytometry.
Activation of myeloid subsets (G) and lymphocyte subsets (I) as determined by MHCII and CD69 expression analysis in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemisphere at 6 DPI using flow cytometry in mice exposed to middle cerebral artery occlusion, followed by i.v. delivery of normal saline
(control) or EVs harvested from supernatants of MSC line I (MSC-EVs I) at 1, 3, and 5 DPI. In the proportion of monocyte (F) and T lymphocyte (H)
subsets was also measured. Three independent flow cytometry experiments were performed, for each of which four brain hemispheres per group
were pooled. Data are mean 6 SD. p, p , .05 or pp, p , .01 compared with the contralateral hemisphere. Abbreviations: contra, contralateral; EVs,
extracellular vesicles; ispi, ipsilateral; MHCII, major histocompatibility class II; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; MSC I and MSC II, group I and II of bone
marrow-derived MSC lines, respectively; MSC-EVs I and MSC-EVs II, supernatants of the two MSC lines; NK, natural killer.

MSC-EVs Induce Post-Stroke Regeneration

1142

writing, final approval of manuscript; J.H.: conception/design,
collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final approval of manuscript; A.G.:
collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, final approval of manuscript; J.S., A.-K.L., S.R., and K.d.M.:
collection and/or assembly of data, final approval of manuscript; P.A.H.: administrative support, manuscript writing, final
approval of manuscript; B.G.: conception/design, financial support, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, final
approval of manuscript; D.M.H.: conception/design, financial

REFERENCES

©AlphaMed Press 2015

DISCLOSURE OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
P.A.H. has a patent pending for “Use of preparations comprising exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
in the prevention and therapy of inflammatory conditions”
(EP000002687219A1). The other authors indicated no potential conflicts of interest.

16 Doeppner TR, Hermann DM. Stem cellbased treatments against stroke: Observations
from human proof-of-concept studies and
considerations regarding clinical applicability.
Front Cell Neurosci 2014;8:357.
17 Honmou O, Houkin K, Matsunaga T et al.
Intravenous administration of auto serumexpanded autologous mesenchymal stem cells
in stroke. Brain 2011;134:1790–1807.
18 Savitz SI, Misra V, Kasam M et al. Intravenous autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells
for ischemic stroke. Ann Neurol 2011;70:59–69.
19 England T, Martin P, Bath PM. Stem cells
for enhancing recovery after stroke: A review.
Int J Stroke 2009;4:101–110.
20 Hermann DM, Chopp M. Promoting brain
remodelling and plasticity for stroke recovery:
Therapeutic promise and potential pitfalls of clinical translation. Lancet Neurol 2012;11:369–380.
21 Yoo SW, Kim SS, Lee SY et al. Mesenchymal stem cells promote proliferation of endogenous neural stem cells and survival of newborn
cells in a rat stroke model. Exp Mol Med 2008;
40:387–397.
22 Doeppner TR, Ewert TA, Tönges L et al.
Transduction of neural precursor cells with
TAT-heat shock protein 70 chaperone: Therapeutic potential against ischemic stroke after
intrastriatal and systemic transplantation. STEM
CELLS 2012;30:1297–1310.
23 Lee RH, Pulin AA, Seo MJ et al. Intravenous hMSCs improve myocardial infarction in
mice because cells embolized in lung are activated to secrete the anti-inflammatory protein
TSG-6. Cell Stem Cell 2009;5:54–63.
24 Timmers L, Lim SK, Arslan F et al. Reduction of myocardial infarct size by human mesenchymal stem cell conditioned medium. Stem
Cell Res (Amst) 2007;1:129–137.
25 Hsieh JY, Wang HW, Chang SJ et al. Mesenchymal stem cells from human umbilical cord
express preferentially secreted factors related
to neuroprotection, neurogenesis, and angiogenesis. PLoS One 2013;8:e72604.
26 Scheibe F, Klein O, Klose J et al. Mesenchymal stromal cells rescue cortical neurons
from apoptotic cell death in an in vitro model
of cerebral ischemia. Cell Mol Neurobiol 2012;
32:567–576.
27 Tate CC, Fonck C, McGrogan M et al. Human mesenchymal stromal cells and their derivative, SB623 cells, rescue neural cells via trophic
support following in vitro ischemia. Cell Transplant 2010;19:973–984.
28 Cantaluppi V, Gatti S, Medica D et al.
Microvesicles derived from endothelial progenitor cells protect the kidney from ischemiareperfusion injury by microRNA-dependent
reprogramming of resident renal cells. Kidney
Int 2012;82:412–427.

29 Gatti S, Bruno S, Deregibus MC et al. Microvesicles derived from human adult mesenchymal
stem cells protect against ischaemia-reperfusioninduced acute and chronic kidney injury. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2011;26:1474–1483.
30 Lai RC, Arslan F, Lee MM et al. Exosome
secreted by MSC reduces myocardial ischemia/
reperfusion injury. Stem Cell Res (Amst) 2010;4:
214–222.
31 Li T, Yan Y, Wang B et al. Exosomes derived from human umbilical cord mesenchymal
stem cells alleviate liver fibrosis. Stem Cells Dev
2013;22:845–854.
32 Xin H, Li Y, Cui Y et al. Systemic administration of exosomes released from mesenchymal stromal cells promote functional recovery
and neurovascular plasticity after stroke in rats.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2013;33:1711–1715.
33 Witwer KW, Buzás EI, Bemis LT et al. Standardization of sample collection, isolation and
analysis methods in extracellular vesicle research. J Extracell Vesicles 2013;2:2.
34 Thery C, Amigorena S, Raposo G et al. Isolation and characterization of exosomes from
cell culture supernatants and biological fluids.
Curr Protoc Cell Biol 2006;Chapter 3:Unit 3.22.
35 Valadi H, Ekström K, Bossios A et al.
Exosome-mediated transfer of mRNAs and
microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells. Nat Cell Biol 2007;9:
654–659.
36 Ludwig AK, Giebel B. Exosomes: Small
vesicles participating in intercellular communication. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 2012;44:11–15.
37 Mitkari B, Kerkelä E, Nystedt J et al. Intraarterial infusion of human bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells results in transient localization in the brain after cerebral ischemia in rats.
Exp Neurol 2013;239:158–162.
38 Janowski M, Lyczek A, Engels C et al. Cell
size and velocity of injection are major determinants of the safety of intracarotid stem cell
transplantation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2013;33:921–927.
39 Blum B, Benvenisty N. The tumorigenicity
of human embryonic stem cells. Adv Cancer Res
2008;100:133–158.
40 Blum B, Benvenisty N. The tumorigenicity
of diploid and aneuploid human pluripotent
stem cells. Cell Cycle 2009;8:3822–3830.
41 Dlouhy BJ, Awe O, Rao RC et al. Autograftderived spinal cord mass following olfactory mucosal cell transplantation in a spinal cord injury patient:
Case report. J Neurosurg Spine 2014;21:618–622.
42 Kordelas L, Rebmann V, Ludwig AK et al.
MSC-derived exosomes: A novel tool to treat
therapy-refractory graft-versus-host disease.
Leukemia 2014;28:970–973.
43 Le Blanc K, Rasmusson I, Sundberg B et al.
Treatment of severe acute graft-versus-host

S TEM C ELLS T RANSLATIONAL M EDICINE

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

1 Bacigaluppi M, Pluchino S, PeruzzottiJametti L et al. Delayed post-ischaemic neuroprotection following systemic neural stem cell
transplantation involves multiple mechanisms.
Brain 2009;132:2239–2251.
2 Banerjee S, Williamson DA, Habib N et al.
The potential benefit of stem cell therapy after
stroke: An update. Vasc Health Risk Manag
2012;8:569–580.
3 Chen J, Li Y, Wang L et al. Therapeutic benefit of intravenous administration of bone marrow stromal cells after cerebral ischemia in rats.
Stroke 2001;32:1005–1011.
4 Dharmasaroja P. Bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stem cells for the treatment of ischemic stroke. J Clin Neurosci 2009;16:12–20.
5 Doeppner TR, Kaltwasser B, Teli MK et al.
Effects of acute versus post-acute systemic delivery of neural progenitor cells on neurological recovery and brain remodeling after focal cerebral
ischemia in mice. Cell Death Dis 2014;5:e1386.
6 Leong WK, Henshall TL, Arthur A et al. Human adult dental pulp stem cells enhance poststroke functional recovery through non-neural
replacement mechanisms. STEM CELLS TRANSLATIONAL MEDICINE 2012;1:177–187.
7 Schwarting S, Litwak S, Hao W et al. Hematopoietic stem cells reduce postischemic inflammation and ameliorate ischemic brain
injury. Stroke 2008;39:2867–2875.
8 Shen LH, Li Y, Chen J et al. One-year followup after bone marrow stromal cell treatment in
middle-aged female rats with stroke. Stroke
2007;38:2150–2156.
9 Shen LH, Li Y, Chen J et al. Therapeutic benefit of bone marrow stromal cells administered
1 month after stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2007;27:6–13.
10 Shen LH, Li Y, Chen J et al. Intracarotid
transplantation of bone marrow stromal cells
increases axon-myelin remodeling after stroke.
Neuroscience 2006;137:393–399.
11 Ukai R, Honmou O, Harada K et al. Mesenchymal stem cells derived from peripheral
blood protects against ischemia. J Neurotrauma
2007;24:508–520.
12 Zheng W, Honmou O, Miyata K et al. Therapeutic benefits of human mesenchymal stem
cells derived from bone marrow after global cerebral ischemia. Brain Res 2010;1310:8–16.
13 Caplan AI. Adult mesenchymal stem cells
for tissue engineering versus regenerative medicine. J Cell Physiol 2007;213:341–347.
14 Bhasin A, Srivastava MV, Kumaran SS et al.
Autologous mesenchymal stem cells in chronic
stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis Extra 2011;1:93–104.
15 Bhasin A, Srivastava MV, Mohanty S et al.
Stem cell therapy: A clinical trial of stroke. Clin
Neurol Neurosurg 2013;115:1003–1008.

support, administrative support, manuscript writing, final approval of manuscript.

Doeppner, Herz, Görgens et al.

53 Meisel C, Schwab JM, Prass K et al. Central nervous system injury-induced immune deficiency syndrome. Nat Rev Neurosci 2005;6:
775–786.
54 Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K
et al. Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral
immune cell accumulation in stroke. Stroke
2009;40:1849–1857.
55 Chung DJ, Choi CB, Lee SH et al. Intraarterially delivered human umbilical cord bloodderived mesenchymal stem cells in canine
cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Res 2009;87:
3554–3567.
56 Honma T, Honmou O, Iihoshi S et al. Intravenous infusion of immortalized human mesenchymal stem cells protects against injury in
a cerebral ischemia model in adult rat. Exp Neurol 2006;199:56–66.
57 Leu S, Lin YC, Yuen CM et al. Adiposederived mesenchymal stem cells markedly
attenuate brain infarct size and improve neurological function in rats. J Transl Med 2010;
8:63.
58 Bliss TM, Andres RH, Steinberg GK. Optimizing the success of cell transplantation therapy for stroke. Neurobiol Dis 2010;37:275–283.
59 Doeppner TR, Hermann DM. Mesenchymal stem cells in the treatment of ischemic
stroke: Progress and possibilities. Stem Cells
Cloning 2010;3:157–163.
60 Onda T, Honmou O, Harada K et al. Therapeutic benefits by human mesenchymal stem
cells (hMSCs) and Ang-1 gene-modified hMSCs
after cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 2008;28:329–340.
61 Doeppner TR, Doehring M, Bretschneider E
et al. MicroRNA-124 protects against focal
cerebral ischemia via mechanisms involving

Usp14-dependent REST degradation. Acta Neuropathol 2013;126:251–265.
62 Komatsu K, Honmou O, Suzuki J et al.
Therapeutic time window of mesenchymal
stem cells derived from bone marrow after cerebral ischemia. Brain Res 2010;1334:84–92.
63 Caplan AI, Correa D. The MSC: An injury
drugstore. Cell Stem Cell 2011;9:11–15.
64 Pittenger M. Sleuthing the source of regeneration by MSCs. Cell Stem Cell 2009;5:
8–10.
65 van Koppen A, Joles JA, van Balkom BW
et al. Human embryonic mesenchymal stem
cell-derived conditioned medium rescues kidney function in rats with established chronic
kidney disease. PLoS One 2012;7:e38746.
66 Famakin BM. The immune response to
acute focal cerebral ischemia and associated
post-stroke immunodepression: A focused review. Aging Dis 2014;5:307–326.
67 Vogelgesang A, May VE, Grunwald U
et al. Functional status of peripheral blood
T-cells in ischemic stroke patients. PLoS One
2010;5:e8718.
68 Sheikh AM, Nagai A, Wakabayashi K et al.
Mesenchymal stem cell transplantation modulates neuroinflammation in focal cerebral ischemia: Contribution of fractalkine and IL-5.
Neurobiol Dis 2011;41:717–724.
69 Yoo SW, Chang DY, Lee HS et al. Immune
following suppression mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation in the ischemic brain is
mediated by TGF-b Neurobiol Dis 2013;58:
249–257.
70 Li W, Ren G, Huang Y et al. Mesenchymal
stem cells: A double-edged sword in regulating
immune responses. Cell Death Differ 2012;19:
1505–1513.

See www.StemCellsTM.com for supporting information available online.

www.StemCellsTM.com

©AlphaMed Press 2015

Downloaded from http://stemcellstm.alphamedpress.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

disease with third party haploidentical mesenchymal stem cells. Lancet 2004;363:1439–1441.
44 Sokolova V, Ludwig AK, Hornung S et al.
Characterisation of exosomes derived from human cells by nanoparticle tracking analysis and
scanning electron microscopy. Colloids Surf B
Biointerfaces 2011;87:146–150.
45 Doeppner TR, Kaltwasser B, Bähr M et al.
Effects of neural progenitor cells on post-stroke
neurological impairment—A detailed and comprehensive analysis of behavioral tests. Front
Cell Neurosci 2014;8:338.
46 Lin TN, He YY, Wu G et al. Effect of brain
edema on infarct volume in a focal cerebral ischemia model in rats. Stroke 1993;24:117–121.
47 Herz J, Hagen SI, Bergmüller E et al. Exacerbation of ischemic brain injury in hypercholesterolemic mice is associated with pronounced
changes in peripheral and cerebral immune responses. Neurobiol Dis 2014;62:456–468.
48 Macrez R, Ali C, Toutirais O et al. Stroke
and the immune system: From pathophysiology
to new therapeutic strategies. Lancet Neurol
2011;10:471–480.
49 Uccelli A, Moretta L, Pistoia V. Mesenchymal stem cells in health and disease. Nat Rev
Immunol 2008;8:726–736.
50 Offner H, Subramanian S, Parker SM et al.
Experimental stroke induces massive, rapid activation of the peripheral immune system. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006;26:654–665.
51 Dirnagl U, Klehmet J, Braun JS et al.
Stroke-induced immunodepression: Experimental evidence and clinical relevance. Stroke 2007;
38(Suppl):770–773.
52 Meisel C, Meisel A. Suppressing immunosuppression after stroke. N Engl J Med 2011;
365:2134–2136.

1143

