Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333
DOI 10.1007/s12028-013-9923-1

REVIEW ARTICLE

Glibenclamide in Cerebral Ischemia and Stroke
J. Marc Simard • Kevin N. Sheth • W. Taylor Kimberly •
Barney J. Stern • Gregory J. del Zoppo • Sven Jacobson •
Volodymyr Gerzanich

Published online: 17 October 2013
Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract The sulfonylurea receptor 1 (Sur1)–transient
receptor potential 4 (Trpm4) channel is an important
molecular element in focal cerebral ischemia. The channel is
upregulated in all cells of the neurovascular unit following
ischemia, and is linked to microvascular dysfunction that
manifests as edema formation and secondary hemorrhage,
which cause brain swelling. Activation of the channel is a
major molecular mechanism of cytotoxic edema and
‘‘accidental necrotic cell death.’’ Blockade of Sur1 using
glibenclamide has been studied in different types of rat
models of stroke: (i) in conventional non-lethal models
(thromboembolic, 1–2 h temporary, or permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion), glibenclamide reduces brain
swelling and infarct volume and improves neurological
function; (ii) in lethal models of malignant cerebral edema,
glibenclamide reduces edema, brain swelling, and mortality;

(iii) in models with rtPA, glibenclamide reduces swelling,
hemorrhagic transformation, and death. Retrospective
studies of diabetic patients who present with stroke have
shown that those whose diabetes is managed with a sulfonylurea drug and who are maintained on the sulfonylurea
drug during hospitalization for stroke have better outcomes
at discharge and are less likely to suffer hemorrhagic
transformation. Here, we provide a comprehensive review
of the basic science, preclinical experiments, and retrospective clinical studies on glibenclamide in focal cerebral
ischemia and stroke. We also compare the preclinical work
in stroke models to the updated recommendations of the
Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR).
The findings reviewed here provide a strong foundation for a
translational research program to study glibenclamide in
patients with ischemic stroke.

J. M. Simard (&)  V. Gerzanich
Department of Neurosurgery, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, 22 S. Greene St., Suite S12D, Baltimore,
MD 21201-1595, USA
e-mail: msimard@smail.umaryland.edu

B. J. Stern
Department of Neurology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

J. M. Simard
Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
J. M. Simard
Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

G. J. del Zoppo
Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA
G. J. del Zoppo
Department of Neurology, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA
S. Jacobson
Remedy Pharmaceuticals, Inc., New York, NY, USA

K. N. Sheth
Division of Neurocritical Care, Department of Neurology,
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
W. T. Kimberly
Division of Neurocritical Care and Emergency Neurology,
Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

123

320

Keywords Cerebral ischemia  Stroke  Sur1 
Sur1–Trpm4 channel  Glibenclamide  RP-1127 
Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR)

Introduction
Stroke accounts for 5.5 million deaths each year [1, 2].
‘‘Malignant infarction’’ occurs in 10–12 % of stroke victims, 70,000 patients per year in the USA alone [3], and is
characterized by the formation of rapidly accumulating
cerebral edema. It is the syndrome of a large stroke causing
progressive edema and tissue swelling that compromises
arterial inflow to surrounding tissue, culminating in further
ischemic damage, enlargement of the infarct, brain herniation, and death. The prognosis for these patients is poor,
with case fatality rates as high as 60–80 % [3, 4].
The multidecade-long effort to identify pharmacotherapeutic targets to reduce death and disability after ischemic
stroke has yet to succeed. Recombinant tissue plasminogen
activator (rtPA) currently is the only medication approved
by national regulatory agencies for use in acute ischemic
stroke, but for many reasons it is used in <20 % of stroke
victims in developed countries [5–8].
Despite the great morbidity and mortality that are a
direct consequence of brain swelling following stroke,

Fig. 1 Schematic diagrams of the KATP (Sur1–Kir6.2) and the Sur1–
Trpm4 channels. The hetero-octameric structure comprised of 4 Sur1
subunits and 4 Kir6.2 subunits depicted for KATP is widely accepted.
The structure depicted for the Sur1–Trpm4 channel is hypothesized
by analogy. Also shown are the principal physiological actions of the
two channels when they are activated by ATP depletion: (i) outward

123

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

novel approaches for the prevention of cerebral edema are
lacking. Current practice for treating brain swelling is
based on unproven, largely reactive drug interventions such
as mannitol and hypertonic saline, and mechanical interventions such as decompressive craniectomy. Treatments
to prevent swelling are lacking even though, from a
physiological and clinical perspective, preventing swelling
is preferable to decompressing the already swollen brain.
Sulfonylurea receptor 1 (Sur1), which is encoded by
Abcc8, serves as the regulatory subunit for two distinct
ion channels. Sur1 co-associates with the ATP-sensitive
K+ channel, Kir6.2, with which it forms KATP channels
in pancreatic b cells and neurons [9–11]. Sur1 also coassociates with the ATP- and calcium-sensitive nonselective cation channel, transient receptor potential
melastatin 4 (Trpm4), with which it forms Sur1–Trpm4
channels [12] (previously named Sur1-regulated NCCa-ATP
channels). Both KATP (Sur1–Kir6.2) and Sur1–Trpm4
channels are regulated by Sur1, but the two have
opposite functional effects—opening of KATP channels
hyperpolarizes the cell [13], whereas opening of Sur1–
Trpm4 channels depolarizes the cell (Fig. 1) which, if
unchecked, results in cytotoxic edema and necrotic cell
death [14, 15].
Sur1 is transcriptionally upregulated in neurons, astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes, and microvascular endothelial cells after

flux of K+ via the K+-selective pore-forming subunit, Kir6.2,
resulting in hyperpolarization with the KATP channel; (ii) inward
flux of Na+ via Trpm4, resulting in depolarization with the Sur1–
Trpm4 channel. Adapted from Simard et al. [14]

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

focal ischemia in animal models [16, 17] and humans [18].
Upregulation of Sur1 is paralleled by upregulation of Trpm4
[19], and is associated with expression of Sur1–Trpm4 channels [16].
Sur1 contains binding sites for therapeutic sulfonylurea
drugs and related compounds. Drugs such as glibenclamide
(US adopted name, glyburide) and repaglinide bind with
nanomolar or subnanomolar affinity, and are potent
inhibitors of Sur1-regulated channel activity. Sur1 is the
target of sulfonylurea drugs used to treat diabetes mellitus
type 2 (DM-2), neonatal diabetes, and some forms of
congenital hyperinsulinism [11]. Growing evidence from
animal models and retrospective human studies shows that
inhibition of Sur1 with glibenclamide may have important
therapeutic effects in focal cerebral ischemia.

Sur1 and ‘‘Accidental Necrotic Cell Death’’
Activation of the Sur1–Trpm4 channel is a major molecular
mechanism of ‘‘accidental necrotic cell death’’ in the CNS
[15, 16, 20]. The other principal mechanism, NMDAreceptor-mediated excitotoxicity, is specific to neurons,
whereas the mechanism mediated by the Sur1–Trpm4
channel involves all members of the neurovascular unit,
including neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and endothelial cells. ‘‘Accidental’’ cell death is substantially
different from ‘‘programmed’’ cell death (apoptosis,
autophagy, and necroptosis) [15]. The designation programmed implies that a specific molecular sequence is
initiated by an identified stimulus, with the explicit purpose
of causing cell death. By contrast, accidental implies that
molecular machinery that normally serves a role unrelated to
death is inadvertently transformed into a cell executioner.
In stroke, the overwhelming form of cell death is not programmed, but is accidental necrosis, due to factors external to
the cell or tissue. Transcriptional upregulation of the Sur1–
Trpm4 channel in CNS injury is not directed to inducing cell
death. As reviewed elsewhere [12, 14], the normal function of
the channel is to protect against a pathological rise in intracellular calcium, one of the hallmarks of CNS injury [21, 22].
However, because Sur1–Trpm4 channels also are sensitive to
the intracellular concentration of ATP, extreme depletion of
ATP, as occurs in stroke, can result in persistent activation of
the channel. Unchecked channel opening, in turn, leads to
persistent sodium influx, resulting in oncotic cell swelling
(cytotoxic edema) and accidental necrotic cell death [15].

Sur1 in CNS Ischemia
Sur1 is constitutively expressed in some but not all neurons of the CNS, where it forms KATP channels

321

exclusively [23, 24]. Sur1 normally is absent in oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, endothelium, and many neurons
[25]. The Sur1–Trpm4 channel is not expressed in uninjured tissues [12].
Animal Models of Stroke
Sur1 is upregulated progressively during several hours after
the onset of ischemia. Following permanent mechanical
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) in the rat, 3 h are
required before Abcc8 mRNA is increased 2.5-fold, and 8 h
are required before Sur1 protein is increased 2.5-fold [16].
In a model with 105 min of mechanical MCAo followed by
1 h of reperfusion, upregulation of Sur1 is observed only in
microvascular endothelial cells [26]. After 3 h of reperfusion, upregulation becomes evident in neurons [26]. By
24 h, Sur1 is upregulated in all members of the neurovascular unit in the penumbra, including neurons, astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes and endothelium, whereas Sur1 expression is undetectable in the necrotic core [16, 17]. In a
model with 4.5 h ischemia followed by a 30-min infusion
of rtPA, Sur1 upregulation after infusion is apparent, but it
increases 7- to 11-fold over the subsequent 19 h, especially
in watershed regions [27]. Expression of Sur1 protein in
neurons and endothelial cells after ischemia has been corroborated by in situ hybridization for Abcc8 mRNA [16,
17]. In cerebral ischemia, transcriptional upregulation of
Sur1 takes place without upregulation of the KATP channel
protein Kir6.2 or its corresponding mRNA [16]. However,
cerebral ischemia is associated with upregulation of Trpm4
and its mRNA [19].
Cell Culture
Sur1 also is upregulated in cultured cells under conditions
that simulate injury. Exposing cultures of brain microvascular endothelial cells, both primary cultures and bEnd.3
cells, to hypoxia or TNFa results in upregulation of Sur1
protein and Abcc8 mRNA [26, 28, 29].
Human Stroke
A comprehensive analysis of human brain autopsy specimens showed that Sur1 is transcriptionally upregulated in
neurons, astrocytes, and vascular endothelial cells in
patients with ischemic stroke [18], corroborating previous
case reports [30]. Postmortem specimens obtained from 15
patients within the first 31 days after focal infarcts were
examined. Significantly elevated levels of Sur1 were
detected in all cases, with three distinct temporal patterns
of expression: (i) neurons and endothelium showed the
greatest elevation during the first week, after which levels
declined; (ii) astrocytes and microglia/macrophages

123

322

showed progressive increases during the first 31 days; (iii)
neutrophils near the infarct showed persistently elevated
degrees of immunoreactivity that did not change with time.
Upregulation of Sur1 was corroborated using in situ
hybridization for Abcc8 mRNA.

Targeting Sur1 in CNS Ischemia
The pharmacological properties of Sur1 in Sur1–Trpm4
channels are indistinguishable from those of Sur1 in KATP
(Sur1–Kir6.2) channels [31]. The Sur1–Trpm4 channel is
blocked by first and second generation sulfonylureas, tolbutamide (EC50, 16.1 lM at pH 7.4), and glibenclamide
(EC50, 48 nM at pH 7.4) [31]. Blockade by sulfonylurea
drugs is due to a prolongation of, and an increase in the
probability of long closed states of the channel, with no
effect on open channel dwell times or channel conductance. The inhibitory effect of glibenclamide on channel
opening is prevented by an antibody directed against one of
the cytoplasmic loops of Sur1 [31]. The potency of
blockade by glibenclamide is increased 8-fold at pH 6.8
(EC50, 6 nM), compared to pH 7.4, consistent with a weak
acid needing to enter the lipid phase of the membrane to
cause blockade [16, 32], paralleling observations with
KATP channels [33].
Normally, glibenclamide and other sulfonylureas do not
accumulate in the brain in physiologically relevant concentrations [34], accounting for the observation that,
despite decades of clinical use in diabetic patients, there
are no reports of side effects involving the CNS that are
attributable directly to sulfonylureas (as distinct from CNS
effects of hypoglycemia), even though the brain contains
neurons that express KATP channels [14, 23]. However,
penetration of glibenclamide into the brain is enhanced
after an ischemic insult. With ischemia, lactic acidosis of
the tissues creates a relatively low pH environment [35].
Glibenclamide is a weak acid and, as such, its lipid solubility, and therefore its ability to penetrate the blood–brain
barrier (BBB), is enhanced at low pH. This factor, combined with dysfunction of the BBB that also occurs with an
ischemic insult, results in glibenclamide being ‘‘selectively’’ taken up by ischemic tissues while being excluded
from normal CNS tissues. Studies using the fluorescent
BODIPY-glibenclamide (constant infusion, 75 ng/h) [16],
as well as [3H]glibenclamide (single injection, 100 lCi IP;
specific activity not specified) [36], have shown that
glibenclamide is undetectable in normal brain but accumulates preferentially in the ischemic brain. As a result,
relatively low doses of drug can be used to obtain a
favorable therapeutic effect, while minimally affecting
insulin secretion in the pancreas [14].

123

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

Blockade of Sur1 in Rat Models of Stroke
Focal ischemic injury involving the brain is associated with
progressive microvascular dysfunction [37, 38], which is
characterized initially by the formation of ionic edema and
subsequently by the formation of vasogenic edema. Edema
fluid that accumulates in the parenchyma when the tight
junctions of the BBB are intact is largely devoid of protein
but is rich in ions, and hence is called ionic edema. When
the tight junctions of the BBB become disrupted, the
edema fluid that accumulates is essentially a plasma filtrate, and is called vasogenic edema. Microvascular
dysfunction may evolve into the catastrophic structural
failure of capillaries. The structural failure of microvessels
can lead to isolated microscopic (petechial) hemorrhages,
or in the worst cases, to the formation of a parenchymal
hematoma. Ionic and vasogenic edema, as well as hemorrhage, add mass to the brain that causes tissue swelling.
Swollen tissues can compromise adjacent tissues and
worsen the original insult. If severe, as in malignant cerebral edema following a large stroke, death of the organism
may ensue.
The molecular events responsible for these various forms
of microvascular dysfunction are complex, but they include
the upregulation of Sur1 and subsequent Sur1-mediated
microvascular dysfunction. Several preclinical studies utilizing a variety of different models of stroke originating
from several independent laboratories have demonstrated
that Sur1 inhibition by glibenclamide reduces adverse secondary manifestations and increases favorable outcomes in
rat models of focal cerebral ischemia.

Conventional Non-lethal Rat Models of Stroke
The effects of glibenclamide have been studied in three
conventional non-lethal rat models of ischemic stroke
(Table 1): thromboembolic [16, 39], temporary MCAo
(tMCAo) [36, 39, 40], and permanent MCAo (pMCAo)
[39, 41] models.
In a thromboembolic model [16], glibenclamide (no
loading dose; 75 ng/h) was associated with cortical sparing
that was attributed to improved leptomeningeal collateral
blood flow due to reduced mass effect from edema (Fig.
2a–c). In the same model [39], glibenclamide (33 lg/kg
loading dose plus 75 ng/h constant infusion) administered
6 h after the onset of ischemia was associated with 50 %
reduction in lesion volume.
In a tMCAo (60 min) model [36], glibenclamide (0.2
lg/rat IV at 7, 13, and 25 h after onset of ischemia) was
associated with beneficial effects on neuroscores, on
necrotic volume and on neuronal preservation at 3 days,
including reduced subcortical (ventral pallidum) necrosis,

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

323

Table 1 Effects of glibenclamide in conventional non-lethal models of stroke
Model (Tx delay)

Na

Effects observed (all effects listed were statistically
significant: 0.001 B P < 0.05)

Thrombo-embolicb (none)

7—9/9

Reduced infarct volume by 53–57 % at 48 h and 7 days, respectively

Thrombo-embolicc (4 and 6 h)

9—5/5

Reduced infarct volume by *50 % at 48 h

60 min MCAOd (7 h)

15—15/15/15

Reduced subcortical (ventral pallidum) necrosis by 55 % at 72 h

Improved laser Doppler flowmetry signals by 51 % at 48 h

Reduced neuronal loss by 30–40 % at 72 h
Reduced pathological calcium deposition by *50 % at 72 h
e

60 min MCAO (7 h)

12—12

Neuronal preservation in striatum and cortex
Improved sensorimotor and cognitive function

105 min MCAOc (1 and 5 h)

11—8/7

Reduced infarct volume by 41 % at 48 h

Permanent MCAOf (none)

9—8

Reduced infarct volume by 26 % at 48 h

Neurogenesis and angiogenesis

Reduced hemispheric swelling by >50 % at 48 h
Improved neuroscores from 6.5 to 4.0, and grip strength from 41 to 61
Permanent MCAOc (4 h)

12—14

Reduced infarct volume by 51 % at 48 h

MCE malignant cerebral edema, rtPA recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
a

N, number of rats per group (numbers on the left, vehicle control; numbers on the right, glibenclamide; multiple series separated by ‘‘/’’)

b

Simard et al. [16]

c

Simard et al. [39]

d

Ortega et al. [36]
Ortega et al. [40]

e
f

Wali et al. [41]

reduced neuronal loss, and reduced pathological calcium
deposition. In another tMCAo (105 min) model [39], glibenclamide (10 lg/kg loading dose plus 200 ng/h constant
infusion) administered at 5.75 h after the onset of ischemia
was associated with 41 % reduction in lesion volumes. In
this study, smaller lesions were associated with less
hemispheric swelling.
In a pMCAo model [41], glibenclamide (10 lg/kg
loading dose plus 200 ng/h constant infusion) administered
shortly after the onset of ischemia, was associated with a
26 % reduction in infarct volume, 50 % reduction in
hemispheric swelling, better neurological severity scores
and improved grip strength. In the same model [39], glibenclamide (33 lg/kg loading dose plus 200 ng/h constant
infusion) administered 4 h after the onset of ischemia was
associated with a 51 % reduction in lesion volume.
In another study with tMCAo (60 min), Ortega et al. [40]
analyzed long-term outcomes with glibenclamide (0.2 lg/
rat IV; *0.6 lg/kg) administered at 7, 13, and 25 h after
onset of ischemia. They observed neuronal preservation, as
in their first paper [36], and they reported significant
improvements in sensorimotor and cognitive functions up to
1 month. In addition, glibenclamide was accompanied by an
increase in BrdU and NeuN labeling in and around the
infarct, consistent with an enhancement in neurogenesis in
the cortex. Also, glibenclamide enhanced angiogenesis in the

cortex and hippocampus, which is a well characterized
hallmark of recovery following ischemic stroke.
Lethal Rat Models of Stroke
The effect of glibenclamide also has been examined in rat
models of malignant infarction/malignant cerebral edema
associated with high mortality rates (Table 2). In a model
that utilized particle embolization in male and female rats
[16], malignant edema was manifested as an increase in brain
tissue water from a normal value of 78–83 % at 8 h, and was
associated with 65 % mortality at 7 days (Fig. 2d). Administration of glibenclamide (no loading dose; 75 ng/h)
beginning shortly after the onset of ischemia decreased tissue
water to 80 % and reduced mortality at 7 days to 24 %.
Another model utilized 6 h tMCAo [17] and was associated
with thrombosis of MCA branches that required up to 2–3 h
to recanalize. Malignant edema was manifested as a 21 %
increase in hemispheric volume and was associated with
67 % mortality at 24 h. Administration of glibenclamide
(10 lg/kg loading dose plus 200 ng/h) at 6 h, at the time of
occluder withdrawal, decreased hemispheric swelling to 8 %
and reduced mortality to 5 %. Using this model, the effect of
glibenclamide was compared to the effect of a large decompressive craniectomy. Both treatments administered at
6 h were equally effective in essentially eliminating

123

324

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

Fig. 2 Glibenclamide reduces infarct volume and mortality in nonlethal and lethal MCA models of stroke. a, b Images of TTC-stained
coronal sections 2 days after thromboembolic MCAo in a rat treated
with saline (a) and another treated with glibenclamide (b), showing
cortical sparing with glibenclamide. c Infarct volumes after thromboembolic MCAo were assessed at 2 or 7 days in three groups,
consisting of 9, 9, and 7 male rats, respectively, treated with either
saline (SAL; 2 days) or glibenclamide (GLIB; 2 and 7 days);
** P < 0.01. d In a malignant cerebral edema model, mortality
was assessed during 7 days in two treatment groups, each consisting
of 19 female and 10 male rats, treated with either saline (open
symbols) or glibenclamide (filled symbols). Mortality at 7 days was
significantly different (P < 0.002); subgroup analyses for sex
showed similar results. Adapted from Simard et al. [16]

mortality. However, neurological function during the subsequent 2 weeks showed that glibenclamide was superior to
decompressive craniectomy. The superior effect of glibenclamide on neurological function was associated with better
tissue (white matter) preservation of the corpus callosum and
of the watershed cortex of the anterior and middle cerebral
arteries, consistent with the aphorism that preventing swelling is preferable to decompressing the already swollen brain.
An important, albeit poorly studied outcome in animal
models of stroke is the general health of the organism.
tMCAo in rats is associated with severe weight loss of
unknown etiology that is not explained by dehydration,
stress, or altered hormonal secretions [42–44]. In the
aformentioned study [17], weight gain quickly resumed its
normal trajectory and endured for the 2 weeks of observation in the rats treated with glibenclamide, but not in
those treated with decompressive craniectomy. Several
reasons potentially could account for this, including better
sparing of cortico-striatal and hypothalamic tissues in the
rats treated with glibenclamide.
Rat Models of Stroke with rtPA
The effect of glibenclamide was examined in a rat model of
malignant cerebral edema involving 4.5 h MCAo plus
administration of rtPA (0.9 mg/kg IV, as in humans) at the
time of occluder withdrawal [27]. Malignant edema was
manifested as 8 and 15 % increases in hemispheric volume

Table 2 Effects of glibenclamide in models of malignant cerebral edema
Model (Tx delay)

Na

MCEb (none)

29—29

Effects observed (all effects listed were statistically significant: 0.001 B P < 0.05)
Reduced mortality from 65 to 24 % at 7 days
Reduced excess brain water by 42 % at 8 h

MCEf (6 h)

21/10—22/10

Reduced mortality from 67 to 5 % at 24 h
Reduced hemispheric swelling from 21 to 8 % at 24 h

MCE+rtPAd (4.5 and 10 h)

51—41/25

Better preservation of watershed cortex and white matter, better neuroscores,
Garcia scores, and the trajectory of weight gain compared to decompressive
craniectomy during 2 weeks post-insult
Reduced mortality from 53 to 17 or 12 % at 48 h (vehicle vs. drug @4.5 or 10 h)
Reduced swelling from 14.7 to 8.1 or 8.8 % at 24 h (same groups)
Improved Garcia scores from 3.8 to 7.6 or 8.4 at 48 h(same groups)

MCE+rtPAe (6 h)

7/9/22—8/13/20

Reduced hemispheric swelling from 26 to 12 % at 24 h
Reduced scores for hemorrhagic transformation from 2.4 to 0.6 at 24 h
Improved neuroscores from 7 to 3 at 2 weeks

MCE malignant cerebral edema, rtPA recombinant tissue plasminogen activator, Tx treatment
a

N, number of rats per group (numbers on the left, vehicle control; numbers on the right, glibenclamide; multiple series separated by ‘‘/’’)

b

Simard et al. [16]

c

Simard et al. [17]

d

Simard et al. [27]

e

Simard et al. [45]

123

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

measured at 10 and 24 h, respectively, and was associated
with 53 % mortality at 48 h. Administration of glibenclamide
(10 lg/kg loading dose plus 200 ng/h) at 4.5 h, at the time of
recanalization and administration of rtPA, decreased hemispheric swelling to 4 and 8 % at 10 and 24 h, respectively,
reduced mortality to 17 %, and yielded significant improvements in neurological function. Administration of
glibenclamide at 10 h after the onset of ischemia (5.5 h after
recanalization plus administration of rtPA), decreased
hemispheric swelling to 8 % at 24 h, reduced 48 h mortality
to 12 %, and yielded significant improvements in neurological function. In these experiments, lesion volumes were not
changed by glibenclamide, consistent with 4.5 h MCAo
producing a maximum ischemic insult. However, examining
the relationship between infarct volume and neurological
function was revealing. In the controls, a steep, highly significant negative correlation was found. By contrast, with
glibenclamide, the association was much less steep and was
not statistically significant, indicating that glibenclamide
essentially dissociated functional outcome from infarct volume, due to the significant reductions in edema and swelling.
The effect of glibenclamide was studied in Wistar and
SHR models of malignant cerebral edema involving 6 h
MCAo plus administration at the time of occluder withdrawal of a dose of rtPA (10 mg/kg IV) that is expected to
be thrombolytic in rats [45]. Malignant edema was manifested as a 26 % increase in hemispheric volume and a high
incidence of hemorrhagic transformation at 24 h. Administration of glibenclamide (10 lg/kg loading dose plus
200 ng/h) at 6 h, at the time of recanalization and administration of rtPA, decreased hemispheric swelling to 12 %
and significantly reduced scores of hemorrhagic transformation. Mortality and functional outcomes were equally
poor in rats without or with treatment with rtPA, with
neurological scores of 7–8 in both groups (8 signifies death,
7 signifies coma). Glibenclamide significantly reduced
mortality and improved neurological scores, both without or
with treatment with rtPA, with scores of 3–4. The best
scores were observed in rats treated with a thrombolytic
dose of rtPA plus glibenclamide. The beneficial effects of
glibenclamide endured for the 2 weeks of observation.

325

The first study involved a model of global ischemia/
reperfusion (15 min/60 min) in Wistar rats [46]. Ischemia/
reperfusion increased myeloperoxidase activity (a marker
of neutrophil activity), lipid peroxides, TNFa and PGE2,
while it decreased glutathione, total antioxidant capacity,
nitric oxide and IL-10 levels in the hippocampus. Glibenclamide (1 mg/kg) pre-treatment prevented all of these
alterations, with neutrophil recruitment reduced by 66 %.
Notably, glibenclamide previously was reported to ameliorate ischemia/reperfusion injury due to neutrophil
recruitment in other organs [47–50].
The second study involved an in vitro model of cerebral
ischemia [hippocampal brain slices subjected to 14 min
oxygen/glucose deprivation (OGD)] [51]. This study found
that glibenclamide (10 lM in the bath) superfused for 30 min
before and during the ‘‘hypoxic’’ period, prevented the
usually irreversible loss of field potentials produced by
14 min OGD. By comparison, no protection was observed
when the ischemic insult was induced in slices treated with
the mitochondrial KATP channel blocker 5-hydroxydecanoate, consistent with glibenclamide acting on plasmalemmal
KATP, not mito-KATP. In this study, glibenclamide also significantly reduced cell loss of CA1 hippocampal pyramidal
neurons.
Conventional thinking suggests that opening KATP
channels should be protective, because the associated cell
hyperpolarization would reduce influx of calcium via
voltage-dependent calcium channels [13]. However, this
hypothesis discounts the fact that voltage-dependent calcium channels undergo voltage-dependent inactivation,
which diminishes the potential harm from prolonged cell
depolarization. In addition, as Nistico et al. [51] point out,
opening of KATP channels might be harmful, if it results in
an excess efflux of potassium that would then have to be
compensated by ATP-consuming sodium–potassium
pumps (Na+/K+-ATPase). Also, hyperpolarization increases the electrochemical driving force for calcium,
increasing its influx via non-voltage-dependent pathways.
Thus, in the setting of ischemia, neuronal depolarization
may be more protective than hyperpolarization [52].
KATP Channels and Microglia

KATP Channels and Neuronal Protection
In acute ischemic injury to the CNS, the principal target of
glibenclamide is the Sur1–Trpm4 channel. However, some
CNS neurons and microglia constitutively express KATP
(Sur1–Kir6.2) channels [23, 24], which also could be
blocked by glibenclamide. Protective effects of glibenclamide in the context of cerebral ischemia have been
reported in two studies in which the effect was unlikely to
be due to Sur1–Trpm4 channels, since there was no time
for transcriptional up-regulation of the channel.

In the two studies by Ortega and colleagues [36, 40] cited
above, as well as in a recent review [53], these authors
proposed that glibenclamide exerts its protective effect in
cerebral ischemia due to modulation of microglial KATP
channels. In culture, they found that BV2 cells (a transformed microglial cell line) exposed to the proinflammatory
stimulus of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus interferon (IFN) c
showed upregulation of the KATP channel subunits, Sur1,
Kir6.1 and Kir6.2, both protein and mRNA. Adding glibenclamide to the medium augmented the reactive

123

326

morphology, the phagocytic capacity and the release of
TNFa [36]. Also, in resting microglia, binding of BODIPYglibenclamide was confined to the perinuclear space
(endoplasmic reticulum), whereas after activation with
LPS+IFNc, BODIPY-glibenclamide labeling was present
in the plasmalemmal membrane [40], suggesting functional
channel localization. Based on these findings, the authors
postulated that protection observed with glibenclamide in
their MCAo model (see above) was due, in part, to increased
microglial phagocytic capacity after microglial KATP
channel inhibition.

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

preconditioning event, a few days before their stroke. In the
retrospective study by Kunte et al. [62], patients were on
sulfonylureas before and after stroke, and if they had a
preconditioning event (TIA) before their stroke, preconditioning should have been blunted if sulfonylurea agents
affect this response. However, analysis directed to this
question revealed no interaction between prior TIA and the
beneficial effect of glibenclamide in non-lacunar stroke
(additional details below).

Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable
Glibenclamide and Ischemic Preconditioning
Ischemic preconditioning is a biological response with an
important adaptive advantage [54]. Preconditioning, i.e.,
the induction of tolerance, is obtained when a subcritical
episode of ischemia activates endogenous protective
mechanisms and thereby renders the brain resistant to a
subsequent, more severe ischemic event [55–57]. Preconditioning is produced not only by subcritical ischemia but
also by several non-ischemic stimuli, including cortical
spreading depression, hypoxia, hyperthermia, and a number of chemical substances such as isoflurane, diazoxide,
adenosine, and others. A considerable body of literature
has addressed this important biological response (reviewed
in [54]). Here, we consider only ischemia-induced preconditioning, due to its relevance to transient ischemic
attacks (TIAs) in humans.
In a rat model, preconditioning induced by 3 min global
ischemia 3 days before 6 min global ischemia was largely
negated by administering glibenclamide (1 lmol *500
lg) intracerebroventricularly 20 min prior to the first
ischemia [58] (This dose is many times greater than what is
administered subcutaneously post-insult to reduce the
effects of focal ischemia/reperfusion). That experiment
recently was revisited using a gerbil model in which the
duration of ischemic depolarization was used to define the
severity of the insults [59]. When equivalent insult severity
was maintained during priming insults, the depolarization
thresholds for ischemic neuronal injury were identical in
vehicle- and glibenclamide-treated animals, and glibenclamide did not affect preconditioning. Doubt about the
potential involvement of Sur1 in ischemic preconditioning
also has arisen from experiments with knock-out mice.
Abcc8-/- mice exhibit normal ischemic preconditioning,
but yet are susceptible to the same augmentation of neurodegeneration by 5-hydroxydecanoate, the selective
blocker of mitoKATP channels, as are wild-type mice [60].
The importance of ischemic preconditioning in human
stroke remains to be clarified [61]. Concern regarding this
phenomenon applies primarily to diabetic patients taking a
sulfonylurea agent who have a TIA, i.e., an ischemic

123

The Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable
(STAIR) was originally undertaken to help address the
translation of animal studies to human clinical trials and to
facilitate successful translation. STAIR provided recommendations in 1999, updated in 2009, for the preclinical
development of acute ischemic stroke treatments [63, 64].
The most recent STAIR recommendations for translational
experiments in stroke are listed below (in italics), along
with comments on how the available preclinical studies on
glibenclamide address these recommendations.
Dose Response
Minimum effective and maximum tolerated dose; a target
concentration; a tissue level of effect identified from animal
histology and behavioral studies; the drug in these ranges
should access the target organ. Effects on infarct volume,
edema, swelling, and neurological function were assessed
in non-lethal models of stroke using loading doses of 0, 3.3,
10, or 33 lg/kg plus a constant infusion dose of 75 or
200 ng/h [16, 39, 41]. In the thromboembolic model, where
loading doses of 3.3 and 33 lg/kg administered at 6 h were
compared directly, the higher loading dose was more
efficacious. Effects on neurological function and on mortality were studied in lethal models of stroke using loading
doses of 0 or 10 lg/kg and constant infusion doses of 75 or
200 ng/h [16, 17]. A clear benefit on mortality was
observed with the higher dose.
Constant infusion doses of 200 and 400 ng/h subcutaneously in rats are devoid of apparent toxicity and yield serum
glucose levels that are within the normal clinical range [16,
28, 29]. The higher infusion dose (400 ng/h) is efficacious in
a model of global cerebral ischemia [65], but has not been
evaluated systematically in focal cerebral ischemia.
Steady-state serum levels of glibenclamide were measured
using liquid chromatography and mass spectroscopy by a
commercial firm (Celerion, Lincoln, NE). Drug levels were
measured 24 h after the start of infusion in rats administered
400 ng/h subcutaneously, a dose twice that used in published
studies on focal ischemia (to improve the fidelity of detecting

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

low serum concentrations). This dosing regimen yielded
steady-state serum levels of glibenclamide of 16 ± 3 ng/mL
(n = 3) (Simard and colleagues, unpublished). These serum
levels are below those observed in humans administered
3 mg/day IV infusion of injectable glibenclamide (RP-1127;
Remedy Pharmaceuticals, Inc.), which is associated with
minimal or no hypoglycemia (additional details below).
Studies using fluorescent BODIPY-glibenclamide
(75 ng/h subcutaneously) [16] as well as [3H]glibenclamide (100 lCi IP; specific activity not specified) [36] in
animals with cerebral infarctions have shown that glibenclamide reaches and accumulates in its intended target. The
doses of drug found to accumulate in the target were protective, but these doses were below those found in other
studies to have more robust protective effects (see above).
Therapeutic Window
The [time] window for neuroprotection. Beneficial effects
on infarct volume have been observed in non-lethal models
of stroke with treatment delivered up to 4–6 h after the
onset of ischemia [39]. Beneficial effects on neurological
function, swelling and on mortality have been observed in
lethal models of stroke with treatment delivered at 6 and
10 h after the onset of ischemia [17, 27].

327

out in rats [Wistar, Sprague–Dawley, spontaneously hypertensive rat (SHR)]. There has been no study of glibenclamide
in gyrencephalic non-human primates (NHP) or cats. There
are two reasons for this. First, in some respects, glibenclamide is akin to decompressive craniectomy—it is being
studied largely for its promise in reducing swelling and
death, two endpoints that were not considered by STAIR [63,
64]. Second, there is no accepted model of the malignant
MCA syndrome in NHP or cat. A non-survival model of
MCA ischemia/reperfusion (3/6 h) has been described in the
cat [66, 67], and several models of stroke have been described in NHP [68–73], including two with potentially high
mortality in baboons [68, 74], depending on timing of
reperfusion. Meaningful implementation of this recommendation in the spirit of STAIR would require developing
an ethically acceptable, high mortality model of the malignant MCA syndrome in cat or NHP. However, this may be
unachievable. It was recognized by the STAIR committee
that ‘‘cost, availability and ethical acceptability may be
problematic’’ [64]. It is difficult to gain IACUC (Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee) approval for high mortality studies with any species, but especially with sentient
species, due to perceived suffering. Given these considerations, current thinking is that the study of a gyrencephalic
model would not be warranted in a setting such as this.

Outcome Measures
Reproducibility
Multiple endpoints; histological and behavioral outcomes;
behavioral studies at least 2–3 weeks after stroke. The multiple endpoints evaluated include edema formation, brain
swelling, infarction volume, neuronal preservation, white
matter preservation, neurological scores, Garcia scores, grip
strength, weight gain and mortality, as well as evidence of
neurogenesis and angiogenesis. Studies have examined endpoints out to 2 weeks [17, 45] and 4 weeks [40].
Physiological Monitoring
Blood pressure, temperature, blood gases, and blood glucose; cerebral blood flow using Doppler flow or perfusion
imaging. Temperature, blood gases, and blood glucose have
been monitored and reported [17, 27, 39, 41]. Laser
Doppler flowmetry has been monitored and reported [17, 27,
39, 41].
Multiple Species
Rodents or rabbits are acceptable for initial testing and
gyrencephalic primates or cats are desirable as a second
species, but the cost, availability, and ethical acceptability
may be problematic. To date, all studies have been carried

There are five items in this category:
Fundamentals of good scientific inquiry: These recommendations have been met in part or in full, as
documented in several studies, with the most comprehensive description given in Simard et al. [27].
Studies in aged animals and animals with comorbidities:
One study reported the effect of glibenclamide on
hemorrhagic transformation in SHR [45].
Studies in male and female animals: One study reported
the effect of glibenclamide on mortality in males and
females [16].
Interaction studies with medications used in stroke
patients: Quantitative analysis of clot lysis induced by
rtPA showed that glibenclamide has no effect on rtPA
activity [45].
In four retrospective studies of diabetic patients with stroke
[30, 62, 75, 76], many of the patients would be expected to
have been taking other commonly prescribed medications
(some are listed in the original papers), suggesting no
adverse interactions in stroke between sulfonylurea drugs
and other commonly prescribed medications.
Relevant biomarker endpoints: No preclinical study has
reported the effect of glibenclamide on serum

123

328

biomarkers, although one study reported reduced
MMP-9 activity in brain tissues [45].
Additional Comments in the STAIR Document
Apart from the above-mentioned formal recommendations,
the updated STAIR document [64] makes a number of other
observations relevant to preclinical studies, including:
No model precisely mimics clinical stroke in that truly
permanent occlusion rarely occurs in humans because of
spontaneous recanalization, and the transient models are
restricted to relatively short time windows, otherwise
risking fatal edema and hemorrhage: STAIR addresses
non-lethal models of stroke exclusively. Several studies on
glibenclamide have gone beyond the traditional assessment of infarct size and neurological function in non-lethal
models to look at fatal outcomes from swelling [16, 17, 27]
and from hemorrhagic transformation [45] (Table 2).
Models with occlusion times up to 6 h have been studied,
with drug administered at the time of recanalization [17].
Lack of direct linkage between the model and the clinical
situation: One study was specifically designed to mimic
the clinical situation by studying 4.5 h MCAo with rtPA
(0.9 mg/kg) administered at the time of filament withdrawal, and glibenclamide given 5.5 h later, 10 h after
the onset of ischemia. These conditions were designed to
reflect salient features of anticipated clinical trials.
Treatment that targets only neurons and that does not also
salvage white mater tracts: The study of Simard et al. [17]
documented that, in a model of malignant cerebral edema,
white matter preservation was better with glibenclamide
than with decompressive craniectomy.
Neurovascular unit: Several studies have shown that all
members of the neurovascular unit upregulate Sur1 de
novo, including neurons, astrocytes, oligodendrocytes
and endothelium [16, 17, 39], and that Sur1 also is
expressed by microglia [40].
Many of the neuroprotective targets may have a negative
effect on the recovery process: The study by Ortega et al.
[40] showed that glibenclamide is associated with
improved neurogenesis and angiogenesis at 1 month.

Summary of the Preclinical Material
The preclinical studies on glibenclamide have fulfilled both
the spirit of STAIR as well as almost all of its specific recommendations, in some cases, numerous times. However,
STAIR addresses non-lethal models of stroke exclusively.
The preclinical studies of glibenclamide have gone beyond
the vision of STAIR to examine lethal models of stroke
intended to mimic malignant cerebral infarction in humans.

123

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

Retrospective Studies in Humans with Stroke
There is a natural experiment that can be exploited to
examine the potential benefit of Sur1 inhibition in human
stroke—compare the outcomes of patients with DM-2
presenting with stroke whose diabetes is managed with a
second generation sulfonylurea drug versus those whose
diabetes is managed without a sulfonylurea drug (controls).
In recent years, two types of such studies have been
reported. The first type examined outcomes in patients who
were on a sulfonylurea drug at the time of stroke, but who
did not necessarily continue on a sulfonylurea after presenting with stroke. The second type of study examined
patients who were on a sulfonylurea drug at the time of
stroke and who were maintained on the sulfonylurea after
hospitalization for stroke. The first type of study can
ascertain whether the presence of drug at the onset of
ischemia has an effect on outcome. The second type of
study can ascertain whether the presence of drug during the
days following the ischemic insult has an effect on outcome. The first type of study addresses an important safety
issue, i.e., should patients with DM-2 at risk for stroke be
treated with a sulfonylurea drug. The second type of study
addresses a very different issue, one of efficacy, i.e., might
patients with an acute ischemic stroke benefit from being
on a sulfonylurea drug.
The first retrospective study of diabetic patients on
second generation sulfonylurea drugs was conducted by
Weih et al. [75]. That study was of the first type, i.e., a
safety study. It did not take into account whether
patients were maintained on a sulfonylurea drug after
stroke. They studied 146 patients with diabetes and
hemispheric stroke, 60 of whom were using a sulfonylurea drug at the time of stroke onset, and 86 of
whom were not (diabetes managed with diet alone,
insulin, or other oral agent such as acarbose or metformin). The study found that the use sulfonylurea
drugs in diabetic patients presenting with stroke is not
associated with increased stroke severity, mortality, or a
worse in-hospital outcome. Notably, there was a nonsignificant trend toward neurological improvement in
the sulfonylurea group, and more patients without sulfonylurea drugs had unimproved neurological deficits in
the first 3 days.
A similar safety study was reported by Favilla et al. [76]
based on an analysis of the Virtual International Stroke
Trials Archive (VISTA), a compilation of unrelated data
sets that has important limitations for analysis. They analyzed outcomes in 1,050 diabetic patients, 298 with
sulfonylurea use before stroke onset. Similar to Weih et al.
[75], they concluded that sulfonylurea use before stroke
onset did not affect stroke severity or long-term functional
outcome compared with other treatments for DM-2.

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

However, in a subset of 28 patients in whom sulfonylureas
were continued following stroke, trends favored
sulfonylureas.
Because the Sur1–Trpm4 channel is transcriptionally
upregulated beginning several hours after the onset of
ischemia [26], and is expressed in neurons and endothelium
for 1 week or more after stroke [18], only patients maintained on a sulfonylurea drug after stroke would be
expected to benefit. The importance of continued use of a
sulfonylurea drug after stroke is underscored by the findings of Kunte et al. [62]. They began their analysis with
precisely the same cohort of patients previously reported
by Weih et al. [75] (see above). They excluded patients
hospitalized later than 24 h after the onset of acute ischemic stroke, and after making other balancing exclusions,
they ended up with a cohort comprised of 33 patients who
were taking a second generation sulfonylurea (glibenclamide, glimepiride, or glibornuride) at admission through
discharge (treatment group), and 28 patients who were not
on a sulfonylurea drug (control group). The primary outcome was a decrease in National Institutes of Health Stroke
Scale (NIHSS) of 4 points or more from admission to
discharge or a discharge NIHSS score = 0, either of which
is considered a ‘‘major neurological improvement.’’ The
secondary outcome was a discharge modified Rankin Scale
(mRS) score of 2 or less, which signifies functional independence. No significant differences, other than stroke
subtype, were observed in baseline variables between
control and treatment groups.
The primary outcome was reached by 36 % of patients
in the treatment group and 7 % in the control group [odds
ratio (OR) = 7.4; 95 % confidence interval (CI) 1.5–37;
P = 0.007]. The secondary outcome was reached by 82
versus 57 % (OR = 3.4; CI 1.1–11; P = 0.035). Subgroup
analysis showed that the benefit of drug was observed only
in patients with non-lacunar strokes, with 42 % of patients
on sulfonylureas who harbored a non-lacunar stroke
achieving the primary outcome, versus 0 % of controls.
Outcomes were independent of sex, previous TIA (see
section above on ischemic preconditioning), and blood
glucose levels. Thus, comparing the reports of Weih et al.
[75] and of Kunte et al. [62], the same population of
patients analyzed to reflect continued use of sulfonylurea
drug after stroke yields a very different conclusion compared to an analysis that omits this critical factor.
A second retrospective study was carried out by Kunte
et al. [30] involving a different cohort of patients. A review
of medical records was performed on diabetic patients
admitted to Charité Hospital (Berlin) with an acute ischemic stroke from January 2005 to December 2006. After
exclusions, the cohort consisted of 177 control patients not
on a sulfonylurea and 43 patients in the treatment group,
who were treated with a sulfonylurea (glibenclamide,

329

glimepiride, or gliquidone) at admission through discharge.
In this study, the primary outcome measure was evidence
of symptomatic hemorrhagic transformation prior to discharge or within 21 days of the ischemic stroke, and
the secondary outcome measures were any hemorrhagic
transformation (symptomatic or asymptomatic), death in
hospital, mRS score of 2 or less, and a decrease in NIHSS
score of 4 points or more from admission to discharge, or a
discharge NIHSS score = 0.
Patients treated with a sulfonylurea drug were significantly more likely to survive hospitalization [no patient in
the sulfonylurea group died, compared to 18 (10 %) in the
control group (P = 0.027)] and significantly less likely to
experience hemorrhagic transformation [20 control
patients (11 %) experienced symptomatic hemorrhagic
transformation, whereas no patient in the sulfonylurea group
experienced symptomatic hemorrhagic transformation
(P = 0.016)]. In agreement with their prior observations
[62], they also found that patients treated with a sulfonylurea
were significantly more likely to have better neurological
outcomes. Even after matching for imbalances in baseline
variables and excluding outliers, the influence of sulfonylurea treatment remained significant.
Another retrospective study of diabetic patients from the
Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network was reported at
the International Stroke Conference in 2009 [77] (Dr.
Frank Silver, University of Toronto, personal communication). Of 15,814 patients screened, 2,448 with diabetes
were admitted to hospital within 24 h of symptom onset.
For patients who had been on and continued on sulfonylurea drugs, compared to controls not on sulfonylureas, the
likelihood of in-hospital mortality was less (OR = 0.51; CI
0.37–0.71; P < 0.05), and the likelihood of neurological
worsening was less (OR = 0.70; CI 0.55–0.89; P < 0.05).
A subgroup of patients was analyzed that were treated with
IV rtPA. For patients who had been on and continued on
sulfonylurea drugs, compared to controls not on sulfonylureas, the likelihood of in-hospital mortality was less
(OR = 0.30; CI 0.12–0.73; P < 0.05), and the likelihood
of neurological worsening was less (OR = 0.52; CI
0.28–0.98; P < 0.05).
Overall, the available data on diabetic patients presenting with acute ischemic stroke suggest that, if a patient is
on a sulfonylurea drug, this drug should be continued, not
stopped, unless a contraindication is present.

Injectable Glibenclamide (RP-1127)
Glibenclamide has been used safely for three decades as an
enteral (per os) formulation for the treatment of DM-2.
However, oral administration of glibenclamide for other

123

330

indications in non-diabetic patients is not appropriate. In all
patients, diabetic or not, episodic oral administration of drug
leads to high peak serum levels that reach a maximum 1–2 h
after ingestion, followed by low serum levels (troughs) at
times between peaks. Peak serum levels of drug trigger
insulin release that is considerably more robust in non-diabetic patients with a normally functioning pancreas
compared to diabetic patients. As a result, non-diabetics
taking oral glibenclamide are at risk for hypoglycemia,
which can become symptomatic. Also, the systemic
absorption of drug taken orally depends on stomach pH.
Stomach pH varies widely, especially in gravely ill patients,
leading to unpredictable serum levels. Thus, oral administration of glibenclamide in acutely ill stroke patients can be
problematic, and is not recommended.
The undesirable pharmacokinetic features and the undesirable side-effect of hypoglycemia associated with orally
administered glibenclamide in non-diabetic patients can be
avoided by parenteral administration. Intravenous administration can be used to rapidly reach and maintain steady
serum concentrations of drug that, for reasons discussed
above, are non-hypoglycemogenic in non-diabetic patients
but may be therapeutic for cerebral ischemia. In acute
cerebral ischemia, two goals are paramount: (i) rapidly
achieving the desired serum concentration—‘‘time is
brain;’’ (ii) maintaining constant receptor occupancy to
optimize channel inhibition. The importance of these precepts is underscored by the preclinical data. The most robust
protection observed in preclinical studies was obtained
using a constant subcutaneous infusion of glibenclamide
[17, 27, 39, 45]. (Bioavailability with subcutaneous infusion
closely approximates that with IV infusion [78]). By contrast, less robust protection was reported with episodic drug
delivery, either IV [36] or IP [79].
Given the forgoing, an injectable formulation of glibenclamide, RP-1127, was developed by Remedy Pharmaceuticals Inc. (New York, NY) that can be administered
IV to non-diabetic patients with acute ischemic stroke
(see Conflict of interest statement). RP-1127 has been
studied in a Phase I clinical trial assessing safety in normal
volunteers.
Phase I Clinical Trial of RP-1127 in Normal Volunteers
Healthy volunteers were enrolled in a Phase I study of
RP-1127 (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01132703).
The primary objective was to evaluate the safety and tolerability of RP-1127 administered as a bolus dose followed
by a 72 h continuous infusion (Table 3). The secondary
objectives were to assess the pharmacokinetics of RP-1127
and blood glucose and serum insulin pharmacodynamic
responses to RP-1127.

123

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333
Table 3 Number of patients in RP-1127 Phase I dosing groups
Dose (mg/day)

RP-1127

Placebo

0.4

8

2

3.0

16

4

6.0

1

1

10.0

1

1

Study subjects were housed in an in-patient facility to
allow for continuous safety monitoring. Blood glucose was
measured throughout the study to obtain pharmacodynamic
information and for safety reasons. Safety labs, vital signs,
and 12-lead electrocardiograms (ECG) were collected at
baseline and at various times after initiation of study drug.
Patients were monitored for adverse events (AEs) including
IV irritation.
There were no serious AEs during the study. No ECG
abnormality, including no evidence of QT interval prolongation, was observed. No clinically relevant IV
irritation was noted. The incidence of blood glucose levels
above 80 mg/dL was more frequent in the placebo group
than in the 3 mg/day group, while there was no difference
in the incidence of blood glucose levels below 70 mg/dL,
implying a reduction in blood glucose at the dose of 3 mg/
day without hypoglycemia (defined as <70 mg/dL) [80–
82].
Two subjects (in the 6.00 and 10.00 mg/day treatment
groups) were discontinued from the study due to persistent
hypoglycemia. The subject in the 6.00 mg/day treatment
group that was discontinued also experienced transient
increases in ALT levels (reported as a severe AE) and
increases in AST levels (reported as a moderate AE)
beginning 3 days after study drug discontinuation. This
subject was asymptomatic at all times. After peaking on
day 6, her liver enzyme levels decreased and were no
longer clinically significantly elevated by day 15, and by
day 22 both were normal. (Liver function abnormalities,
including elevations in liver enzymes, have been reported
in patients taking oral glyburide, as described in package
inserts for approved oral glyburide drug products.) There
were no other clinically significant drug-related AEs.
Steady-state plasma levels for the dose of 3.0 mg/day
were 27.3 ± 8.4 ng/mL (mean ± SD). Plasma glibenclamide concentrations >*25 ng/mL resulted in decreased
blood glucose levels relative to baseline.
Based on the findings in the Phase I study, the dose of
3 mg/day IV of RP-1127 may be safe and least likely to
lead to refractory hypoglycemia, yet appears to yield serum
levels of drug that exceed those observed to be therapeutic
in the animal models of stroke (see above).

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

331

Conclusion
Recent advances in molecular neurobiology have broadened
our understanding of the role of the Sur1–Trpm4 channel in
acute focal cerebral ischemia, not only in oncotic cell
swelling and necrotic (oncotic) cell death, but also in
microvascular dysfunction marked by edema formation and
delayed secondary hemorrhage. As reviewed here, a wealth
of evidence implicates this channel in cerebral ischemia, and
indicates that channel inhibition with glibenclamide results
in robust protection in animal models of stroke. Numerous
putative neuroprotectants previously were shown to be
beneficial in typical non-lethal animal models [83], but to
our knowledge no agent previously studied exhibits the lifesaving effect observed with glibenclamide in lethal models
of malignant cerebral edema. The relevance of the Sur1–
Trpm4 channel to human disease is underscored by recent
findings that the channel is upregulated in humans with
stroke, and by retrospective studies showing beneficial
effects of channel inhibition in diabetics with stroke. As
stated in an editorial in Stroke by Professor Arboix [84], ‘‘a
prospective randomized trial of sulfonylureas is justified and
[is] urgently needed.’’

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by Grants to JMS
from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
(NS061808) and the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
(HL082517).
Conflict of interest JMS holds a US patent (#7,285,574), ‘‘A novel
non-selective cation channel in neural cells and methods for treating
brain swelling,’’ and is a member of the scientific advisory board and
holds shares in Remedy Pharmaceuticals. No support was provided by
Remedy Pharmaceuticals to JMS or to other university-affiliated
authors for this project.

17.

18.

19.

20.

References
1. Truelsen T, Begg S, Mathers C. The global burden of cerebrovascular disease. http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/bod_
cerebrovasculardiseasestroke.pdf. Accessed 10 Jan 2013.
2. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Executive summary:
Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics–2013 update: a report from
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2013;127:143–52.
3. Hacke W, Schwab S, Horn M, Spranger M, De GM, von KR.
‘Malignant’ middle cerebral artery territory infarction: clinical
course and prognostic signs. Arch Neurol. 1996;53:309–15.
4. Berrouschot J, Sterker M, Bettin S, Koster J, Schneider D.
Mortality of space-occupying (‘malignant’) middle cerebral
artery infarction under conservative intensive care. Intensive Care
Med. 1998;24:620–3.
5. Adeoye O, Hornung R, Khatri P, Kleindorfer D. Recombinant
tissue-type plasminogen activator use for ischemic stroke in the
United States: a doubling of treatment rates over the course of
5 years. Stroke. 2011;42:1952–5.
6. Kleindorfer D, Lindsell CJ, Brass L, Koroshetz W, Broderick JP.
National US estimates of recombinant tissue plasminogen

21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

activator use: ICD-9 codes substantially underestimate. Stroke.
2008;39:924–8.
Singer OC, Hamann GF, Misselwitz B, Steinmetz H, Foerch C.
Time trends in systemic thrombolysis in a large hospital-based
stroke registry. Cerebrovasc Dis. 2012;33:316–21.
Jauss M, Schutz HJ, Tanislav C, Misselwitz B, Rosenow F. Effect
of daytime, weekday and year of admission on outcome in acute
ischaemic stroke patients treated with thrombolytic therapy. Eur J
Neurol. 2010;17:555–61.
Bryan J, Munoz A, Zhang X, et al. ABCC8 and ABCC9: ABC
transporters that regulate K+ channels. Pflugers Arch. 2007;453:
703–18.
Burke MA, Mutharasan RK, Ardehali H. The sulfonylurea
receptor, an atypical ATP-binding cassette protein, and its regulation of the KATP channel. Circ Res. 2008;102:164–76.
Aittoniemi J, Fotinou C, Craig TJ, de WH, Proks P, Ashcroft FM.
Review. SUR1: a unique ATP-binding cassette protein that
functions as an ion channel regulator. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci. 2008;364:257–67.
Woo SK, Kwon MS, Ivanov A, Gerzanich V, Simard JM. The
sulfonylurea receptor 1 (sur1)–transient receptor potential melastatin 4 (trpm4) channel. J Biol Chem. 2013;288:3655–67.
Yamada K, Inagaki N. Neuroprotection by KATP channels. J Mol
Cell Cardiol. 2005;38:945–9.
Simard JM, Woo SK, Schwartzbauer GT, Gerzanich V. Sulfonylurea receptor 1 in central nervous system injury: a focused
review. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32:1699–717.
Simard JM, Woo SK, Gerzanich V. Transient receptor potential
melastatin 4 and cell death. Pflugers Arch. 2012;464:573–82.
Simard JM, Chen M, Tarasov KV, et al. Newly expressed SUR1regulated NC(Ca-ATP) channel mediates cerebral edema after
ischemic stroke. Nat Med. 2006;12:433–40.
Simard JM, Tsymbalyuk N, Tsymbalyuk O, Ivanova S, Yurovsky
V, Gerzanich V. Glibenclamide is superior to decompressive
craniectomy in a rat model of malignant stroke. Stroke. 2010;
41:531–7.
Mehta RI, Ivanova S, Tosun C, Castellani RJ, Gerzanich V,
Simard JM. Sulfonylurea receptor 1 expression in human cerebral
infarcts. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013;72:871–83.
Loh KP, Ng G, Yu CY, et al. TRPM4 inhibition promotes
angiogenesis after ischemic stroke. Pflugers Arch. 2013. doi:10.
1007/s00424-013-1347-4.
Gerzanich V, Woo SK, Vennekens R, et al. De novo expression
of Trpm4 initiates secondary hemorrhage in spinal cord injury.
Nat Med. 2009;15:185–91.
Bano D, Nicotera P. Ca2+ signals and neuronal death in brain
ischemia. Stroke. 2007;38:674–6.
Arundine M, Tymianski M. Molecular mechanisms of calciumdependent neurodegeneration in excitotoxicity. Cell Calcium.
2003;34:325–37.
Liss B, Roeper J. Molecular physiology of neuronal K-ATP
channels (review). Mol Membr Biol. 2001;18:117–27.
Pelletier MR, Pahapill PA, Pennefather PS, Carlen PL. Analysis
of single K(ATP) channels in mammalian dentate gyrus granule
cells. J Neurophysiol. 2000;84:2291–301.
Sullivan HC, Harik SI. ATP-sensitive potassium channels are not
expressed in brain microvessels. Brain Res. 1993;612:336–8.
Woo SK, Kwon MS, Geng Z, et al. Sequential activation of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and specificity protein 1 is required for
hypoxia-induced transcriptional stimulation of Abcc8. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32:525–36.
Simard JM, Woo SK, Tsymbalyuk N, et al. Glibenclamide-10-h
treatment window in a clinically relevant model of stroke. Transl
Stroke Res. 2012;3:286–95.
Simard JM, Tsymbalyuk O, Ivanov A, et al. Endothelial sulfonylurea receptor 1-regulated NC Ca-ATP channels mediate

123

332

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333
progressive hemorrhagic necrosis following spinal cord injury.
J Clin Invest. 2007;117:2105–13.
Simard JM, Geng Z, Woo SK, et al. Glibenclamide reduces
inflammation, vasogenic edema, and caspase-3 activation after
subarachnoid hemorrhage. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2009;
29:317–30.
Kunte H, Busch MA, Trostdorf K, et al. Hemorrhagic transformation of ischemic stroke in diabetics on sulfonylureas. Ann
Neurol. 2012;72:799–806.
Chen M, Dong Y, Simard JM. Functional coupling between
sulfonylurea receptor type 1 and a nonselective cation channel in
reactive astrocytes from adult rat brain. J Neurosci. 2003;
23:8568–77.
Simard JM, Woo SK, Bhatta S, Gerzanich V. Drugs acting on
SUR1 to treat CNS ischemia and trauma. Curr Opin Pharmacol.
2008;8:42–9.
Findlay I. Effects of pH upon the inhibition by sulphonylurea
drugs of ATP-sensitive K+ channels in cardiac muscle. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1992;262:71–9.
Tomiyama Y, Brian JE Jr, Todd MM. Cerebral blood flow during
hemodilution and hypoxia in rats : role of ATP-sensitive potassium channels. Stroke. 1999;30:1942–7.
Nedergaard M, Kraig RP, Tanabe J, Pulsinelli WA. Dynamics of
interstitial and intracellular pH in evolving brain infarct. Am J
Physiol. 1991;260:R581–8.
Ortega FJ, Gimeno-Bayon J, Espinosa-Parrilla JF, et al. ATPdependent potassium channel blockade strengthens microglial
neuroprotection after hypoxia–ischemia in rats. Exp Neurol.
2012;235:282–96.
Simard JM, Kent TA, Chen M, Tarasov KV, Gerzanich V. Brain
oedema in focal ischaemia: molecular pathophysiology and theoretical implications. Lancet Neurol. 2007;6:258–68.
Weiss N, Miller F, Cazaubon S, Couraud PO. The blood–brain
barrier in brain homeostasis and neurological diseases. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2009;1788:842–57.
Simard JM, Yurovsky V, Tsymbalyuk N, Melnichenko L, Ivanova S, Gerzanich V. Protective effect of delayed treatment with
low-dose glibenclamide in three models of ischemic stroke.
Stroke. 2009;40:604–9.
Ortega FJ, Jolkkonen J, Mahy N, Rodriguez MJ. Glibenclamide
enhances neurogenesis and improves long-term functional
recovery after transient focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2012;33:356–64.
Wali B, Ishrat T, Atif F, Hua F, Stein DG, Sayeed I. Glibenclamide administration attenuates infarct volume, hemispheric
swelling, and functional impairments following permanent focal
cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke Res Treat. 2012;2012:460909.
doi:10.1155/2012/460909.
Petullo D, Masonic K, Lincoln C, Wibberley L, Teliska M, Yao
DL. Model development and behavioral assessment of focal
cerebral ischemia in rats. Life Sci. 1999;64:1099–108.
Virtanen T, Sivenius J, Jolkkonen J. Dehydration and stress do
not explain severe weight loss after experimental stroke in rats.
J Animal Vet Adv. 2003;2:247–52.
Virtanen T, Jolkkonen J, Sivenius J. Re: External carotid artery
territory ischemia impairs outcome in the endovascular filament
model of middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Stroke.
2004;35:e9–10.
Simard JM, Geng Z, Silver FL, et al. Does inhibiting Sur1
complement rt-PA in cerebral ischemia? Ann N Y Acad Sci.
2012;1268:95–107.
Abdallah DM, Nassar NN, Abd-El-Salam RM. Glibenclamide
ameliorates ischemia-reperfusion injury via modulating oxidative
stress and inflammatory mediators in the rat hippocampus. Brain
Res. 2011;1385:257–62.

123

47. Figura M, Chilton L, Liacini A, et al. Blockade of K(ATP)
channels reduces endothelial hyperpolarization and leukocyte
recruitment upon reperfusion after hypoxia. Am J Transplant.
2009;9:687–96.
48. Da Silva-Santos JE, Santos-Silva MC, Cunha FQ, Assreuy J. The
role of ATP-sensitive potassium channels in neutrophil migration
and plasma exudation. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2002;300:946–51.
49. Pompermayer K, Amaral FA, Fagundes CT, et al. Effects of the
treatment with glibenclamide, an ATP-sensitive potassium
channel blocker, on intestinal ischemia and reperfusion injury.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2007;556:215–22.
50. Pompermayer K, Souza DG, Lara GG, et al. The ATP-sensitive
potassium channel blocker glibenclamide prevents renal ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats. Kidney Int. 2005;67:1785–96.
51. Nistico R, Piccirilli S, Sebastianelli L, Nistico G, Bernardi G,
Mercuri NB. The blockade of K(+)-ATP channels has neuroprotective effects in an in vitro model of brain ischemia. Int Rev
Neurobiol. 2007;82:383–95.
52. Huang H, Gao TM, Gong L, Zhuang Z, Li X. Potassium channel
blocker TEA prevents CA1 hippocampal injury following transient forebrain ischemia in adult rats. Neurosci Lett. 2001;
305:83–6.
53. Ortega FJ, Jolkkonen J, Rodriguez MJ. Microglia is an active
player in how glibenclamide improves stroke outcome. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 2013;33:1138–9.
54. Schaller B, editor. Cerebral ischemic tolerance: from animal
models to clinical relevance. New York: Nova Science Publishers; 2004.
55. Durukan A, Tatlisumak T. Preconditioning-induced ischemic
tolerance: a window into endogenous gearing for cerebroprotection. Exp Transl Stroke Med. 2010;2:2.
56. Kirino T. Ischemic tolerance. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2002;22:1283–96.
57. Dirnagl U, Simon RP, Hallenbeck JM. Ischemic tolerance and
endogenous neuroprotection. Trends Neurosci. 2003;26:248–54.
58. Heurteaux C, Lauritzen I, Widmann C, Lazdunski M. Essential
role of adenosine, adenosine A1 receptors, and ATP-sensitive
K+ channels in cerebral ischemic preconditioning. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1995;92:4666–70.
59. Sorimachi T, Nowak TS Jr. Pharmacological manipulations of
ATP-dependent potassium channels and adenosine A1 receptors
do not impact hippocampal ischemic preconditioning in vivo:
evidence in a highly quantitative gerbil model. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2004;24:556–63.
60. Munoz A, Nakazaki M, Goodman JC, et al. Ischemic preconditioning in the hippocampus of a knockout mouse lacking SUR1based K(ATP) channels. Stroke. 2003;34:164–70.
61. Hamann GF. Clinical aspects of ischemic tolerance in the brain.
In: Schaller B, editor. Cerebral ischemic tolerance: from animal
models to clinical relevance. New York: Nova Science Publishers; 2004. p. 115–9.
62. Kunte H, Schmidt S, Eliasziw M, et al. Sulfonylureas improve
outcome in patients with type 2 diabetes and acute ischemic
stroke. Stroke. 2007;38:2526–30.
63. No authors listed. Recommendations for standards regarding
preclinical neuroprotective and restorative drug development.
Stroke 1999; 30: 2752–2758.
64. Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, et al. Update of the stroke
therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical recommendations. Stroke. 2009;40:2244–50.
65. Tosun C, Koltz MT, Kurland DB, et al. The protective effect of
glibenclamide in a model of hemorrhagic encephalopathy of
prematurity. Brain Sci. 2013;3:215–38.
66. Toyota S, Graf R, Valentino M, Yoshimine T, Heiss WD.
Prediction of malignant infarction: perifocal neurochemical

Neurocrit Care (2014) 20:319–333

67.

68.
69.
70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

monitoring following prolonged MCA occlusion in cats. Acta
Neurochir Suppl. 2003;86:153–7.
Toyota S, Graf R, Valentino M, Yoshimine T, Heiss WD.
Malignant infarction in cats after prolonged middle cerebral
artery occlusion: glutamate elevation related to decrease of
cerebral perfusion pressure. Stroke. 2002;33:1383–91.
del Zoppo GJ, Copeland BR, Harker LA, et al. Experimental
acute thrombotic stroke in baboons. Stroke. 1986;17:1254–65.
Fukuda S, del Zoppo GJ. Models of focal cerebral ischemia in the
nonhuman primate. ILAR J. 2003;44:96–104.
West GA, Golshani KJ, Doyle KP, et al. A new model of cortical
stroke in the rhesus macaque. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2009;29:1175–86.
Bahjat FR, Williams-Karnesky RL, Kohama SG, et al. Proof of
concept: pharmacological preconditioning with a Toll-like
receptor agonist protects against cerebrovascular injury in a primate model of stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011;31:
1229–42.
Cook DJ, Tymianski M. Nonhuman primate models of stroke for
translational neuroprotection research. Neurotherapeutics. 2012;
9:371–9.
Cook DJ, Teves L, Tymianski M. A translational paradigm for
the preclinical evaluation of the stroke neuroprotectant TatNR2B9c in gyrencephalic nonhuman primates. Sci Transl Med.
2012;4:154ra133.
Zabramski JM, Spetzler RF, Selman WR, et al. Naloxone therapy
during focal cerebral ischemia evaluation in a primate model.
Stroke. 1984;15:621–7.
Weih M, Amberger N, Wegener S, Dirnagl U, Reuter T, Einhaupl
K. Sulfonylurea drugs do not influence initial stroke severity and

333

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

in-hospital outcome in stroke patients with diabetes. Stroke.
2001;32:2029–32.
Favilla CG, Mullen MT, Ali M, Higgins P, Kasner SE. Sulfonylurea use before stroke does not influence outcome. Stroke.
2011;42:710–5.
Silver FL, Fang J, Robertson AC, Casaubon L, Kapral MK.
Possible neuroprotective effects of sulfonylureas in diabetic
patients with acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2009;40:51.
Mishra MK, Ray D, Barik BB. Microcapsules and transdermal
patch: a comparative approach for improved delivery of antidiabetic drug. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2009;10:928–34.
Zhou Y, Fathali N, Lekic T, Tang J, Zhang JH. Glibenclamide
improves neurological function in neonatal hypoxia-ischemia in
rats. Brain Res. 2009;1270:131–9.
Gray CS, Hildreth AJ, Sandercock PA, et al. Glucose–potassium–
insulin infusions in the management of post-stroke hyperglycaemia: the UK glucose insulin in stroke trial (GIST-UK). Lancet
Neurol. 2007;6:397–406.
Bruno A, Kent TA, Coull BM, et al. Treatment of hyperglycemia
in ischemic stroke (THIS): a randomized pilot trial. Stroke.
2008;39:384–9.
Johnston KC, Hall CE, Kissela BM, Bleck TP, Conaway MR.
Glucose regulation in acute stroke patients (GRASP) trial: a
randomized pilot trial. Stroke. 2009;40:3804–9.
O’Collins VE, Macleod MR, Donnan GA, Horky LL, van der
Worp BH, Howells DW. 1,026 experimental treatments in acute
stroke. Ann Neurol. 2006;59:467–77.
Arboix A. Potential impact of sulfonylureas in the outcome of
type 2 diabetic patients with ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2007;38:
2413–4.

123

