This information is current as
of October 4, 2016.

Age-Associated Resident Memory CD8 T
Cells in the Central Nervous System Are
Primed To Potentiate Inflammation after
Ischemic Brain Injury
Rodney M. Ritzel, Joshua Crapser, Anita R. Patel, Rajkumer
Verma, Jeremy M. Grenier, Anjali Chauhan, Evan R.
Jellison and Louise D. McCullough

Supplementary
Material
References
Subscriptions
Permissions
Email Alerts

http://www.jimmunol.org/content/suppl/2016/03/08/jimmunol.150202
1.DCSupplemental.html
This article cites 105 articles, 34 of which you can access for free at:
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/196/8/3318.full#ref-list-1
Information about subscribing to The Journal of Immunology is online at:
http://jimmunol.org/subscriptions
Submit copyright permission requests at:
http://www.aai.org/ji/copyright.html
Receive free email-alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up at:
http://jimmunol.org/cgi/alerts/etoc

The Journal of Immunology is published twice each month by
The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.,
9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3994.
Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of
Immunologists, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0022-1767 Online ISSN: 1550-6606.

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

J Immunol 2016; 196:3318-3330; Prepublished online 9
March 2016;
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1502021
http://www.jimmunol.org/content/196/8/3318

The Journal of Immunology

Age-Associated Resident Memory CD8 T Cells in the Central
Nervous System Are Primed To Potentiate Inflammation after
Ischemic Brain Injury
Rodney M. Ritzel,* Joshua Crapser,* Anita R. Patel,* Rajkumer Verma,*
Jeremy M. Grenier,† Anjali Chauhan,* Evan R. Jellison,† and Louise D. McCullough*,‡

A

ging is associated with cognitive decline, a heightened
risk of neurodegenerative disease, and poorer recovery
after injury. People aged 80 and over are now the fastest
growing segment of the population, projected to reach 19.4 million
in 2030 (1). These statistics highlight growing concerns over the
burden to the health services. The aging process exerts profound
changes on the nervous and immune systems, which extend into
nearly all organ systems (2–4). Indeed, the relationship between these
two systems is bidirectional, and the concept of the CNS as an
immune-privileged organ is evolving (5). It is now recognized that the
brain is under constant immune surveillance by resident microglia
and trafficking systemic T lymphocytes recruited by the choroid
plexus (6–8). These generally serve a protective role as a rapid response system to detect damaging agents that disrupt homeostasis.
Although T lymphocytes transit the CNS at low numbers in healthy
brain, the role of these cells and how they change with age is not well
understood (9). Recent work has shown that CD4 effector memory
(TEM) cells with a TCR repertoire specific to CNS Ag are constitu-

*Neuroscience Department, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030; †Immunology Department, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030; and ‡Department of Neurology, McGovern Medical School,
University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77370
Received for publication September 16, 2015. Accepted for publication February 5,
2016.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants R21 NS07629301A1 (to L.D.M.) and F31 NS083244-01A1 (to R.M.R.).
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Dr. Louise D. McCullough, Department of Neurology, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health
Science Center, 6431 Fannin Street, Houston, TX 77370. E-mail address: Louise.
D.McCullough@uth.tmc.edu
The online version of this article contains supplemental material.
Abbreviation used in this article: TEM, effector memory.
Copyright Ó 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc. 0022-1767/16/$30.00
www.jimmunol.org/cgi/doi/10.4049/jimmunol.1502021

tively present in the epithelial layers of the choroid plexus where, at
this interface between brain and blood, they are poised to act as
immunomodulators of aging and senescence (6, 10). T cells have
many diverse functions that influence both immune and nonimmune
pathways. For example, Scid mice, which lack functional T cells,
have cognitive deficits compared with wild-type mice, implying that
T cells can influence CNS function (11–13). However, little is known
regarding the role and identity of the lymphocytes that traffic
throughout the CNS under normal conditions and with aging.
Surveillance is the process whereby the immune system identifies
and eliminates transformed or infected cells before they become
cancerous or cause harm (14). Although little is known concerning
the role of aging on immune surveillance in the CNS, the increase
in basal inflammatory levels indicative of the phenomenon known
as “inflammaging” supports the notion that the necessity for surveillance may be heightened (15). The low-grade inflammatory
status of the aged CNS may favor immune cell recruitment, but the
critical mediators of this phenomenon and the functional role of the
specific cell subtypes entering the aged brain in steady state remain
to be established. Stichel and Luebbert (16) showed a significant
increase in both CD11c+ dendritic cells and CD3+ T cells with wide
distribution throughout the brain beginning at middle age and increasing with advanced age. Studies assessing donor human brain
tissue have identified the presence of resident CD8+ T cells enriched
in white matter and regions of blood-brain barrier leakiness (17,
18). These findings indicate that the observed changes in leukocyte
recruitment in the aging mouse brain most likely have translational
relevance as immune surveillance also occurs in the human CNS.
In the current study, the presence of peripheral leukocytes in the
aging CNS was assessed to determine the functional relevance of these
cells to age-related inflammatory signaling. We evaluated lymphocyte
recruitment guidance and response cues and performed a comprehensive phenotypic analysis of cell subsets found in normal CNS.

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

Aging is associated with an increase in basal inflammation in the CNS and an overall decline in cognitive function and poorer
recovery following injury. Growing evidence suggests that leukocyte recruitment to the CNS is also increased with normal aging,
but, to date, no systematic evaluation of these age-associated leukocytes has been performed. In this work, the effect of aging on CNS
leukocyte recruitment was examined. Aging was associated with more CD45high leukocytes, primarily composed of conventional
CD8+ T cells. These results were strain independent and seen in both sexes. Intravascular labeling and immunohistology revealed
the presence of parenchymal CD8+ T cells in several regions of the brain, including the choroid plexus and meninges. These cells
had effector memory (CD44+CD62L2) and tissue-resident phenotypes and expressed markers associated with TCR activation.
Analysis of TCRvb repertoire usage suggested that entry into the CNS is most likely stochastic rather than Ag driven. Correlational analyses revealed a positive association between CD8 T cell numbers and decreased proinflammatory function of microglia. However, the effects of cerebral ischemia and ex vivo stimulation of these cells dramatically increased production of TNF,
IFN-g, and MCP-1/CCL2. Taken together, we identified a novel population of resident memory, immunosurveillant CD8 T cells
that represent a hallmark of CNS aging and appear to modify microglia homeostasis under normal conditions, but are primed to
potentiate inflammation and leukocyte recruitment following ischemic injury. The Journal of Immunology, 2016, 196: 3318–3330.

The Journal of Immunology
Lastly, to determine whether there was a functional consequence of
these CNS-resident leukocytes, we assessed production of inflammatory mediators in an age-relevant model of brain injury, experimental stroke.

Materials and Methods
Mice/Animals

Tissue harvesting
Mice were euthanized and transcardially perfused with 60 mL cold, sterile
PBS, and the brains were harvested. The olfactory bulb, brainstem, and
cerebellum were removed. The brain was then divided along the interhemispheric fissure into two hemispheres and then subsequently rinsed with
PBS to remove contaminant cells.

Flow cytometry
Blood was drawn by cardiac puncture with heparinized needles. Spleens
were removed and processed by mechanical disruption on a 70-mm filter
screen. RBC lysis was achieved by three consecutive 10-min incubations
with Tris-ammonium chloride (Stem Cell Technologies). CNS tissue to be
analyzed by flow cytometry was placed in RPMI 1640 (Lonza) medium
and mechanically and enzymatically digested in collagenase/dispase
(1 mg/ml) and DNAse (10 mg/ml; both Roche Diagnostics). The cell
suspension was filtered through a 70-mm filter. Leukocytes were harvested
from the interphase of a 70/30% Percoll gradient. Blood and brain
leukocytes were washed and blocked with mouse Fc Block (eBioscience)
prior to staining with primary Ab-conjugated fluorophores (CD45-eF450,
CD11b-allophycocyanin eF780, MHCII-FITC, Ly6C-PerCP-Cy5.5, CD3eallophycocyanin, and CD4-PE-Cy7 were purchased from eBioscience),
whereas CD8-Bv510, CD69- allophycocyanin, CD103-PerCP-Cy5.5,
programmed death-1-PE, CD11a-PE-Cy7, and CD49d-PerCP-Cy5.5 were
purchased from BioLegend. For live/dead cell discrimination, a fixable
viability dye, CASE-AF350 (Invitrogen), was diluted at 1:300 from a
working stock of 0.3 mg/ml. Data were acquired on a LSRII using
FACsDiva 6.0 (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo (Tree Star).
No less than 100,000 events were recorded for each sample. Resident
microglia were identified as the CD45 intCD11b+Ly6C2 population,
whereas bone marrow–derived leukocytes were identified as CD45high.
Cell-specific fluorescence minus one controls were used to determine the
positivity of each Ab.
For intracellular cytokine staining, a stock solution of brefeldin A
(Sigma-Aldrich) was prepared at 20 mg/ml in DMSO and diluted with PBS
to obtain a working solution of 0.5 mg/ml. Mice were euthanized 8 h after
i.v. injection of brefeldin A (250 ml). Leukocytes were collected, as
described above, and 1 ml GolgiPlug containing brefeldin A (BD Biosciences) was added to 800 ml complete RPMI 1640. Cells were subsequently
stimulated with PBS or Cell Stimulation Cocktail (eBioscience) containing
PMA/ionomycin and incubated for 4 h at 37˚C (5% CO2). Afterward, cells
were resuspended in Fc Block, stained for surface Ags, and washed in 100
ml fixation/permeabilization solution (BD Biosciences) for 20 min. Cells
were then washed twice in 300 ml Permeabilization/Wash buffer (BD
Biosciences) and resuspended in an intracellular Ab mixture containing
TNF-PE-Cy7, CCL2-PE, and IFN-g-PerCP-Cy5.5 and fixed.
For detection of reactive oxygen species, leukocytes were incubated
with redox-sensitive 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-29,79-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
diacetate, acetyl ester (5 mM; Ex/Em: 495/520) fluorogenic cell-permeant
dye (Life Technologies, Invitrogen). Cells were incubated for 20 min at
37˚C, washed three times with FACS buffer (without NaAz), and then
stained for surface markers, including CASE.
To determine TCRvb usage, we used a mouse vb TCR screening panel
(BD Pharmingen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly,

after collecting blood and tissue leukocytes, each sample was divided into
15 separate FACS tubes and stained for the Ab mixture, including 1 of 15
respective TCRvb FITC-conjugated mAbs.
Phagocytic activity of microglia was performed, as described by Ritzel
et al. (19). Briefly, fluorescent latex beads (Fluoresbrite Yellow Green
carboxylate microspheres; 1 mm diameter; Polysciences) were added to
sorted microglia in a final dilution of 1:100, as described (19). After 1-h
incubation at 37˚C, the cells were washed three times with FACS buffer,
resuspended in FACS buffer, stained for surface markers, and fixed in
paraformaldehyde.

ELISA cytokine measurement
Plasma and whole tissue brain chemokine levels were determined by ELISA
(Milliplex Cytokine/Chemokine Assay; EMD Millipore). In brief, mice
were euthanized by avertin injection, and blood was collected by cardiac
puncture into heparin-coated syringes. Samples were centrifuged (13,000 3
g for 10 min at 4˚C), and plasma was collected and stored frozen (280˚C)
until assaying. Brain hemispheres were collected and homogenized in icecold lysis buffer containing a protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Diagnostics). Homogenates were sonicated and centrifuged at 4˚C for 15 min at
14,000 rpm, and supernatants were assayed for total protein using a
bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific). Using a
standard curve, protein concentration was determined and 100 mg each
sample was loaded into each well in duplicate. Samples were assayed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions using a Luminex 200
(Luminex, Austin, TX) magnetic bead array platform. Inter- and intraassay coefficients of variation were ,10%.

Intravascular staining and cell isolation
A total of 7 mg anti-CD3e-PE was injected i.v. At 4 min after injection, the
animals were sacrificed and perfused with 40 mL PBS. Blood was taken
by cardiac puncture prior to perfusion to confirm injection efficiency.
The brain hemispheres were harvested within 3 min and washed with PBS
to remove free Ab, and leukocytes were isolated, as described above.
Leukocytes were then stained with CD45-eF450, CD11b-AF700, CD3eallophycocyanin eF780, CD4-allophycocyanin, CD8-PerCPCy5.5, and
CASE. Colabeling was used to determine the percentage of perivascular/
parenchymal (CD3e-PE2/CD3e-allophycocyanin eF780+) versus intravascular cells (CD3e-PE+/CD3e-allophycocyanin eF780+).

Immunohistochemistry
Following PBS perfusion, brains were harvested and embedded in an
optimal cutting temperature embedding solution and subsequently frozen on
dry ice and stored at 280˚C. Brains were sectioned on a cryostat at a
thickness of 10 mm at a temperature of 17˚C. These sections were mounted
on charged slides and stored at 220˚C until use. After being brought to
room temperature, the sections were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for
10 min, washed, and then blocked in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer with 0.3%
Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 10% donkey serum for 1 h. Primary
Abs rat anti-CD8 (Abcam; 1:200), rabbit anti-myelin basic protein
(Abcam; 1:200), mouse anti-NeuN (Millipore; 1:200), and rabbit anti-CD3
(Abcam; 1:100) were added and incubated overnight at 4˚C. These sections were washed, and secondary Abs Alexa Flour 488 anti-rat (Invitrogen; 1:1000), Alexa Flour 594 anti-rabbit (Life Technologies; 1:1000),
and Alexa Flour 594 anti-mouse (Invitrogen; 1:1000) as well as conjugated
Abs Texas Red Lycopersicon Esculentum (Tomato) Lectin (Vector; 1:200),
mouse anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein-Cy3 (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:200), and
DAPI (Invitrogen; 1:1000) were added and incubated at room temperature
for 1 h, washed, and coverslipped for viewing. Images were acquired with
a Zeiss Axiovert microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using a
X-Cite 120Q fluorescence illumination system (Lumen Dynamics Group,
Mississauga, ON, Canada) and Zeiss image acquisition software (Zeiss
LSM 510).

Middle cerebral artery occlusion model of ischemic stroke
Cerebral ischemia was induced in aged mice (20 mo) by 90 min of reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion under isoflurane anesthesia, as previously
described (20). Rectal temperatures were maintained at ∼37˚C during
surgery and ischemia with an automated temperature control feedback
system. A midline ventral neck incision was made, and unilateral middle
cerebral artery occlusion was performed by inserting a 0.23-mm siliconecoated suture (Doccol, Redlands, CA) into the right internal carotid artery
6 mm from the internal carotid/pterygopalatine artery bifurcation via an
external carotid artery stump. Mice were euthanized at 4 h after reperfusion, and cells were isolated from contralateral (control) and ipsilateral
(ischemic) hemispheres, as above. Reactive oxygen species and cytokine

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

C57BL/6J mice of 8–12 wk (young adult) and 18–22 mo (aged) of age
were pair-housed on sawdust bedding in a specific pathogen-free facility
(light cycle 12/12-h light/dark). The average weight of the naive, young
mice was 29.6 6 2.3 g and that of aging mice was 35.7 6 3.2 g before
sacrifice. All experiments were performed using male C57BL/6J mice,
unless otherwise stated. Several experiments were performed using BALB/
cByJ mice of 11 wk (young adult) and 21 mo (aged) of age to determine
strain dependence. A cohort of aged C57BL/6J and BALB/cByJ females
was also included. All animals had access to chow and water ad libitum.
Animal procedures were performed in accordance with National Institutes
of Health guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals and approved by the Animal Care Committee of the University of Connecticut
Health Center. Ex vivo studies were performed by an investigator blinded
to age.

3319

3320

AGE-RELATED CNS-RESIDENT CD8 T CELLS ARE REACTIVE TO STROKE

production was measured as above following 2 h of PMA/ionomycin
stimulation at 37˚C.

Statistical analyses
Data represent averages of cell counts obtained from one hemisphere of
individual mice within a group. Data from individual experiments are
presented as mean 6 SEM and compared with Student t test where appropriate (GraphPad Prism Software, San Diego, CA). Multiple comparisons were assessed by one-way or two-way ANOVA analysis with Tukey
post hoc correction. Significant differences between paired comparisons
were conducted with the Holm-Sidak test. Correlation analyses were
performed using Pearson’s correlation. The p value ,0.05 was considered
statistically significant.

Results
Aging increases the number of peripheral leukocytes in the CNS

Age-related chemokine production is associated with enhanced
recruitment of CD8 T cells into the aging brain
To determine whether CD8 T cell recruitment to the aging brain
could result from a directed, homeostatic process rather than a
random dispersion into tissues, we examined whole brain protein
expression of chemokines known to be involved in T cell migration.
CCL5 (RANTES), CCL11 (Eotaxin), CXCL9 (monokine induced
by IFN-g), and CXCL10 (IFN-g–inducible protein) concentrations
were all significantly upregulated in the brain with age by ELISA
(Fig. 2A–D). Levels of these chemokines were similarly increased
in aged plasma (Fig. 2E–H), suggesting that these gradient levels
are accessible to circulating T cells. Surface expression of chemokine receptors to these respective chemokine ligands was then
assessed on both blood and brain CD8 T cells. An increase in
expression of these chemokine receptors was found on blood CD8
T cells with age (Fig. 2I–L). Interestingly, CD8 T cells in the aged
brain expressed lower levels of these receptors relative to those in
circulation, and levels were comparable to that found in young
blood (Fig. 2M–P). These results suggest that the aged brain is a
rich source of chemokine cues that are generally required for
active T cell migration. After reaching the CNS, CD8 T cells
downregulate expression of their chemokine receptors to establish residence.
CD8 T cells are present in perivascular and parenchymal
regions throughout the aging CNS
T cell extravasation across the endothelium involves a series of
adhesion events that include attachment, rolling, and transmigration.

FIGURE 1. CNS recruitment of CD8 T cells increases with age. A representative dot plot depicts an increase in CD45high peripheral leukocytes in one
aged brain hemisphere compared with young (A). The absolute number of CD45high peripheral leukocytes present in the young and aged brain is quantified
[(B) n = 13 per group]. The number of cells within the CD45high population is displayed by subset [(C) n = 13 per group]. A representative dot plot shows T
cell subsets in the aged brain (D). The CD4:CD8 ratio of T cells is quantified for blood, spleen, and brain in young and aged mice [(E) n = 10–26 per group].
Data are representative of the average of individual mice within a group. Error bars show mean SEM. *p , 0.05, **p , 0.01, ***p , 0.001.

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

To confirm that aging increases leukocyte trafficking in the CNS,
we quantified the absolute number of bone marrow–derived cells
present in each tissue using the gating strategy shown in
Supplemental Fig. 1A. The number of CD45high leukocytes was
significantly increased in the aged brain (Fig. 1A). Absolute cell
counts revealed a nearly 3-fold increase in peripheral cells in
normal aged brain [(Fig. 1B) p , 0.001, n = 13 per group]. Similar
increases were also observed in the aged spinal cord (Supplemental
Fig. 1B). T cells composed the majority of these age-associated
leukocytes, wherein the CD8 subset was more numerous than the
CD4 subset [(Fig. 1C–E) p , 0.001]. These were identified as
conventional TCR-a/b, CD8 a/b T cells (data not shown).
CD4:CD8 ratios of circulating T cells were decreased with age
(p , 0.001) and significantly lower in the brain compared with
blood and spleen regardless of age (Fig. 1E). To determine
whether our findings were strain dependent, we validated our
results in the BALB/cByJ strain, which also demonstrated
greater numbers of CD8 T cells in their brains with age, with

older females exhibiting significantly higher numbers compared
with their age-matched male counterparts (Supplemental Figs.
1C, 2A–D). The results show that the CNS is more permissive
to CD8 T lymphocyte trafficking with age.

The Journal of Immunology

3321

Because ICAM-1 expression is reported to be increased in aged brain
vasculature (21, 22), we examined CD8 T cell expression of CD11a
(LFA1) and CD49d (VLA4), adhesion molecules required for T cell
entry into peripheral tissues. Fig. 3A–D shows that CD11a and
CD49d expression was significantly increased on circulating CD8
T cells with age (p , 0.05 and p , 0.01, respectively), and further
elevated on those present in the brain at either age (p , 0.001 and
p , 0.05, respectively). In both tissues, CD49d-positive CD8 T cells
were CD11ahigh. The vessel capture of T cells implies subsequent
extravasation into perivascular and parenchymal CNS tissue. Using tomato-lectin immunohistochemistry, we identified the putative
presence of CD8 T cells outside of lectin-positive lumen of vessels
(Fig. 3E). To confirm that T cells resided in the parenchymal tissue,
and were not adherent to the brain endothelium, we performed an

injection-labeling experiment, as previously described (23, 24).
All circulating and vessel-associated cells bound to transcardially
injected PE-conjugated CD3e Ab were processed for leukocyte
collection and subsequently stained with allophycocyanin eF780conjugated CD3e Ab. Compared with an injection-labeling efficiency of ∼98% for all blood CD3e-injected+CD8 T cells, only
7.7 6 5% of aged brain CD8 T cells were positive for CD3einjected Ab, suggesting these cells are located outside of the
vascular network and in the parenchyma or perivascular spaces
(Fig. 3F, 3G). Immunohistology revealed the presence of CD3+
CD8+ T cells in circumventricular organs (choroid plexus and
meninges) and most gray and white matter regions (cortex,
striatum, corpus collosum) throughout the anterior–posterior axis
of the brain (Fig. 3H, 3I). Furthermore, we found that these cells

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

FIGURE 2. Age-related changes in chemokine production and chemokine receptor expression in the brain. Whole brain protein concentrations of CCL5
(A), CCL11 (B), CXCL9 (C), and CXCL10 (D) are quantified in young and aged mice. Plasma concentrations of these respective chemokines (E, F, G, and
H) are quantified. Representative histograms show higher expression of CCR5 (I), CCR3 (J), CCR6 (K), and CXCR3 (L) on circulating CD8 T cells with
age, and downregulation on CD8 T cells present in the aged brain. Young blood (dotted gray), aged blood (solid gray), and aged brain (solid black) CD8
T cells are depicted. The mean fluorescence intensity for each of the respective chemokine receptors was quantified [(M, N, O, and P) n = 5 per group]. Cellspecific fluorescence minus one controls were used to determine positive gating (shaded gray). Error bars show mean SEM. MFI, mean fluorescence
intensity. *p , 0.05, **p , 0.01, ***p , 0.001.

3322

AGE-RELATED CNS-RESIDENT CD8 T CELLS ARE REACTIVE TO STROKE

were often associated with astrocytes, although the precise nature
of this association is unknown (Fig. 3J).
Age-related, CNS-resident CD8 T cells have memory/effector
phenotype and expression markers of TCR activation
The trafficking of T cells into CNS tissues is thought to occur
following antigenic presentation in draining lymph nodes by professional APCs. Ag-experienced memory T cell subsets are defined
by CD44+CD62L+ (central memory) and CD44+CD62L2 (TEM)
expression, whereas naive T cells are largely negative for the activation marker CD44 (25). Applying this paradigm to CD8 T cells in

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

FIGURE 3. Extravasation of CD8 T cells
is higher into the aged brain. Representative
histograms depict the relative expression of
the adhesion molecules CD11a (A) and
CD49d (C) on CD8 T cells from the blood
(red) and brain (blue) of young (dotted) and
aged (solid) mice. Quantification of the mean
fluorescence intensity of CD11a+ [(B) n = 5–
6 per group] and percentage of CD49d+ [(D)
n = 9–10 per group] CD8 T cells is shown.
Immunohistochemistry shows the presence of
CD8-positive cells (green) outside of lectinpositive (red) blood vessels (E). A representative dot plot from the intravascular labeling
experiment shows the absence of injected
CD3+ Ab on CD8 T cells in the aged brain
[(F) n = 8 per group]. The percentage of intravascular-labeled CD3+CD8 T cells was
quantified (G) in the aged brain and blood
(for positive control). Representative 10-mm–
thick brain tissue sections illustrating the
presence of CD3+CD8+ T cells in the aged
brain, meninges, and choroid plexus [(H)
scale bar, 10 mm]. CD8+ T cells were found
throughout the anterior–posterior axis of the
brain, including the striatum, cortex, and
corpus collosum (I) and in association with
activated astrocytes (J). Cell-specific fluorescence minus one controls were used to
determine positive gating (shaded gray). Error bars show mean SEM. GFAP, glial
fibrillary acidic protein; MBP, myelin basic
protein; NeuN, neuronal nuclei. *p , 0.05,
**p , 0.01, ***p , 0.001.

the aging brain, we found that the vast majority (87 6 4%) of all
CNS-resident CD8 T cells have an effector memory phenotype,
compared with just 9 6 4% of CD8 T cells in blood (Fig. 4A, 4B).
A similar percentage of T cells with effector memory phenotype
was observed in young brains, despite the fact that T cells were
found in significantly lower abundance. To determine the general
activation state of CNS-resident CD8 TEM cells, we probed these
cells with known markers of T cell activation. The early activation
and tissue-retention marker, CD69, was highly upregulated on
CNS-resident CD8 T cells compared with those in the blood
[(Fig. 4C) n = 5 per group, p , 0.001]. Expression of programmed

The Journal of Immunology

3323

death-1 receptor, which is upregulated on activated T cells, was also
dramatically increased on nearly all CNS-resident T cells compared
with CD8 T cells in aged blood [(Fig. 4D) n = 5 per group, p ,
0.0001], implying the presence of widespread T cell activation in
the aged brain. Expression of the resident memory marker aE
integrin CD103 was also found on a significant fraction of these
cells (Fig. 4E). To determine whether CNS-resident memory CD8
T cells were responding to antigenic signals present in the aging
CNS, CD8 T cells in the blood and brain were screened for TCRvb
usage to determine T cell clonality in tertiary tissues. No differences
in TCRvb usage between CNS-resident CD8 T cells and their
blood counterparts were found for any of the 15 TCRvb families
(Fig. 4F). Based on the absence of major clonal expansions in the
CNS, these results suggest that CD8 T cell entry into the aged brain
is largely stochastic, rather than Ag driven. The following data

suggest that the increased trafficking of these cells into the CNS is a
stochastic process, whereby a pool of activated, Ag-experienced
memory effector CD8 T cells is constitutively present throughout
adult life in the CNS.
Increased immune surveillance by CD8 T cells in the aging
brain is associated with microglial function
We investigated the functional role of CNS-resident CD8 T cells by
correlating the absolute number in each brain with the activation
status of microglia in that brain. Correlation analyses revealed that
aged brains with greater numbers of CNS-resident CD8 T cells had
significantly more microglia (Fig. 5A, p , 0.05), indicating that
these cells may either promote microglia survival or, alternatively,
increase activation-induced proliferation. Brains that contained
large numbers of CNS-resident CD8 T cells, however, were also

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

FIGURE 4. CNS-resident CD8 T cells stochastically migrate into the brain and have tissue-resident and effector memory phenotypes. A representative
dot plot shows effector memory phenotype of CD8 T cells in the aged brain and central memory phenotype of CD8 T cells in the aged blood (A). The
percentage of CD8 T cells with effector memory phenotype (CD44highCD62low) was quantified (B). Representative histograms (n = 5–6 per group) depict
significant expression of the activation markers CD69 (C) and programmed death-1 (D) in the brain (solid black) relative to blood (solid gray), as well as the
resident memory marker CD103 (E). A mouse vb TCR screening panel containing 15 FITC-conjugated mAbs was used to assess TCR vb usage in CD8
T cells from the blood and brain of aged mice. The mean percentage for each of the 15 subfamilies of TCR vb is displayed (F). No differences were found
between groups (n = 11 per group). Cell-specific fluorescence minus one controls were used to determine positive gating (shaded gray). Error bars show
mean SEM. *p , 0.05, **p , 0.01, ***p , 0.001.

3324

AGE-RELATED CNS-RESIDENT CD8 T CELLS ARE REACTIVE TO STROKE

associated with smaller sized microglia relative to brains with
fewer CD8 T cells (Fig. 5D, p , 0.05), indicative of a more
ramified, resting morphology. Functionally, higher numbers of
T cells were associated with increased microglia phagocytosis
(Fig. 5E, 5F, p , 0.001) and decreased TNF production (Fig. 5B,
5C, p , 0.05). These data suggest that the increased presence of
CD8 T cells in the aged CNS is positively associated with an antiinflammatory microglia phenotype in the aged brain.
Basal and stimulus-driven production of cytokines and
chemokines following ischemic stroke
T cells are polarized to effector memory cells following TCR
reactivation to selected antigenic stimuli. The effector function of
these cells is largely specified by cytokine production. An in vivo
brefeldin protocol was used to measure cytokine production in
CNS-specific CD8 T cells as in (26). Cytokines commonly associated with CD8 T cell proinflammatory responses (TNF and
IFN-g) were basally produced at significant levels (Fig. 6A–C),
whereas granzyme B or perforin was not expressed under any
conditions (data not shown). Both the number and relative expression level of TNF and IFN-g were significantly increased after
stimulation in CNS-resident CD8 T cells compared with those in
blood (Fig. 6D, 6E, p , 0.001). CCL2 production by CNSresident CD8 T cells was significantly higher after stimulation
compared with those in the blood (Fig. 6F, p , 0.001). These data
suggest that CNS-resident T cells in the aged CNS are a rich
source of proinflammatory cytokines, most likely contributing to
the steady increase in overall levels of inflammation that occurs
with advanced age. Next we determined whether these cells were
similarly responsive to stimuli in an age-relevant model of brain
injury. We tested this in an experimental model of ischemic stroke,
as this is a disease that mainly affects the aging population. Cytokine production was assessed at 4 h postreperfusion following
90 min of occlusion. Reactive oxygen species generation was
significantly increased in CD8 T cells subjected to ischemia

compared with those in the control contralateral hemisphere, as
evidenced by 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-29,79-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
diacetate, acetyl ester staining (Fig. 6G, 6H, p , 0.05). The percentage of TNF- and CCL2-positive CD8 T cells was also increased in ischemic hemisphere compared with control (Fig. 6I–L,
p , 0.05 and p , 0.01, respectively). These data suggest that
activated CNS-resident CD8 T cells contribute to the age-related
exacerbation of acute ischemic brain injury by amplifying production of proinflammatory cytokines and promoting recruitment
of peripheral leukocytes.

Discussion
This work has identified a novel population of immune surveillant
CD8 T cells in the aging CNS that may have opposing roles in
health and disease. This adds to previous studies demonstrating that
immune privilege in the aging CNS is compromised. The aged
brain is more permissive to T cell entry, which has functional
consequences, especially after injury. We base this observation on
several criteria, as follows: 1) increased brain production of T cell
chemokine cues, 2) enhanced expression of adhesion molecules, 3)
higher levels of extravasation into perivascular and parenchymal
regions, 4) activated tissue-resident and effector memory phenotypes, 5) presence alters microglia function, and 6) primed to elicit
strong cytokine and chemokine responses after sterile brain injury.
These cells have a phenotype indicative of resident memory cells
(CD44highCD62L2CD11a+CD69+CD103+/2). In summary, this
work has identified a specific population of age-associated CNSresident memory CD8 T cells and has highlighted their influence
on the neuroimmunological landscape.
For an organ that has long been described as immune privileged
and devoid of any blood-borne leukocytes, the brain’s relationship
to the immune system is now being revised with the advent of a
meningeal–lymphatic system and growing recognition that T cells
constitutively traffic throughout the CNS (27). Compared with
many widely used experimental models of CNS injury, the number

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

FIGURE 5. Positive correlation between the number of CNS-resident CD8 T cells and healthy microglia functions in the aged brain. Correlation analysis
between CD8 T cell count and microglia (CD45intCD11b+Ly6C2) count [(A) p = 0.0125 and r = 0.534], percentage TNF-positive [(C) p = 0.0105 and r =
20.7616], forward scatter/cell size [(D) p = 0.0421 and r = 20.5488], and percentage of bead-positive phagocytic [(F) p = 0.0003 and r = 0.6945]. Representative dot plots are shown for microglia TNF production (B) and bead assay (E). For all experiments, n = 10–22 per group. Age-matched, cell-specific
fluorescence minus one controls were used to determine positive gating.

The Journal of Immunology

3325

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

FIGURE 6. Acute stimulation of CD8 T cells by PMA/ionomycin and in an age-relevant model of cerebral ischemia. Representative histograms show
CD8 T cell expression of TNF (A), IFN-g (B), and CCL2 (C) in blood (solid black) and brain (solid gray) and after stimulation (dotted). The respective
mean fluorescence intensities (D–F) were quantified (n = 4–10 per group). Aged mice were subject to 90 min of occlusion, followed by 2 h of reperfusion
and 1-h ex vivo stimulation by PMA/ionomycin. CD8 T cells from the ischemic hemisphere (ipsilateral) were compared with those in the contralateral
hemisphere for internal control (n = 4–6 per group). A representative zebra plot shows reactive oxygen species levels in CD8 T cells after stroke, as
measured by CM-H2DCFDA (G) and quantification of mean fluorescence intensity (H). A representative dot plot shows intracellular production of TNF (I)
and the percentages quantified (J). A representative dot plot depicts a stroke-induced increase in CCL2 production by CD8 T cells in the aged brain (K). The
percentages were quantified (L). Cell-specific fluorescence minus one controls were used to determine positive gating (shaded gray). Error bars show mean
SEM. *p , 0.05, **p , 0.01, ***p , 0.001. a.u.i., arbitrary units of intensity; CM-H2DCFDA, 5-(and-6)-chloromethyl-29,79-dichlorodihydrofluorescein
diacetate, acetyl ester; MFI, mean fluorescence intensity; SSC, side scatter intensity.

3326

AGE-RELATED CNS-RESIDENT CD8 T CELLS ARE REACTIVE TO STROKE
Our observation that brain-related chemokine production is increased with age suggests possible involvement in facilitating T cell
migration to the CNS. Moreover, the age-related increase in chemokine receptor expression on circulating CD8 T cells as noted in
this study may further enhance this migration. Although speculative,
this thinking is premised on several studies in which blocking these
particular chemokines (i.e., CCL5, CCL11, CXCL9, and CXCL10)
interfered with the normal migration of T cells into the injured CNS
(46–55). The cellular source of these chemokines was not assessed
in this study, although glial cells are known to be major producers
of these signals. For example, astrocyte-secreted CXCL10 promotes
the recruitment and entry of lymphocytes into the CNS and worsens
acute spinal cord demyelination in experimental allergic encephalitis (56, 57). Indeed, there is a growing appreciation for astrocyte–
T cell interactions (58–60). The impact of CNS-resident CD8
T cells on astrocyte functions in aged brains remains to be shown.
Although aged astrocytes exhibit signs of a senescence-associated
phenotype with age (61–63) and produce chemokines in response to
amyloid-b peptides (64), the role of astrocytes as mediators of
T cell recruitment in the aging brain is not understood.
The inverted CD4:CD8 ratios in the young and aged brain
implied there was a CD8 T cell–specific pathway in the CNS that
warranted further investigation. These findings stand in stark
contrast to that found in the choroid plexus, meninges, and cerebrospinal fluid, which suggest CD4 T cells are the predominate
subset (6, 10, 65). The relatively low number of CD4 T cells residing in brain parenchyma hindered our attempts to make reliable
quantitative assessments of this population, yet much of our unpublished findings suggest that these cells exhibit many of the
same features as CNS-resident CD8 T cells, despite having a
markedly diminished capacity for stimulus-driven cytokine production. The general absence of CD4 T cells from the CNS parenchyma and preferential localization in portal sites of CNS entry
and egress is most likely indicative of their homeostatic role, yet
our current understanding of these cells is still in its infancy.
CD8 T cells have received comparably less attention than their
CD4 counterparts with respect to aging and CNS disease. This is
partly due to their narrowly defined role in antiviral responses. Yet,
emerging data suggest that CD8 T cells may play more diverse
roles in disease settings. Mounting evidence supports a role for
CD8-mediated immune surveillance in peripheral tissues as part of
the body’s normal defense against cancer and viral infection (14).
The prevalence of pathogenic and oncogenic insults increases with
age, triggering the induction of intrinsic defense mechanisms such
as cell death signaling and senescence. Naturally extrinsic
mechanisms evolved that alert the immune system to eliminate
these aberrant cells to prevent further bystander damage. One
mechanism through which this occurs is via immune surveillance
by tissue-patrolling CD8 T cells. These cells eliminate unhealthy
cells that increase presentation of nonself peptide. Although expression of MHC class I protein increases in the brain with age,
the role of immune surveillance in aging individuals and likewise
the effect of aging on the efficacy of immune surveillance is
understudied and warrants further investigation.
Because endothelial-ICAM expression has been shown to be
elevated with age (22), we evaluated whether these cells were
simply adherent to the vasculature. The majority of CNS-resident
CD8 T cells were not associated with the vascular lumen, as these
cells were largely found extravasated beyond the vascular lumen
into many parenchymal regions across the CNS. CD8 T cell–astrocyte interactions have also received growing attention (60, 66).
Functional evidence that CD8 T cells are prime candidates for a
role in CNS immune surveillance is based on the exquisitely
specific destruction of transgenic astrocytes expressing MHCI-

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

of the T cells in the normal aging brain is relatively small, yet
emerging data suggests that interfering with this steady-state
trafficking of T cells results in significant cognitive impairment
(12). Moreover, recent findings suggest that the recovery of resident memory CD8 T cells from nonlymphoid tissues may be
significantly underestimated, as many cells are either killed or
discarded during the lengthy tissue-processing procedure (28).
The nearly 3-fold increase in CNS-resident CD8 T cells of old
mice highlights the role of aging on neuroinflammatory activity
and the greater need for immune surveillance.
Despite the fact that the other CD45high leukocyte populations do
not prominently increase in the brain with age, the question arises as
to whether T cell recruitment is gradually increased over time, or
whether there is a critical period in which the brain is more permissive to these lymphocytes. Although the recent identification of a
CNS lymphatic route implies that T cell trafficking is a constitutive,
homeostatic process, the presence of CD8 T cells in the young brain
suggests that this process begins early. Although our study was
limited to two time points, earlier work by Stichel and Luebbert (16)
demonstrated that CD3+ T cells accumulate in several CNS regions
with chronological age, consistent with the age-related increase of
these cells in other peripheral tissues (29–33). These findings support
the notion of “inflammaging,” which describes the gradual increase
in basal inflammatory processes with age (15). In addition to the
elevated production of inflammatory mediators, this definition may
be extended to account for age-related increases in thymic atrophy,
memory conversion, TCR repertoire shrinkage, and migration into
nonlymphoid tissues.
Our decision to refer to these cells as CNS-resident CD8 T cells
is based on several criteria, including the simple fact that these cells
are present (or reside) in CNS tissue and have a phenotype resembling that of known resident memory T cell populations (34).
Among these, they exhibit diminished expression of chemokine
receptors such as CCR7 required for lymph node homing (18).
Because CD8 T cells of similar phenotype and function are rarely
found in blood circulation or layover lymphoid sites, we assume
these to be features of those present in nonlymphoid tissues. The
distinction between resident and trafficking T cells is an important
one, and some have attempted to address this question using
parabiosis and adoptive transfer experiments following the generation of memory in infection models, but studies on normal
aging are lacking (35–38). Nonetheless, these studies suggest that
egress from the CNS is minimal or slow, supporting the idea of
long-term retention, or residency. Although the initial migration
and entry into tissues may be Ag driven, resident memory CD8
T cells can persist in the absence of Ags while maintaining impressive effector functions (36, 39–44). Seminal work by the
Lefrancois group (24) has demonstrated that newly generated
memory CD8 T cells migrate to nonlymphoid tissues regardless of
site of activation or tissue of origin (28, 35, 45). Regardless of Ag
specificity, the CNS niche provides signals that are most likely
distinct from all other tissues (e.g., adipose, liver, lung, etc.),
priming them to respond and function in ways that are adapted (or
specific) to this unique environment. In support of this notion, the
Bevan laboratory (36) has shown that CNS-resident CD8 T cells
require local niche signals for their maintenance and survival.
However, residence may only be temporary, and we cannot rule
out the possibility that these cells shift their phenotype as they
transit out of the CNS and back into circulation. Future studies
employing cell-tracking approaches might serve to elucidate the
migratory path of this rather reclusive lymphocyte population.
Although T cell trafficking through the healthy CNS most likely
reflects a constitutive requirement for immune surveillance, factors
associated with chronic stress may modulate this regulated process.

The Journal of Immunology

works support the notion of an immune surveillant pathway in the
CNS that maintains not only the acute steady state trafficking of
CD8 T cells, but their long-term maintenance as well. Surveillance also occurs at CNS drainage sites, as intracranial injection of
OVA peptide results in T cell priming in peripheral lymphoid
organs and the subsequent infiltration and persistence of OT-1
T cells into the brain (36, 80, 81). Because the age-related accumulation of CD8 memory cells described in our study represents a
naturally occurring population of CNS-resident T cells, it may
stand as a useful model for understanding the biology of tissueresident memory and immune surveillance. Taken together, the
migration of effector memory CD8 T cells into the aged CNS does
not require stimulation by CNS Ag, although deeper sequencing
of the TCR repertoire might be a useful approach in determining
the antigenic specificity of these cells.
We demonstrated that, upon activation by either PMA/ionomycin
stimulation or ischemic brain injury, CNS-resident CD8 T cells in
aged brains are prone to elicit highly volatile responses that include
the enhanced production of reactive oxygen species, TNF, IFN-g,
and CCL2. These cells may therefore predispose the aged brain to
overreact to stimuli, further exaggerating the inflammatory response and altering the context of injury via the recruitment of
injury-causing neutrophils. This is in contrast to that of the infiltrating CD8 T cell population, which is involved in the delayed
response to ischemia during the recovery period. Indeed, the inflammatory milieu and leukocyte response in the ischemic brain
are dramatically different in older mice (82–86). Furthermore,
these exaggerated immune responses are tightly linked to worse
outcomes in aged mice (33, 87). Whether stroke-induced activation of CNS-resident CD8 T cells results in the biased recruitment
of neutrophils in the aged brain by producing elevated levels of
chemokines is not known, but would provide an alternative explanation for differences in the kinetics of leukocyte infiltration
with age. Moreover, given their role in promoting leukocyte recruitment, CNS-resident CD8 T cells may represent important
therapeutic targets in the acute period following stroke.
Although rarely described, age-related CNS-resident CD8
T cells have now been observed in multiple mouse strains and even
humans, implying that augmented immune surveillance of the CNS
is a conserved adaptation to aging (17, 18, 88). Older BALB/cByJ
and C57BL/6J males exhibited similar CNS leukocyte compositions. Interestingly, aged female BALB/cByJ had higher frequencies of CD4 T cells, consistent with the Th2 bias of this
particular strain and sex (89, 90). We also noted significant sex
differences in the number of CNS-resident T cells in aged mice,
with females having approximately twice as many as males. Although sex differences in activation status were not examined, the
large number of injury-responsive CNS-resident T cells present in
the aged female brain suggests that they are predisposed to greater
inflammatory activity and worse outcomes following stroke. Indeed, clinical data and past work from our laboratory have shown
that aged females exhibit greater acute injury after ischemic stroke
compared with aged males (83, 91). Moreover, this sexual dimorphism in immune surveillance may partially explain why
autoimmune and antiviral responses are ostensibly stronger in
females or why the diagnosis of malignant brain tumors is twice as
likely in males and results in greater cognitive impairment and
mortality compared with females (92–97). Whether ovarian hormones mediate this sex effect is not known, as aged female mice
are postmenopausal and young females were not examined in this
study. However, our previous work suggests that T cell numbers in
the injured brain negatively correlate with circulating estradiol
levels in aging females, suggesting that estrogen may normally
suppress T cell trafficking into the brain (33). Understanding the

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

restricted hemagglutinin (67). OVA-expressing oligodendrocytes
elicit the proliferation and effector memory conversion of
responding OT-1 T cells in healthy mice without infiltrating the
CNS, indicating that Ag sampling is performed by CD8 T cells
under steady state conditions (68). Interestingly, the authors found
that neuroinflammation augmented the level of Ag sampling and
led to the accumulation of OT-1 T cells in the inflamed brain.
Thus, it is increasingly evident that CD8 T cells have the capacity
to mediate responses against CNS Ags (69). Although the agerelated increase in neuroinflammation most likely promotes the
recruitment of immune surveillant CD8 T cells, how they impact
CNS function is poorly understood. Tissue-resident memory CD8
T cells provide superior protection against viral reactivation
compared with the circulating memory T cell pool, but become
dependent on the local milieu for function and survival (36, 42,
70). The increased presence of these cells in the aged CNS may
reflect an evolutionary need to generate a rapid response to control
senescent transformation of cells and/or prevent reactivation of
latent neurotropic viruses.
The role of immunosurveillance as a defense mechanism that
safeguards the functional integrity of tissues implies that it is an
adaptive response to an environment under constant insult. Normal
aging is associated with deficits in microglia phagocytosis and
increased expression of proinflammatory mediators (19). We
demonstrated that the increased presence of CNS-resident CD8
T cells in older brains was associated with an attenuation of TNF
production and enhanced phagocytic activity by microglia. Although causality cannot be proven, the effects of CD8 T cells on
microglia need not occur via direct cell–cell interaction. Although
T cells are generally associated with CNS injury, other work has
shown that T cells can enter the brain and not cause glial pathology (71), with T regulatory subsets showing potent neuroprotection and anti-inflammatory activity (72–75). Furthermore,
emerging data indicate that T cells may function to support
learning and memory under normal physiological conditions (11).
It is possible that by eliminating nearby senescent cells CD8
T cells serve to attenuate age-related neuroinflammation, thereby
indirectly preventing the chronic activation of microglia.
Given the lack of stereotypical antiviral responses and recent
evidence showing clonal expansion of CNS Ag-specific CD4
T cells in the choroid plexus of aged mice, we hypothesized that
CNS-resident CD8 T cell activation is similarly induced by CNS
Ag. However, we report relatively little clonal expansion of TCRvb
subsets in the aged CNS, as evidenced by equilibrium in TCRvb
usage between those in the CNS and blood. Thus, our data argue
that their migration into the CNS is stochastic and not Ag driven.
Consistent with our findings, studies using OVA-specific
T cells have shown that CNS-irrelevant T cells recognizing
nonmammalian Ag also have the capacity to enter the CNS (71).
Novel transgenic approaches designed to probe the efficiency
of CNS immune surveillance have shown that Ag-containing
microglia and astrocytes, which are normally confined within
the CNS barrier, are routinely surveyed by naive and Ag-specific
CD8 T cells, resulting in the exquisitely specific destruction of
these cells (38, 67, 76, 77). Interestingly, the elimination of these
Ag-containing glia occurred in the absence of any bystander
damage, implying that the mechanisms underlying CD8 T cell
surveillance are wired to protect the brain from foreign cells in
a remarkably effective manner. Thus, it is not unreasonable to
assume that the elimination of abnormal or senescent cells is a
routine occurrence in the healthy brain, increasing with age and
stress. Taken together, the consensus understanding is that the
CNS provides a niche that maintains both Ag-specific and nonspecific effector memory CD8 T cells (78–80). Furthermore, these

3327

3328

AGE-RELATED CNS-RESIDENT CD8 T CELLS ARE REACTIVE TO STROKE

3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Robert Clark and Dr. Stefan Brocke for helpful discussions.
We also acknowledge Brett Friedler for technical assistance.

Disclosures
The authors have no financial conflicts of interest.

References
1. Ortman, J. M., V. A. Velkoff, and H. Hogan. 2014. An Aging Nation: the Older
Population in the United States. US Census Bureau, Washington, DC.
2. Cribbs, D. H., N. C. Berchtold, V. Perreau, P. D. Coleman, J. Rogers,
A. J. Tenner, and C. W. Cotman. 2012. Extensive innate immune gene acti-

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.

vation accompanies brain aging, increasing vulnerability to cognitive decline
and neurodegeneration: a microarray study. J. Neuroinflammation 9: 179.
Schwartz, M., J. Kipnis, S. Rivest, and A. Prat. 2013. How do immune cells
support and shape the brain in health, disease, and aging? J. Neurosci. 33:
17587–17596.
Wrona, D. 2006. Neural-immune interactions: an integrative view of the bidirectional relationship between the brain and immune systems. J. Neuroimmunol. 172: 38–58.
Banks, W. A. 2015. The blood-brain barrier in neuroimmunology: tales of
separation and assimilation. Brain Behav. Immun. 44: 1–8.
Baruch, K., N. Ron-Harel, H. Gal, A. Deczkowska, E. Shifrut, W. Ndifon,
N. Mirlas-Neisberg, M. Cardon, I. Vaknin, L. Cahalon, et al. 2013. CNSspecific immunity at the choroid plexus shifts toward destructive Th2 inflammation in brain aging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110: 2264–2269.
Louveau, A., I. Smirnov, T. J. Keyes, J. D. Eccles, S. J. Rouhani, J. D. Peske,
N. C. Derecki, D. Castle, J. W. Mandell, K. S. Lee, et al. 2015. Structural and
functional features of central nervous system lymphatic vessels. Nature 523:
337–341.
Sierra, A., S. Beccari, I. Diaz-Aparicio, J. M. Encinas, S. Comeau, and
M. E. Tremblay. 2014. Surveillance, phagocytosis, and inflammation: how
never-resting microglia influence adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Neural
Plast. 2014: 610343.
Gemechu, J. M., and M. Bentivoglio. 2012. T cell recruitment in the brain
during normal aging. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 6: 38.
Kivisäkk, P., D. J. Mahad, M. K. Callahan, C. Trebst, B. Tucky, T. Wei, L. Wu,
E. S. Baekkevold, H. Lassmann, S. M. Staugaitis, et al. 2003. Human cerebrospinal fluid central memory CD4+ T cells: evidence for trafficking through
choroid plexus and meninges via P-selectin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100:
8389–8394.
Kipnis, J., S. Gadani, and N. C. Derecki. 2012. Pro-cognitive properties of
T cells. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 12: 663–669.
Radjavi, A., I. Smirnov, N. Derecki, and J. Kipnis. 2014. Dynamics of the
meningeal CD4(+) T-cell repertoire are defined by the cervical lymph nodes
and facilitate cognitive task performance in mice. Mol. Psychiatry 19: 531–533.
Radjavi, A., I. Smirnov, and J. Kipnis. 2014. Brain antigen-reactive CD4+
T cells are sufficient to support learning behavior in mice with limited T cell
repertoire. Brain Behav. Immun. 35: 58–63.
Swann, J. B., and M. J. Smyth. 2007. Immune surveillance of tumors. J. Clin.
Invest. 117: 1137–1146.
Franceschi, C., M. Bonafè, S. Valensin, F. Olivieri, M. De Luca, E. Ottaviani,
and G. De Benedictis. 2000. Inflamm-aging: an evolutionary perspective on
immunosenescence. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 908: 244–254.
Stichel, C. C., and H. Luebbert. 2007. Inflammatory processes in the aging
mouse brain: participation of dendritic cells and T-cells. Neurobiol. Aging 28:
1507–1521.
Loeffler, C., K. Dietz, A. Schleich, H. Schlaszus, M. Stoll, R. Meyermann, and
M. Mittelbronn. 2011. Immune surveillance of the normal human CNS takes
place in dependence of the locoregional blood-brain barrier configuration and is
mainly performed by CD3(+)/CD8(+) lymphocytes. Neuropathology 31: 230–
238.
Smolders, J., E. B. Remmerswaal, K. G. Schuurman, J. Melief, C. G. van Eden,
R. A. van Lier, I. Huitinga, and J. Hamann. 2013. Characteristics of differentiated CD8(+) and CD4(+) T cells present in the human brain. Acta Neuropathol. 126: 525–535.
Ritzel, R. M., A. R. Patel, S. Pan, J. Crapser, M. Hammond, E. Jellison, and
L. D. McCullough. 2015. Age- and location-related changes in microglial
function. Neurobiol. Aging 36: 2153–2163.
McCullough, L. D., Z. Zeng, K. K. Blizzard, I. Debchoudhury, and P. D. Hurn.
2005. Ischemic nitric oxide and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 in cerebral ischemia: male toxicity, female protection. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 25: 502–512.
Miguel-Hidalgo, J. J., S. Nithuairisg, C. Stockmeier, and G. Rajkowska. 2007.
Distribution of ICAM-1 immunoreactivity during aging in the human orbitofrontal cortex. Brain Behav. Immun. 21: 100–111.
Xu, Y. Z., M. Nygård, K. Kristensson, and M. Bentivoglio. 2010. Regulation of
cytokine signaling and T-cell recruitment in the aging mouse brain in response
to central inflammatory challenge. Brain Behav. Immun. 24: 138–152.
Anderson, K. G., K. Mayer-Barber, H. Sung, L. Beura, B. R. James, J. J. Taylor,
L. Qunaj, T. S. Griffith, V. Vezys, D. L. Barber, and D. Masopust. 2014. Intravascular staining for discrimination of vascular and tissue leukocytes. Nat.
Protoc. 9: 209–222.
Anderson, K. G., H. Sung, C. N. Skon, L. Lefrancois, A. Deisinger, V. Vezys,
and D. Masopust. 2012. Cutting edge: intravascular staining redefines lung CD8
T cell responses. J. Immunol. 189: 2702–2706.
Roberts, A. D., and D. L. Woodland. 2004. Cutting edge: effector memory
CD8+ T cells play a prominent role in recall responses to secondary viral infection in the lung. J. Immunol. 172: 6533–6537.
Liu, F., and J. L. Whitton. 2005. Cutting edge: re-evaluating the in vivo cytokine responses of CD8+ T cells during primary and secondary viral infections.
J. Immunol. 174: 5936–5940.
Ellwardt, E., J. T. Walsh, J. Kipnis, and F. Zipp. 2016. Understanding the role of
T cells in CNS homeostasis. Trends Immunol. 37: 154–165.
Steinert, E. M., J. M. Schenkel, K. A. Fraser, L. K. Beura, L. S. Manlove,
B. Z. Igyártó, P. J. Southern, and D. Masopust. 2015. Quantifying memory CD8
T cells reveals regionalization of immunosurveillance. Cell 161: 737–749.
Martinet, K. Z., S. Bloquet, and C. Bourgeois. 2014. Ageing combines CD4
T cell lymphopenia in secondary lymphoid organs and T cell accumulation in
gut associated lymphoid tissue. Immun. Ageing 11: 8.

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

biological consequences of these sex differences remains an area
rife for exploration.
Although little is known about naturally occurring populations of
tissue-resident T cells in nonlymphoid tissues like the CNS, they are
believed to be an important part of adaptive immune memory and
immune surveillance by rapidly addressing and clearing infected and
transformed cells (38). However, the pathological accumulation of
these cells can drive disease progression in these tissues, highlighting the dual nature of these cells (98). The absolute number of
these cells obtained from the aged brain prohibits their utility in
adoptive transfer experiments. Nevertheless, our findings suggest
that resident memory CD8 T cells are poised to influence CNS
function by direct interaction with aged glial cells. These data
suggest that the working definition of “inflammaging” in the CNS
should include the increased level of immune surveillance by CD8
T cells. These T cells may be included with other cell types known
to have the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (61, 99–
102). Senescent cells promote tumor progression through the release of proinflammatory molecules and are relatively more vulnerable to transformation due to the age-related accumulation of
DNA mutations. Thus, senescence surveillance is believed to be
critical for tumor suppression (14, 99, 103–105). Resident microglial function is influenced by the increased presence of these cells.
However, the beneficial role for CD8 T cells in suppressing the
proinflammatory activity of microglia under normal conditions is in
contrast to their exaggerated response to stimuli resulting in the elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokine signals that favor recruitment of granulocytes. Interestingly, memory
T cells are known to accumulate in several tertiary tissues with advanced age. Moreover, the age-related increase in the number of these
tissue-resident cells may likely predispose older mice to worse outcomes and account for age-related differences in inflammation following traumatic injuries such as ischemic stroke. Future studies are
needed to determine whether these interactions can be experimentally
manipulated to better understand their functional role in normal aging.
Although it has long been presumed that T cells visit nonlymphoid
tissues like the brain, many believed these cells to circulate back to
the lymph nodes. Emerging data suggest that some T cells functionally adapt to these environments and reside in peripheral tissues
forever (106, 107). Whereas resident memory CD8 T cells have
superior effector functions and provide frontline protection against
infection and tumor development, the effects of aging on the distribution and function of these cells in otherwise healthy mice are
largely unknown. In this study, we have shown that aging increases
the recruitment of CD8 T cells to the CNS and these cells establish
residence and stand poised to react to inflammatory stimuli in the
wake of sterile injury. By potentiating the neuroinflammatory response to stroke, we demonstrated that the age-related increase in
the level of immune surveillance by CD8 T cells may have unintended consequences that could profoundly alter the course of injury in aged mice.

The Journal of Immunology

55. Ochiai, E., Q. Sa, M. Brogli, T. Kudo, X. Wang, J. P. Dubey, and Y. Suzuki.
2015. CXCL9 is important for recruiting immune T cells into the brain and
inducing an accumulation of the T cells to the areas of tachyzoite proliferation
to prevent reactivation of chronic cerebral infection with Toxoplasma gondii.
Am. J. Pathol. 185: 314–324.
56. Phares, T. W., S. A. Stohlman, D. R. Hinton, and C. C. Bergmann. 2013.
Astrocyte-derived CXCL10 drives accumulation of antibody-secreting cells in
the central nervous system during viral encephalomyelitis. J. Virol. 87: 3382–
3392.
57. Mills Ko, E., J. H. Ma, F. Guo, L. Miers, E. Lee, P. Bannerman, T. Burns,
D. Ko, J. Sohn, A. M. Soulika, and D. Pleasure. 2014. Deletion of astroglial
CXCL10 delays clinical onset but does not affect progressive axon loss in a
murine autoimmune multiple sclerosis model. J. Neuroinflammation 11: 105.
58. Xie, L., and S. H. Yang. 2015. Interaction of astrocytes and T cells in physiological and pathological conditions. Brain Res. 1623: 63–73.
59. Huseby, E. S., D. Kamimura, Y. Arima, C. S. Parello, K. Sasaki, and
M. Murakami. 2015. Role of T cell-glial cell interactions in creating and amplifying central nervous system inflammation and multiple sclerosis disease
symptoms. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9: 295.
60. Barcia, C., N. S. Sanderson, R. J. Barrett, K. Wawrowsky, K. M. Kroeger,
M. Puntel, C. Liu, M. G. Castro, and P. R. Lowenstein. 2008. T cells’ immunological synapses induce polarization of brain astrocytes in vivo and in vitro: a
novel astrocyte response mechanism to cellular injury. PLoS One 3: e2977.
61. Salminen, A., J. Ojala, K. Kaarniranta, A. Haapasalo, M. Hiltunen, and
H. Soininen. 2011. Astrocytes in the aging brain express characteristics of
senescence-associated secretory phenotype. Eur. J. Neurosci. 34: 3–11.
62. Orre, M., W. Kamphuis, L. M. Osborn, J. Melief, L. Kooijman, I. Huitinga,
J. Klooster, K. Bossers, and E. M. Hol. 2014. Acute isolation and transcriptome
characterization of cortical astrocytes and microglia from young and aged mice.
Neurobiol. Aging 35: 1–14.
63. Rodrı́guez-Arellano, J. J., V. Parpura, R. Zorec, and A. Verkhratsky. 2015.
Astrocytes in physiological aging and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience DOI:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.01.007.
64. Johnstone, M., A. J. Gearing, and K. M. Miller. 1999. A central role for astrocytes in the inflammatory response to beta-amyloid; chemokines, cytokines
and reactive oxygen species are produced. J. Neuroimmunol. 93: 182–193.
65. Derecki, N. C., A. N. Cardani, C. H. Yang, K. M. Quinnies, A. Crihfield,
K. R. Lynch, and J. Kipnis. 2010. Regulation of learning and memory by
meningeal immunity: a key role for IL-4. J. Exp. Med. 207: 1067–1080.
66. Sasaki, K., A. Bean, S. Shah, E. Schutten, P. G. Huseby, B. Peters, Z. T. Shen,
V. Vanguri, D. Liggitt, and E. S. Huseby. 2014. Relapsing-remitting central
nervous system autoimmunity mediated by GFAP-specific CD8 T cells. J.
Immunol. 192: 3029–3042.
67. Cabarrocas, J., J. Bauer, E. Piaggio, R. Liblau, and H. Lassmann. 2003. Effective and selective immune surveillance of the brain by MHC class Irestricted cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Eur. J. Immunol. 33: 1174–1182.
68. Harris, M. G., P. Hulseberg, C. Ling, J. Karman, B. D. Clarkson, J. S. Harding,
M. Zhang, A. Sandor, K. Christensen, A. Nagy, et al. 2014. Immune privilege of
the CNS is not the consequence of limited antigen sampling. Sci. Rep. 4: 4422.
69. Sun, D., J. N. Whitaker, Z. Huang, D. Liu, C. Coleclough, H. Wekerle, and
C. S. Raine. 2001. Myelin antigen-specific CD8+ T cells are encephalitogenic
and produce severe disease in C57BL/6 mice. J. Immunol. 166: 7579–7587.
70. Ariotti, S., J. B. Haanen, and T. N. Schumacher. 2012. Behavior and function of
tissue-resident memory T cells. Adv. Immunol. 114: 203–216.
71. Smorodchenko, A., J. Wuerfel, E. E. Pohl, J. Vogt, E. Tysiak, R. Glumm,
S. Hendrix, R. Nitsch, F. Zipp, and C. Infante-Duarte. 2007. CNS-irrelevant Tcells enter the brain, cause blood-brain barrier disruption but no glial pathology.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 26: 1387–1398.
72. Li, P., Y. Gan, B. L. Sun, F. Zhang, B. Lu, Y. Gao, W. Liang, A. W. Thomson,
J. Chen, and X. Hu. 2013. Adoptive regulatory T-cell therapy protects against
cerebral ischemia. Ann. Neurol. 74: 458–471.
73. Beers, D. R., J. S. Henkel, W. Zhao, J. Wang, A. Huang, S. Wen, B. Liao, and
S. H. Appel. 2011. Endogenous regulatory T lymphocytes ameliorate amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in mice and correlate with disease progression in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain 134: 1293–1314.
74. Gendelman, H. E., and S. H. Appel. 2011. Neuroprotective activities of regulatory T cells. Trends Mol. Med. 17: 687–688.
75. Reynolds, A. D., R. Banerjee, J. Liu, H. E. Gendelman, and R. L. Mosley. 2007.
Neuroprotective activities of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in an animal
model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Leukoc. Biol. 82: 1083–1094.
76. Agudo, J., A. Ruzo, E. S. Park, R. Sweeney, V. Kana, M. Wu, Y. Zhao, D. Egli,
M. Merad, and B. D. Brown. 2015. GFP-specific CD8 T cells enable targeted
cell depletion and visualization of T-cell interactions. Nat. Biotechnol. 33:
1287–1292.
77. Zhao, J., J. Zhao, and S. Perlman. 2009. De novo recruitment of antigenexperienced and naive T cells contributes to the long-term maintenance of
antiviral T cell populations in the persistently infected central nervous system.
J. Immunol. 183: 5163–5170.
78. Bergmann, C. C., J. D. Altman, D. Hinton, and S. A. Stohlman. 1999. Inverted
immunodominance and impaired cytolytic function of CD8+ T cells during
viral persistence in the central nervous system. J. Immunol. 163: 3379–3387.
79. Hawke, S., P. G. Stevenson, S. Freeman, and C. R. Bangham. 1998. Long-term
persistence of activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes after viral infection of the
central nervous system. J. Exp. Med. 187: 1575–1582.
80. Qing, Z., D. Sewell, M. Sandor, and Z. Fabry. 2000. Antigen-specific T cell
trafficking into the central nervous system. J. Neuroimmunol. 105: 169–178.

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

30. Singh, P., Z. Z. Coskun, C. Goode, A. Dean, L. Thompson-Snipes, and
G. Darlington. 2008. Lymphoid neogenesis and immune infiltration in aged
liver. Hepatology 47: 1680–1690.
31. Lumeng, C. N., J. Liu, L. Geletka, C. Delaney, J. Delproposto, A. Desai,
K. Oatmen, G. Martinez-Santibanez, A. Julius, S. Garg, and R. L. Yung. 2011.
Aging is associated with an increase in T cells and inflammatory macrophages
in visceral adipose tissue. J. Immunol. 187: 6208–6216.
32. Thome, J. J., N. Yudanin, Y. Ohmura, M. Kubota, B. Grinshpun,
T. Sathaliyawala, T. Kato, H. Lerner, Y. Shen, and D. L. Farber. 2014. Spatial
map of human T cell compartmentalization and maintenance over decades of
life. Cell 159: 814–828.
33. Manwani, B., F. Liu, V. Scranton, M. D. Hammond, L. H. Sansing, and
L. D. McCullough. 2013. Differential effects of aging and sex on stroke induced inflammation across the lifespan. Exp. Neurol. 249: 120–131.
34. Mueller, S. N., T. Gebhardt, F. R. Carbone, and W. R. Heath. 2013. Memory
T cell subsets, migration patterns, and tissue residence. Annu. Rev. Immunol.
31: 137–161.
35. Klonowski, K. D., K. J. Williams, A. L. Marzo, D. A. Blair, E. G. Lingenheld,
and L. Lefrançois. 2004. Dynamics of blood-borne CD8 memory T cell migration in vivo. Immunity 20: 551–562.
36. Wakim, L. M., A. Woodward-Davis, and M. J. Bevan. 2010. Memory T cells
persisting within the brain after local infection show functional adaptations to
their tissue of residence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107: 17872–17879.
37. Wakim, L. M., A. Woodward-Davis, R. Liu, Y. Hu, J. Villadangos, G. Smyth,
and M. J. Bevan. 2012. The molecular signature of tissue resident memory CD8
T cells isolated from the brain. J. Immunol. 189: 3462–3471.
38. Carbone, F. R. 2015. Tissue-resident memory T cells and fixed immune surveillance in nonlymphoid organs. J. Immunol. 195: 17–22.
39. Casey, K. A., K. A. Fraser, J. M. Schenkel, A. Moran, M. C. Abt, L. K. Beura,
P. J. Lucas, D. Artis, E. J. Wherry, K. Hogquist, et al. 2012. Antigenindependent differentiation and maintenance of effector-like resident memory
T cells in tissues. J. Immunol. 188: 4866–4875.
40. Clark, R. A. 2015. Resident memory T cells in human health and disease. Sci.
Transl. Med. 7: 269rv1.
41. Gebhardt, T., L. M. Wakim, L. Eidsmo, P. C. Reading, W. R. Heath, and
F. R. Carbone. 2009. Memory T cells in nonlymphoid tissue that provide enhanced local immunity during infection with herpes simplex virus. Nat.
Immunol. 10: 524–530.
42. Ariotti, S., J. B. Beltman, G. Chodaczek, M. E. Hoekstra, A. E. van Beek,
R. Gomez-Eerland, L. Ritsma, J. van Rheenen, A. F. Marée, T. Zal, et al. 2012.
Tissue-resident memory CD8+ T cells continuously patrol skin epithelia to
quickly recognize local antigen. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109: 19739–19744.
43. Clark, R. A., R. Watanabe, J. E. Teague, C. Schlapbach, M. C. Tawa, N. Adams,
A. A. Dorosario, K. S. Chaney, C. S. Cutler, N. R. Leboeuf, et al. 2012. Skin
effector memory T cells do not recirculate and provide immune protection in
alemtuzumab-treated CTCL patients. Sci. Transl. Med. 4: 117ra7.
44. Mackay, L. K., A. T. Stock, J. Z. Ma, C. M. Jones, S. J. Kent, S. N. Mueller,
W. R. Heath, F. R. Carbone, and T. Gebhardt. 2012. Long-lived epithelial
immunity by tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells in the absence of persisting
local antigen presentation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109: 7037–7042.
45. Masopust, D., V. Vezys, E. J. Usherwood, L. S. Cauley, S. Olson, A. L. Marzo,
R. L. Ward, D. L. Woodland, and L. Lefrançois. 2004. Activated primary and
memory CD8 T cells migrate to nonlymphoid tissues regardless of site of activation or tissue of origin. J. Immunol. 172: 4875–4882.
46. Roy, A., S. Mondal, J. H. Kordower, and K. Pahan. 2015. Attenuation of
microglial RANTES by NEMO-binding domain peptide inhibits the infiltration
of CD8(+) T cells in the nigra of hemiparkinsonian monkey. Neuroscience 302:
36–46.
47. Jaerve, A., and H. W. M€uller. 2012. Chemokines in CNS injury and repair. Cell
Tissue Res. 349: 229–248.
48. Sporici, R., and T. B. Issekutz. 2010. CXCR3 blockade inhibits T-cell migration
into the CNS during EAE and prevents development of adoptively transferred,
but not actively induced, disease. Eur. J. Immunol. 40: 2751–2761.
49. Dénes, A., N. Humphreys, T. E. Lane, R. Grencis, and N. Rothwell. 2010.
Chronic systemic infection exacerbates ischemic brain damage via a CCL5
(regulated on activation, normal T-cell expressed and secreted)-mediated
proinflammatory response in mice. J. Neurosci. 30: 10086–10095.
50. Ransohoff, R. M. 2009. Chemokines and chemokine receptors: standing at the
crossroads of immunobiology and neurobiology. Immunity 31: 711–721.
51. Nie, C. Q., N. J. Bernard, M. U. Norman, F. H. Amante, R. J. Lundie,
B. S. Crabb, W. R. Heath, C. R. Engwerda, M. J. Hickey, L. Schofield, and
D. S. Hansen. 2009. IP-10-mediated T cell homing promotes cerebral inflammation over splenic immunity to malaria infection. PLoS Pathog. 5: e1000369.
52. Byrne, F. R., A. Winters, D. Brankow, S. Hu, T. Juan, S. Steavenson,
G. Doellgast, K. Kuchimanchi, H. Brown, S. Anderson, et al. 2009. An antibody to IP-10 is a potent antagonist of cell migration in vitro and in vivo and
does not affect disease in several animal models of inflammation. Autoimmunity
42: 171–182.
53. Campanella, G. S., A. M. Tager, J. K. El Khoury, S. Y. Thomas,
T. A. Abrazinski, L. A. Manice, R. A. Colvin, and A. D. Luster. 2008. Chemokine receptor CXCR3 and its ligands CXCL9 and CXCL10 are required for
the development of murine cerebral malaria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 105:
4814–4819.
54. Ubogu, E. E., M. K. Callahan, B. H. Tucky, and R. M. Ransohoff. 2006. CCR5
expression on monocytes and T cells: modulation by transmigration across the
blood-brain barrier in vitro. Cell. Immunol. 243: 19–29.

3329

3330

AGE-RELATED CNS-RESIDENT CD8 T CELLS ARE REACTIVE TO STROKE
94. Klein, S. L. 2012. Sex influences immune responses to viruses, and efficacy of
prophylaxis and treatments for viral diseases. BioEssays 34: 1050–1059.
95. Fairweather, D., S. Frisancho-Kiss, and N. R. Rose. 2008. Sex differences in
autoimmune disease from a pathological perspective. Am. J. Pathol. 173: 600–
609.
96. Barna, M., T. Komatsu, Z. Bi, and C. S. Reiss. 1996. Sex differences in susceptibility to viral infection of the central nervous system. J. Neuroimmunol.
67: 31–39.
97. Han, X., P. Lundberg, B. Tanamachi, H. Openshaw, J. Longmate, and E. Cantin.
2001. Gender influences herpes simplex virus type 1 infection in normal and
gamma interferon-mutant mice. J. Virol. 75: 3048–3052.
98. Park, C. O., and T. S. Kupper. 2015. The emerging role of resident memory
T cells in protective immunity and inflammatory disease. Nat. Med. 21: 688–
697.
99. Zender, L., and K. L. Rudolph. 2009. Keeping your senescent cells under
control. Aging 1: 438–441.
100. Young, A. R., and M. Narita. 2009. SASP reflects senescence. EMBO Rep. 10:
228–230.
101. Senovilla, L., L. Galluzzi, L. Zitvogel, and G. Kroemer. 2013. Immunosurveillance as a regulator of tissue homeostasis. Trends Immunol. 34: 471–481.
102. Salama, R., M. Sadaie, M. Hoare, and M. Narita. 2014. Cellular senescence and
its effector programs. Genes Dev. 28: 99–114.
103. Sagiv, A., and V. Krizhanovsky. 2013. Immunosurveillance of senescent cells:
the bright side of the senescence program. Biogerontology 14: 617–628.
104. Ovadya, Y., and V. Krizhanovsky. 2014. Senescent cells: SASPected drivers of
age-related pathologies. Biogerontology 15: 627–642.
105. Coppé, J. P., P. Y. Desprez, A. Krtolica, and J. Campisi. 2010. The senescenceassociated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. Annu. Rev.
Pathol. 5: 99–118.
106. Thome, J. J., and D. L. Farber. 2015. Emerging concepts in tissue-resident
T cells: lessons from humans. Trends Immunol. 36: 428–435.
107. Sathaliyawala, T., M. Kubota, N. Yudanin, D. Turner, P. Camp, J. J. Thome,
K. L. Bickham, H. Lerner, M. Goldstein, M. Sykes, et al. 2013. Distribution and
compartmentalization of human circulating and tissue-resident memory T cell
subsets. Immunity 38: 187–197.

Downloaded from http://www.jimmunol.org/ at Edinburgh University on October 4, 2016

81. Ling, C., M. Sandor, and Z. Fabry. 2003. In situ processing and distribution of
intracerebrally injected OVA in the CNS. J. Neuroimmunol. 141: 90–98.
82. Doyle, K. P., E. Cekanaviciute, L. E. Mamer, and M. S. Buckwalter. 2010.
TGFb signaling in the brain increases with aging and signals to astrocytes and
innate immune cells in the weeks after stroke. J. Neuroinflammation 7: 62.
83. Liu, F., and L. D. McCullough. 2012. Interactions between age, sex, and hormones in experimental ischemic stroke. Neurochem. Int. 61: 1255–1265.
84. Popa-Wagner, A., I. Badan, L. Walker, S. Groppa, N. Patrana, and C. Kessler.
2007. Accelerated infarct development, cytogenesis and apoptosis following
transient cerebral ischemia in aged rats. Acta Neuropathol. 113: 277–293.
85. Sieber, M. W., R. A. Claus, O. W. Witte, and C. Frahm. 2011. Attenuated inflammatory response in aged mice brains following stroke. PLoS One 6:
e26288.
86. Sieber, M. W., M. Guenther, N. Jaenisch, D. Albrecht-Eckardt, M. Kohl,
O. W. Witte, and C. Frahm. 2014. Age-specific transcriptional response to
stroke. Neurobiol. Aging 35: 1744–1754.
87. Shapira, S., M. Sapir, A. Wengier, E. Grauer, and T. Kadar. 2002. Aging has a
complex effect on a rat model of ischemic stroke. Brain Res. 925: 148–158.
88. Kleine, T. O., and L. Benes. 2006. Immune surveillance of the human central
nervous system (CNS): different migration pathways of immune cells through
the blood-brain barrier and blood-cerebrospinal fluid barrier in healthy persons.
Cytometry A 69: 147–151.
89. Sellers, R. S., C. B. Clifford, P. M. Treuting, and C. Brayton. 2012. Immunological variation between inbred laboratory mouse strains: points to consider in
phenotyping genetically immunomodified mice. Vet. Pathol. 49: 32–43.
90. Pennell, L. M., C. L. Galligan, and E. N. Fish. 2012. Sex affects immunity. J.
Autoimmun. 38: J282–J291.
91. Liu, F., R. Yuan, S. E. Benashski, and L. D. McCullough. 2009. Changes in
experimental stroke outcome across the life span. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
29: 792–802.
92. Sun, T., A. Plutynski, S. Ward, and J. B. Rubin. 2015. An integrative view on
sex differences in brain tumors. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 72: 3323–3342.
93. Klein, S. L., I. Marriott, and E. N. Fish. 2015. Sex-based differences in
immune function and responses to vaccination. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med.
Hyg. 109: 9–15.

