Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

THE LATE PHASE OF POST-STROKE NEUROREPAIR IN AGED RATS
IS REFLECTED BY MRI-BASED MEASURES
E. M. TITOVA, a,b N. GHOSH, a Z. G. VALADEZ, a
J. H. ZHANG, c D. L. BELLINGER d AND A. OBENAUS a,e,f*

GFAP), activated microglia/macrophages (ionized calciumbinding adapter molecule 1, Iba1), T-lymphocytes (CD3),
phagocytes (ED1) and apoptotic cells (caspase-3) was
assessed. We found a positive T2–NS correlation in irradiated, ischemic rats that corresponded to late-stage brain
recovery. Late-stage brain recovery was characterized by
improved neovascularization, formation of glio-vascular
complexes (visualized by GFAP/vWF) and enhanced neuronal viability (by NeuN/caspase-3) in the peri-lesional zone.
The immune response plateaued at the late stage of repair
as evidenced by signiﬁcantly decreased expression (41.7%)
and distribution of phagocytes (phagocytic rim decreased
44.6%). We also found reduced inﬁltration of T-lymphocytes
(CD3) in the brain and normalization of blood lymphocytes.
The observed T2–NS correlations may provide a simple
MRI-based criterion for recognition of regenerative brain
transformation in aged patients following stroke. Selective
activation of innate immunity and accelerated transition from
pro-inﬂammatory to pro-healing macrophage phenotypes
induced by localized brain irradiation is a potential mechanism for enhancing repair ability in the elderly.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled:
Brain Compensation. For Good? Ó 2014 IBRO. Published
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

a

Pediatric Research Department, Loma Linda University,
Coleman Pavilion, Room A-1120, 11175 Campus Street,
Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA
b
Department of Anesthesiology, Krasnoyarsk State Medical
University, Krasnoyarsk, Russia
c
Physiology & Pharmacology, Loma Linda University School
of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA
d
Department of Pathology and Human Anatomy, Loma Linda
School of Medicine, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, USA
e
Department of Pediatrics, Loma Linda University School of
Medicine, Loma Linda, CA, USA
f
Division of Interdisciplinary Studies, School of Behavioral
Health, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA, USA

Abstract—Non-invasive criteria determining the progress of
brain healing are especially important in aging, providing a
case-speciﬁc therapeutic strategy in populations with dysregulated neurorepair mechanisms. We hypothesized that
temporal evolution of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of
T2 tissue relaxation values correlate with neurological severity scores (NS), and provide a robust indicator of healing in
the aging brain after stroke. Pre-treatment of aged rats with
brain-only proton irradiation was undertaken to pre-condition the inﬂammatory system. Irradiation was performed
10 days prior to right middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) for 50 min (MCAO + Rad). Control rats included
naı̈ve (no ischemia, no radiation), irradiated-only (Rad), irradiated ischemic, or ischemic-only (MCAO). MRI and NS were
obtained at 3, 14 and 28 days post-stroke. At 28 days poststroke, immunoﬂuorescence for visualizing blood vessels
(Von Willebrand factor; vWF), neurons (neuronal nuclear
antigen; NeuN), astrocytes (glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein;

Key words: brain repair, cerebral ischemia, lymphocytes,
macrophage, immunity, stroke.

INTRODUCTION
Stroke is a complex disease that is largely associated with
increasing age. Aging not only increases the risk of stroke
occurrence, but brain recovery mechanisms are altered in
the elderly, delaying brain healing and repair. The
fundamental process of brain repair is orchestrated by
the immune system with two overlapping phases,
inﬂammation and proliferation (Carson et al., 2006;
Endres et al., 2008). Inﬂammation is an essential step that
precedes the structural and functional brain reorganization after injury. Inﬂammation facilitates progression of
the initial ischemic injury, but also concomitantly limits
expansion of the lesion by clearing cellular debris while
promoting the ensuing reparative glial cell proliferation
(reviewed (Endres et al., 2008; Popovich and
Longbrake, 2008; Iadecola and Anrather, 2011)). In
aging, the acute inﬂammatory phase is dysregulated
(Franceschi, 2007; Gomez et al., 2008) due to a
deﬁciency in key innate immune mechanisms,
including a decline in natural killer (NK) and NK T-cell
cytotoxicity, reduced production of interferon-gamma

*Correspondence to: A. Obenaus, Pediatric Research Department,
Loma Linda University, Coleman Pavilion, Room A-1120, 11175
Campus Street, Loma Linda, CA 92354, USA. Tel: +1-909-5587108; fax: +1-909-558-7519.
E-mail addresses: elenatitovakrsk@gmail.com (E. M. Titova),
nghosh@llu.edu (N. Ghosh), zvala001@gmail.com (Z. G. Valadez),
johnzhang3910@yahoo.com (J. H. Zhang), dbellinger@llu.edu
(D. L. Bellinger), aobenaus@llu.edu (A. Obenaus).
Abbreviations: 3D, three dimensional; ADC, apparent diﬀusion
coeﬃcient; ANOVA, analysis of variance; BBB, blood–brain barrier;
DAPI, 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DCs, dendritic cells; DWI,
diﬀusion-weighted imaging; EDTA, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid;
GFAP, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein; GRA, granulocyte; Iba1, ionized
calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1; IR, infrared; MCAO, middle
cerebral artery occlusion; MCAO + Rad, MCAO + radiation; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; NeuN, neuronal nuclei clone A60; NIH,
National Institutes of Health; NK, natural killer; NS, neurological
severity scores; Rad, radiation-only; ROIs, regions of interest; T2WI,
T2-weighted imaging; TE, Echo Time; TR, Repetition Time; vWF, Von
Willebrand factor antibody; WBC, white blood cell.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.09.028
0306-4522/Ó 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
231

232

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

(Czlonkowska et al., 1979; Mocchegiani and Malavolta,
2004; Dirnagl et al., 2007; Qi et al., 2014) and decrements
in phagocytic activity, and intracellular killing eﬃciency of
neutrophils (Gomez et al., 2008). In addition, macrophage
dysfunction, such as reduced cytokine and chemokine
secretion, altered cell motility and wound repair ability,
and antigen presentation, compromise both defense and
repair mechanisms. Dendritic cells (DCs), the key antigen-presenting cells are numerically and functionally
impaired in the elderly and cannot generate an eﬀective
adaptive immune response (Sharma et al., 2009).
Lymphocyte re-population and their diﬀerential and activation abilities are altered due to a decreased volume of
hematopoietic bone marrow tissue, reduced progenitor
potential, and thymus involution (Sharma et al., 2009; Qi
et al., 2014). The basal level and injury-triggered production of proinﬂammatory cytokines are increased in the
elderly, which is indicative of persistent low-grade
inﬂammatory processes (Franceschi, 2007). Hence,
immunosenescence aﬀects the integrated ability to
respond appropriately to immediate neurological injury
and results in decrements in the ability of tissues to regain
homeostasis.
At present, little is known about the interactions
between neurorepair and immunity mechanisms during
the aged-brain recovery following stroke (Zhang et al.,
2014). While the major focus of this research has been
on mechanisms of acute injury and early (days) poststroke neurorepair (Eady et al., 2014), there is a signiﬁcant lack of studies investigating mechanisms that control
the delayed (weeks, months) re-modeling within the aged
brain following stroke injury. Recently, in long-term experiments, we reported that a single low dose of brain-only
irradiation 10 days prior to stroke was signiﬁcantly neuroprotective, resulting in decreased lesion volumes,
reduced glial hypertrophy and diminished apoptosis/
necrosis (Titova et al., 2011). We have now extended
these studies to test the hypothesis that the systemic
immune response to stroke injury is modiﬁed by a low
dose of brain irradiation resulting in neuroprotective outcomes. We further evaluated if these improved tissue
metrics correlated to our previously reported magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) ﬁndings.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
All procedures were approved by the Animal Care and
Use Committee at Loma Linda University and complied
with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Animals were
housed two per cage under 12:12 h light/dark cycle with
free access to water and food and allowed to acclimate
for 7 days prior to experimentation.
Animal groups
The blood and brain tissue examinations were performed
on four groups of animals (n = 5/group) that underwent:
(1) no radiation or ischemia (Naı̈ve), (2) radiation-only
(Rad), (3) right middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
only, and (4) MCAO plus radiation (MCAO + Rad). A
total of 23 male 18 month-old Sprague Dawley rats

(530–580 g; Harlan Laboratories, Inc., Indianapolis, IN,
USA) were used, but three animals were excluded due
to mortality (n = 2, MCAO-only) or a failed MCAO
(n = 1). The experimental sequence is outlined in Fig. 1A.
Irradiation protocol
Proton exposure was performed at the Loma Linda
University Medical Center Proton Treatment Facility, as
described previously (Titova et al., 2011). Ten days prior
to MCAO, MCAO + Rad and Rad, the heads of rats were
exposed to 8 Gy proton irradiation (250 MeV/amu) at a
dose rate of 5.3 ± 0.2 Gy/min while under a low dose of
anesthetic (<1% isoﬂurane). The remaining animal
groups (MCAO and Naı̈ve) were treated similarly, but
without brain irradiation.
MCAO induction
Ten days after irradiation, right MCAO was performed to
induce focal ischemia utilizing the intraluminal thread
technique (Longa et al., 1989; Titova et al., 2011). In anesthetized (2–4% isoﬂurane) and mechanically ventilated
animals, the right common carotid artery was isolated
and clamped, and after ligation of the external carotid, a
silicon-coated nylon ﬁlament (#6, 0.07 mm) was threaded
into the internal carotid to occlude the MCA. After 50 min of
MCA occlusion, the ﬁlament was removed to allow reperfusion. Non-ischemic (Naı̈ve, Rad) animal groups were
anesthetized, but without surgery.
Neurological severity scoring (NS)
Prior to each MRI, each rat was graded for neurological
deﬁcits by an investigator blinded to treatment groups
using an 18-point NS system (Sugawara et al., 2008).
Brieﬂy, the score consisted of three tests with a score of
0–3 and an additional three tests with a score of 1–3 given
to each rat and a ﬁnal summarized score (minimum score
3; maximum 18) where a higher score is better. The tests
assessed motor function, including: (i) spontaneous activity in a cage (5 min); (ii) symmetry in spontaneous fore
and hind limb movement; (iii) forepaw outstretching while
suspended by the tail; (iv) climbing the wall of a wire cage;
(v) truncal response to touch; and (vi) sensory testing
(i.e., response to vibrissae touch).
MRI and analysis
MRI data were acquired using a Bruker 4.7 T with a
57-mm (I.D.) quadrature receiver coil, as previously
described (Titova et al., 2011). Brieﬂy, multiple contrast
levels were acquired using T2-weighted imaging (T2WI)
and diﬀusion-weighted imaging (DWI). Images were
acquired with 2562 matrix; a 3.5-cm ﬁeld of view (FOV)
with 20 consecutive 1-mm thick coronal slices, providing
full coverage of the brain. A six echo T2 sequence had
a Repetition Time (TR)/Echo Time (TE) = 2850/20 ms
with an acquisition time of 24 min, while the DWI parameters were TR/TE = 3000/28 ms for an acquisition time
of 51 min. Two diﬀusion gradients were applied (b = 0,
434 s/mm2). MRI data were acquired at 2, 14, and
28 days after MCAO induction.

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

233

Fig. 1. Radiation improves stroke measures. (A) Experimental design outlining the temporal repeated MRI and neurological testing.
(B) MCAO + Rad-treated rats had smaller lesions on T2-weighted and diﬀusion-weighted imaging (DWI) compared to MCAO-only. (C) Lesion
volumes derived from T2-weighted imaging were signiﬁcantly reduced at 2 d post-stroke (⁄p < 0.01) in MCAO + Rad-treated rats. (D) In
MCAO + Rad animals evaluation of the distribution of infarcted tissues (globus pallidus, striatum, and cortex) revealed dramatic reductions in the
virtually every anatomical location.

MRI data analysis. All MR data sets were quantiﬁed
using previously published protocols (Obenaus et al.,
2007). T2 relaxation rates were obtained by exponential
ﬁts for each pixel to generate T2 maps (ms). Apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) maps were generated using
2-point linear ﬁt with the two diﬀusion acquisitions (ADC,
mm2/s). Regions of interest (ROIs) were manually drawn
on T2 and DW images displaying the largest area of
lesion area (Fig. 1B). Regional statistics, including mean,
standard deviation, and number of pixels for each ROI
were obtained. All quantitative values from the right and
left hemisphere were extracted and summarized.

ice-cold 0.12 M Millonig’s phosphate buﬀer, pH 7.4 and
decapitated.
The
brains
were
ﬁxed
in
4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) (Electron Microscopy Science,
Hatﬁeld, PA, USA) for 24 h, washed twice in Millonig’s
buﬀer for 5 min/wash and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose.
The brains were then frozen in the optimal cutting
temperature compound (O.T.C., Tissue Tek). Coronal
sections (30 lm) were cut on a cryostat (Leica CM1850,
Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) and
stored in cryoprotectant at 4 °C. Immediately after brain
ﬁxation, the blood samples were analyzed for complete
blood cell counts using a HESKA Vet ABC-Diﬀ
Hematology Analyzer (Heska Corp., Waukesha, WI, USA).

Euthanasia, sample collection and tissue processing
At 28 days post-MCAO, after a lethal dose of isoﬂurane, the
abdomen walls were rapidly opened and blood samples
were collected from the vena portae into tubes containing
the anticoagulant 0.5 M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA). Animals were then intracardially perfused with

Immunoﬂuorescence, microscopy and analysis
Single- and double-labeled immunoﬂuorescence were
performed on free-ﬂoating brain sections. After
nonspeciﬁc blocking in 10% normal donkey or goat sera
(Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West

234

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

Grove, PA, USA), sections were incubated overnight at
4 °C in the following primary antibodies: polyclonal
rabbit anti-ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1
(Iba1) 1:500 (Waco Chemicals; Richmond, VA),
polyclonal rabbit anti-glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP)
1:150 (Sigma-Aldrich; St. Louis, MO, USA), monoclonal
mouse anti-GFAP, clone GA5 1:250 (MilliporeChemicon; Temecula, CA, USA), polyclonal goat anticaspase-3 p20 antibody (L-18) 1:200 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology; Santa Cruz, CA, USA), monoclonal
mouse anti-neuronal nuclei clone A60 (NeuN) 1:200
(Millipore; Temecula, CA, USA), polyclonal rabbit antiVon Willebrand factor antibody (vWF) 1:250 (Abcam;
San Francisco, CA, USA), monoclonal mouse anti-CD68
(ED-1) 1:200 and monoclonal mouse anti-CD3 (PC3/
188A) 1:200, both from Santa Cruz Biotechnology
(Santa Cruz, CA).
Tissue sections were incubated with the appropriate
ﬂuorochrome-conjugated secondary antisera (goat antirabbit Alexa Fluor 488; goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor
568, goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) or donkey anti-goat Texas Red and
donkey
anti-mouse
FITC-conjugated
(Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA))
used at 1:500 dilution for 2 h at room temperature.
Sections were mounted onto SuperFrost Plus slides
(Fisher Scientiﬁc, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) and coverslipped with anti-fading Vectashield medium or medium
containing 40 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Vector
laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA). To control for
cross-reactivity between primary and secondary
antibodies, a separate single-labeled immunostaining
protocol for each primary antibody was performed and
compared with double immunostained tissues. Negative
controls were completed by omitting the primary
antibodies; no detectable labeling was observed.
Sections were imaged with an Olympus FV 1000
laser-scanning confocal imaging system mounted on an
Olympus IX81 microscope under 20 or 40 oilimmersion objective lenses (Olympus America Inc.,
Center Valley, PA, USA). Each ﬂuorescence channel
was imaged sequentially with Kalman ﬁlter averaging
ﬁve frames with excitation wavelengths at 405 nm
(Mercury Arc), 488 nm (Ar laser) and 561 nm (He–Ne
laser) using a 420–450 nm, 500–545 nm and 575–
620 nm bandpass emission ﬁlters. Images were
captured at serial optical sections (15–25 sections at
1-lm intervals).

Table 1. Absolute leukocyte counts
Group/cell
Naive
types (109/l)
WBC
MON
LYM
GRA

MCAO-only Rad-only

4.9 ± 0.5 4.9 ± 0.6
0.2 ± 0.04 0.2 ± 0.05
2.9 ± 0.3 1.9 ± 0.3*
1.8 ± 0.2 2.2 ± 0.5

MCAO + Rad

3.7 ± 0.5 4.5 ± 0.5
0.2 ± 0.04 0.2 ± 0.02
2.1 ± 0.3 2.4 ± 0.3
1.4 ± 0.1 1.9 ± 0.3

WBC, white blood cells; MON, monocytes; LYM, lymphocytes; GRA,
granulocytes.
*
p < 0.05 vs. Naı̈ve (t-test).

All tissue sections from each set of immunostaining
were imaged in a single session to minimize variability.
Three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions of ﬁve z-series
stack images were created utilizing ImageJ 1.44p
software
(NIH,
Bethesda,
MD,
USA;
http://
imagej.nih.gov/ij). Fluorescent intensities from NeuN and
caspase-3
staining
were
measured
on
ﬁve
stereologically selected ROIs on each brain section.
Next, Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcients for NeuN/
caspase-3 and for the number of NeuN-positive cells
were calculated using the Colocalization Finder and Cell
Counter features in ImageJ. The images in Fig. 5 were
digitized using Olympus BX-71 microscope (Olympus
America Inc., Melville, NY, USA) equipped with a 0.5X
digital camera (Cook, Auburn Hills, MI, USA).
Infrared (IR) immunostaining was performed in
parallel with immunoﬂuorescent staining for quantitative
assessment. Brain sections were processed and
incubated in primary antibodies as described above, and
then were incubated with near-IR dye-conjugates
(Biotium, Inc., Hayward, CA, USA). Brain sections were
incubated in goat anti-mouse CF 680 or goat anti-rabbit
CF 770 near-IR dyes for 2 h at room temperature,
mounted onto SuperFrost Plus slides. Slides were
cover-slipped with clear VECTASHIELDÒ mounting
medium (Vector Laboratories, Inc., Burlingame, CA,
USA). Sections were then scanned using an infra-red
scanner and Iba1-, ED1, and vWF immunoreactivity was
quantiﬁed (Odyssey infrared imaging system, LI-COR
Biotechnology US, Lincoln, NE, USA). The IR signal
intensity was reported as integrated-intensities (arbitrary
units, a.u.).
Inﬂammatory rim area assessment
The width of the rim of active phagocytosis was
automatically calculated using Matlab-based software
from two histological brain sections per animal
immunolabeled for ED1. Thresholding was used to
classify abnormal tissues and provided a binary mask of
the inﬂammatory rim (see Fig. 3A, right). The mask then
underwent computational morphological operations
including opening, closing and area-based ﬁltering. The
area of the binary mask was then calculated where
each pixel was converted into lm2, with a ﬁnal
conversion factor of 0.168 lm2/pixel.
Statistical analysis
Quantitative data are expressed as the mean ± SEM,
where n indicates the number of animals. Temporal MRI
data underwent a repeated measures two-way analysis
of variance (ANOVA) followed by a pairwise multiple
comparison post hoc tests (Holm-Šidák). Cellular and
immunohistochemical statistical comparisons were
obtained by either a Student’s t-test (comparisons
between two groups) or an ANOVA followed by HolmŠidák post hoc tests (SyStat Software Inc., San Jose,
CA, USA). Signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence between
coeﬃcients of Pearson’s correlation between T2 values
and neurological scores were calculated by Fisher’s z0
transformation with two-tailed probabilities (VassarStats

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

website; http://vassarstats.net/). A p value <0.05 was
considered statistically signiﬁcant.

RESULTS
Proton irradiation improves long-lasting
lymphopenia after stroke
A three-component white blood cell (WBC) diﬀerential
count was performed to examine the delayed systemic
eﬀects of cerebral ischemia and/or brain-only irradiation
on the various types of WBCs. The absolute
granulocyte (GRA), lymphocyte and monocyte counts
and total WBC were not signiﬁcantly altered following
brain-only irradiation (Rad vs. Naı̈ve, Table 1). Cerebral
ischemia alone resulted in a signiﬁcant drop in
lymphocyte counts and elevated GRAs (lymphocytes,
p < 0.05, MCAO-only vs. Naı̈ve). In contrast, radiation
pre-treatment of MCAO animals normalized the altered
blood counts (p > 0.05, MCAO + Rad vs. Rad). There
was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in WBCs between

235

irradiated and non-irradiated ischemic groups (p > 0.05,
MCAO vs. MCAO + Rad, Table 1).
Neuroimaging correlates to neurological scores
Neuroimaging of stroke typically utilizes diﬀusionweighted imaging (DWI) to identify early cytotoxic
edema while T2WI is a marker of evolving vasogenic
edema and ongoing cellular pathology (Fig. 1B). Initial
MRI evaluation (2 days after stoke) revealed the robust
diﬀerence in lesion volumes as determined by T2/DWI
(Fig. 1B). Two days post-treatment, we found a
signiﬁcant threefold (306%) reduction in lesion volume in
MCAO + Rad-treated animals compared with MCAOonly (Fig. 1C; p = 0.013). The reduced lesion volume
was still present at 14 and 28 d post-stroke in
MCAO + Rad animals, but not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent.
We then evaluated the anatomical locations in which
ischemic tissues were present on MRI (Fig. 1D).
Overall, no MCAO + Rad animals exhibited cortical
infarcts at any time point (2, 14, 28 d) (Fig. 1D). In

Fig. 2. MRI-derived lesion characteristics reveal the temporal eﬀects of neurorepair following experimental stroke. (A) Edema is associated with
increased T2 values (ms) and were found to be signiﬁcantly reduced (p < 0.05) at 2 d post-stroke induction in MCAO + Rad compared with MCAOonly animals. B) DWI-derived apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients (ADC) reﬂect ongoing modiﬁcations to the underlying tissue matrix. MCAO + Rad
animals had signiﬁcantly increased ADC values within the lesion compared with MCAO-only animals, particular at 14–28 d post-stroke (⁄p < 0.01).
C) Early edematous changes (T2) and neurological scores (NS) in MCAO-only MCAO + Rad correlations (Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient, r) were
evaluated over the 28 d post-stroke. In the MCAO-only animals (a–c), there was a negative correlation of T2–NS indices (a and b) during the
transition from the acute (a, 2 days) to sub-acute (b, 14 days) period that then remained unchanged over the 14–28-day experimental period. In the
MCAO-only group, this would suggest a dependency of functional recovery on resolution of edematous water content within the injured brain.
However, this contrasted to the results seen in MCAO + Rad rats (d–), where a weak, negative T2–NS correlation (d) was maintained for 14 days
(e; segment d and e), suggesting that brain water content had a little inﬂuence on the early functional improvement in irradiated, ischemic rats.
Importantly, progressive functional recovery in MCAO + Rad animals (late period, 14–28 days, segment e and f) revealed a signiﬁcantly strong,
positive correlation (f; ⁄p < 0.05, Fisher’s z0 test; f vs. c) with T2 values, suggesting dependence of neurological improvements due to reparative
cellular proliferation triggered by a single dose of brain irradiation.

236

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

Fig. 3. The phagocytic rim is reduced around the irradiated, ischemic
cavity. (A, B) Activated phagocytes were identiﬁed by infrared
immunostaining using a monoclonal anti-CD68 clone, ED-1 antibody
as a marker of multiple lysosomal compartments (A, left). The spatial
distribution of ED1-positive cells was computed utilizing a binary
mask of ED1 signal intensities (A, right). The area of active
phagocytosis surrounding the ischemic cavity (IC) was signiﬁcantly
reduced in irradiated, ischemic animals compared with non-irradiated
rats (B; n = 5, ⁄p < 0.05, t-test). (C) Representative confocal
microphotographs (bottom panel, C) of double-immunoﬂuorescent
staining for monocyte/macrophage/microglia lineage cells (green;
ionized calcium-binding adaptor protein, Iba1) and active phagocytes
(red, ED1); cell nuclei counterstained with DAPI (blue). Enlarged
Iba1-positive cell bodies in irradiated-only controls (Rad; upper panel,
right) with short and stout cell branches contrasted to smaller cells
with slender, ramiﬁed branches in naı̈ve rats (Naı̈ve; upper panel, left;
arrows and zoomed images in inserts to Naı̈ve and Rad). No
ED-1-positive immunoﬂuorescence was found in the Naı̈ve or
Rad-only group. In the MCAO-only animals immunoﬂuorescence
demonstrated an extended region of ED-1-positive cells (MCAO;
lower panel, left), while the Iba1 protein expression did not diﬀer
between ischemic and irradiated, ischemic animals (MCAO + Rad;
lower panel, right). Scale bar = 100 lm.

addition, the percentage of MCAO + Rad animals with
striatal lesions was reduced. Similar ﬁndings were also
observed in the globus pallidus, but only at the later
14- and 28-d time points (Fig. 1D).
Quantitative T2 values (ms) of the ischemic tissues
showed a dramatic rise at 2 d post-stroke, but the

MCAO + Rad animals had signiﬁcantly decreased
values compared with MCAO animals (p = 0.04)
(Fig. 2A). In contrast, quantitative ADC from DWI
revealed no early diﬀerences, but evolving increases in
ADC at the 14- (p = 0.004) and 28-d time points
(p < 0.001) (Fig. 2B). We reported previously overall
temporal neurological recovery correlated with reduction
of peri-lesional brain edema in all groups of ischemic
rats (Titova et al., 2011). We also found that at every time
point evaluated, MCAO + Rad animals demonstrated an
inverse correlation between decreasing T2 values with
improved neurological scores at day 28. Using Pearson’s
correlation coeﬃcient (r) measures over the 28 days following stroke (Fig. 2C), we identiﬁed a time point when
T2 values (edema and water content) reﬂected neurological scores. In MCAO-only animals a negative correlation
(r = 0.75, 2–14 d) plateaued over the remaining
14–28 d of the study (r = 0.73). This correlation suggests a direct dependency of early functional recovery
on decreased brain water content and ischemic brain tissue during acute/sub-acute periods (<14 d post MCAO)
while an unchanged correlation at >14 d indicates ischemic brain injury has stabilized. A surprisingly diﬀerent picture emerged in MCAO + Rad rats with initially little
correlation between T2 values and NS on 2–14 d
(r = 0.27, 2 d; r = 0.36). A temporal progression to
a signiﬁcant positive correlation was found at 28 d postinjury (r = 0.81, p < 0.05, Fisher’s z0 test). Based on
these data, we propose that a shift in T2–NS correlations
at later time points (14–28 d) could reﬂect a late phase of
post-injury neurorepair and a shift in the transition from
inﬂammation to proliferative repair phases in the
MCAO + Rad rats that was not evident in the MCAO-only
rats. To test this hypothesis, we further evaluated the cellular underpinnings of the reparative process in this cohort
of rodents.
Brain-only irradiation attenuates chronic
peri-lesional phagocytosis
Local phagocytic activity was assessed using anti-ED1
protein immunostaining in tissue adjacent to the
ischemic cavity (peri-lesion). In the MCAO-only rats,
phagocytes were abundant in the peri-ischemic zone at
28 d after the stroke (Figs. 3 and 4). The phagocytic rim
area was signiﬁcantly reduced in MCAO + Rad
compared with MCAO-only animals (upper and lower
panels of Fig. 3A, respectively; Fig. 3B: p < 0.05,
MCAO vs. MCAO + Rad), which corresponds to a 42%
decrease in ED1 IR signal intensity (Fig. 4C; C:
p < 0.05, MCAO vs. MCAO + Rad). Colocalization of
ED1- and Iba1 (protein speciﬁc for microglia/
macrophage cell linages) suggested that the majority of
the cells in the peri-lesional rim were phagocytic
macrophages/microglia cells (Fig. 3 lower two panels,
overlap coeﬃcient, 0.86 ± 0.4). ED-1/Iba-1 doublepositive cells were reduced in MCAO + Rad animals
(Fig. 3C lower right panel, Fig. 4A, B, higher
magniﬁcation). In irradiated-only animals (no MCAO),
we observed enlarged microglial cell bodies with short
thick processes that were not observed in naı̈ve animals
(insets, Fig. 3C, Naı̈ve and Rad).

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

237

Fig. 4. Chronic phagocytic activity is upregulated in aged, ischemic rats. High magniﬁcation (40) images of Iba1 (green), ED1 (red) and GFAP
(green) immunoﬂuorescence and cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). (A–C) In the area adjacent to the Ischemic cavity (IC), there was
no diﬀerence in Iba1 immunoﬂuorescence between MCAO (A) and MCAO + Rad animals (B). The ED-1-labeled cells were more intense in the
MCAO-only animals both visually (A, B) and quantitatively (n = 5, ⁄MCAO vs. Naı̈ve;  MCAO vs. MCAO + Rad; #MCAO + Rad vs. Rad, p < 0.05,
ANOVA). D–F). In MCAO-only animals enlarged irregular-shaped Iba1-positive cells appeared to have engulfed cellular debris (arrows, D), in
contrast to the round-shaped smaller Iba1-positive cells in irradiated, ischemic animals (arrows, E). Quantitative analysis showed increased
integrated Iba1 signal intensities in the MCAO-only and MCAO + Rad compared with Naı̈ve or Rad-only animals. There was no diﬀerence in
ischemic animal groups (n = 5; ⁄p < 0.05, MCAO vs. Naı̈ve; #p < 0.05, MCAO + Rad vs. Rad, ANOVA). G, H) The anti-GFAP immunostaining in
ischemic-only animals revealed irregular dense GFAP-positive ﬁlaments, forming a dense scar surrounding the ischemic cavity (G). In irradiated,
ischemic animals, GFAP-labeled ﬁlaments appeared to be concentrated around newly formed vessels, suggesting angiogenesis (see also Fig. 4)
(arrows, H). Scale bar = 50 lm.

In both MCAO-only and MCAO + Rad animal groups,
the morphology of Iba1-positive cells visualized at higher
magniﬁcations appeared to be macrophage-like with
typically rounded shapes and retracted cell processes
(Fig. 4D, E) (Kettenmann et al., 2011). In the MCAO-only
animals, Iba1-positive cells revealed enlarged cell bodies
and multiple internalized particles indicative of the hyperactive state of these cells (Fig. 4A, D), while in
MCAO + Rad animals, the activated Iba1-positive cells
were smaller in size with occasional engulfed fragments
(Fig. 4B, E). However, despite the apparent morphological diﬀerences in Iba1-positive cells between MCAO-only
and MCAO + Rad tissues, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in
cell density were found (Fig. 4F, raw integrated intensities, MCAO or MCAO + Rad vs. Naı̈ve or Rad, ⁄ or #,
p > 0.05). Stereological quantiﬁcation of Iba1 infra-red
signal intensities revealed an upregulation of Iba1 in both

ischemic groups, but not in radiation-treated animals
(Fig. 3F; p < 0.05 MCAO vs. Naı̈ve; MCAO + Rad vs.
Rad).
Brain irradiation stimulates angiogenesis in the
peri-infarct zone
Immunostaining for GFAP (marker of astrocyte-speciﬁc
intermediate ﬁlament) revealed decreased density of
GFAP-positive ﬁlaments in MCAO + Rad compared
with MCAO-only animals (Fig. 4G and H, respectively)
consistent with decreased inﬂammation and similar to
the staining observed with Iba1. Also, in MCAO + Rad
animals, GFAP-positive ﬁlaments appeared to be
associated with blood vessels (Fig. 4H, arrows), in
contrast to dense disorganized GFAP-labeled glial ﬁbers
in the MCAO-only rats (Fig. 4G). We performed

238

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

glio-vascular architecture
animals (Fig. 6A).

seen

in

the

MCAO-only

Brain irradiation improves neuronal viability in
ischemic peri-lesional tissues
Caspase-3, the main executor within the apoptotic
cascade, was used to identify apoptosis in neurons
co-labeled with an anti-NeuN antibody (Fig. 7A–D). In all
four experimental groups, there were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences in the total number of NeuN-positive cells
(from ipsi- and contralateral cortex and peri-lesional
regions; data not shown). Further, there was no change
in the number of apoptotic neurons in the cortex and
peri-lesional zone in Rad-only animals (Fig. 7E, F;
NeuN/caspase-3 colocalization, p>0.05 Rad vs. Naı̈ve).
However, there was a signiﬁcant increase in neuronal
apoptosis in the peri-infarct area in all animals that
underwent MCAO with or without radiation treatment
(Fig. 7E, F; p < 0.01 MCAO vs. Naı̈ve; MCAO+Rad
vs. Rad). Non-apoptotic, potentially viable neurons were
identiﬁed within the scar tissue in irradiated (Fig. 7D;
arrows, ischemic animals, but were not observed in
MCAO-only animals (Fig. 7C).
Inﬁltration of T-lymphocytes is reduced in irradiated
ischemic lesion

Fig. 5. Post-stroke neovascularization is activated in irradiated
animal brains. Double-ﬂuorescent staining for GFAP (red) and vWF
(endothelial cell marker, green) visualized post-ischemic neovascularization. GFAP-positive cells (A, B; red) formed an ischemic scar in
the ischemic-only animals (MCAO, left column). Newly regenerated
vWF-labeled blood vessels (green, arrows in C, D; G, H) in ischemiconly animals were dilated and failed to develop normal architecture
(C). In contrast, in irradiated, ischemic animals (MCAO + Rad, right
column) angiogenesis was enhanced where new vWF-labeled vessels penetrated the subtle scar forming a well-developed capillary
network (D). Cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (E, F; blue).
IC = Ischemic cavity. Scale bar = 100 lm.

double-labeled immunoﬂuorescence for GFAP and vWF
(a marker of neovascularization) (Figs. 5 and 6) that
revealed colocalization in newly formed vessels in
MCAO + Rad animals (Figs. 5H, 6B). This contrasts
with the grossly-dilated vessels entering the dense scar
at peri-lesional tissues in MCAO-only animals (Fig. 5C).
Despite apparent structural diﬀerences in the newly
formed vasculature of MCAO and MCAO + Rad
animals, no diﬀerences in vWF protein expression were
found (data not shown). The merged GFAP/DAPI/vWF
images clearly show the association of astrocytes in
conjunction with the new vessels in MCAO + Rad
animals, but not in MCAO-only animals (Figs. 5G, 6A
and 5H, 6B, respectively). The morphology of the gliovascular complex was more organized and complete in
the peri-lesional boundary zone in MCAO + Rad
animals (Fig. 6B) in stark contrast to the disrupted

T-lymphocyte inﬁltration into irradiated and non-irradiated
ischemic
brain
tissues
was
examined
using
immunolabeling for a CD3 surface glycoprotein, a pan
marker of T-lymphocytes (Fig. 8A, B). In all MCAO
animals, T-lymphocytes accumulated within the
ischemic boundary zone, where the T-cells were found
abundant in the MCAO-only tissues (Fig. 8A), but were
notably reduced within MCAO + Rad ischemic lesions
(Fig. 8B). No CD3-positive cells were seen in naı̈ve or
Rad-only controls (data not shown).

DISCUSSION
We are the ﬁrst to demonstrate enhanced brain repair in
aged animals that underwent a pre-conditioning dose of
brain-only irradiation prior to stroke onset. These
improvements were most apparent at 28 days after
stroke onset. Our novel ﬁndings are: in blood – (i)
normalization of lymphocyte counts; within the chronic
ischemic lesion tissue – (ii) observation of a positive
correlation between T2 values and neurological scores,
(iii) decreased phagocytic activity; (iv) reduction of
T-lymphocyte inﬁltration; (v) improved neovascularization
and formation of glio-vascular complexes; and
(vi) presence of viable neurons. Our tissue level analysis
was performed only at 28 days post MCAO and while
MR imaging deﬁned temporal evolution of injury,
correlative histo- and immunohistochemistry were not
undertaken at earlier time points and are the focus of
future investigations.
Our study utilized a brain-irradiation-preconditioning
model of stroke in aged rats to evaluate systemic eﬀects
of locally modiﬁed immunity by activation of
neuroprotective and neurorepair mechanisms in injured

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

Fig. 6. The glio-vascular unit. High magniﬁcation (40) confocal
images in post-stroke neovascularization between ischemic and
irradiated, ischemic animals. Occasional vWF-positive cells (green,
arrows) were recognizable within the extensive glial scaring (GFAP,
red) in MCAO-only animals (upper panel). However, in irradiated,
ischemic rats the GFAP- and vWF-labeled cells formed the appearance of functional glio-vascular units (bottom panel). Cell nuclei were
counterstained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar = 50 lm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

tissues. Low-dose ionizing radiation exposure has been
shown to diﬀerentially modulate immunity in vivo
(Formenti, 2010). In contrast to highly radiosensitive
T-lymphocytes (adaptive immune cells), innate immune
cells (macrophages, DC, and NK cells) are radioresistant
and remain viable after low doses of irradiation (McBride
et al., 2004; Gridley et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2011), modifying early and late immune processes. Considering that
radiation eﬀects on the CNS are dose- and time-dependent (Toﬁlon and Fike, 2000), we selected a low-dose paradigm of brain-only proton irradiation to evaluate radiation
modulation of the immune response to stroke. The dose
we chose is a dose range (4–8 Gy) that aﬀects radiosensitive glial and endothelial cells, but is far below the neuronal necrosis threshold (Levegrun et al., 2004). In
contrast to slowly developing neuronal loss (months),

239

the glial cell alterations occur early (days to weeks) following radiation exposure (Toﬁlon and Fike, 2000), in agreement with our ﬁndings. These glial signaling mechanisms
are responsible for a cascade of cellular and molecular
signals that engage whole-organism survival mechanisms
and mobilize repair mechanisms (McBride et al., 2004;
Hallenbeck et al., 2006). This cascade includes amplifying
maturation and activation of local antigen-presenting cells
and mediating bystander eﬀects on systemic immunity
(Lorimore et al., 2001; McBride et al., 2004; Coates
et al., 2008; Schaue and McBride, 2010).
The concept of ‘‘danger signaling’’ distinguishes the
brain-irradiation model from other traditional models of
preconditioning in the stroke literature (Dirnagl et al.,
2009). Typically, ischemic tolerance is induced by a lowintensity event that does not result in an overt injury.
Ischemic tolerance develops as early as an hour, reaches
a peak around the third day and disappears within a week
later (Cadet and Krasnova, 2009; Dirnagl et al., 2009). In
contrast, we found that radio-neuroprotection in stroke
lasts for at least 10 days after brain irradiation, consistent
with a previous report from our laboratory (Titova et al.,
2011). These ﬁndings possibly relate to the similar
immune-mediated mechanisms that occur with crossneuroprotection induced by consequent traumatic injuries
(Yoles et al., 2001).
Our study investigated a time point of 28 d after stroke
induction, where we observed a positive correlation
between the resolution of T2 values and improved
neurological outcomes. This ﬁnding prompted us to
investigate the underlying complexity of reparative
transformations in irradiated and non-irradiated aged
animals following stroke. In the scar tissue of irradiated
ischemic rats, we found enhanced neovascularization,
formation of a well-organized glio-vascular complexes
and existence of non-apoptotic neurons. These
outcomes were not found in the ischemic-only rats.
When the vasculature re-growth, was present, it was
abnormal and incomplete.
Our ﬁndings in ischemic-only animals conﬁrm
previous reports of insuﬃcient brain repair that is seen
in advanced aging (Buga et al., 2008; Dinapoli et al.,
2008; Liu et al., 2009; Popa-Wagner et al., 2011). The limited ability of the aged brain to repair after stroke relates in
part to weakened capacity for vascular repair. Decreased
smooth muscle and elastin combined with an increase in
intramural collagen impairs microvasculature distension;
thickens the basement membrane, increases abnormal
inclusions and abnormalities in astrocytic endfeet,
decreases the number and metabolic demand of endothelial cells (Burns et al., 1981; Petcu et al., 2010). These
changes act synergistically to alter normal vascular function and regenerative potential. Functional deﬁciencies in
the cerebral vasculature are linked to increased blood–
brain barrier (BBB) vulnerability with aging (Dinapoli
et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2009). Buga et al. (2008) reported
a twofold increase in BBB disruption post-MCAO in aged
compared to young rats that resulted in an increased inﬁltration of blood-derived immune cells into the infarcted
area. The net eﬀect of this cascade is increased brain
inﬂammation. Later, during the reparative tissue

240

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

Fig. 7. Neuronal viability is increased in the irradiated, peri-ischemic zone. (A–D) Microphotographs of merged double-labeled immunoﬂuorescence
images for NeuN (neuronal nuclei, green) and caspase-3 (apoptosis, red); DAPI (cell nuclei, blue). Colocalization of NeuN and caspase-3
immunostaining (yellow) indicates apoptotic neurons. The broken line outlines the scar (S) boundary adjacent to the ischemic cavity (IC). No overt
group diﬀerences in colocalization of NeuN and caspase-3 markers were signiﬁcant in the peri-ischemic cavity zone (A, B). Interestingly, in
irradiated, ischemic animals the NeuN-positive/caspase-3 negative (non-apoptotic neurons) cells were noted within the area of scar (D, arrows), but
were not observed in ischemic-only animals (C). Scale bar A, B = 50 lm; C, D = 100 lm. (E, F) Neuronal apoptosis was quantiﬁed in the cortex
(E) and peri-ischemic areas (F) using Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcients (r) of NeuN/caspase-3 colocalization. While no signiﬁcant changes were
observed in the cortex (E), r values were signiﬁcantly increased in the peri-ischemic zone (F) in all ischemic animals indicative of stroke-related
activation of neuronal apoptosis (⁄p < 0.01; MCAO vs. Naı̈ve;  MCAO + Rad vs. Rad, ANOVA). (For interpretation of the references to colour in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

remodeling, lack of metabolic support due to altered angiogenesis can detrimentally eﬀect neural plasticity (Black
et al., 1989) and slow tissue repair.
Another factor deterring brain repair capabilities is
astroglial proliferation and subsequent scar formation
that is abnormally accelerated in the aged brain (PopaWagner et al., 2011). Enhanced scar tissue in the late
repair phase impedes angiogenesis and axonal regrowth
creating both physical and chemical barriers by secreting

a variety of growth-inhibiting molecules (Buga et al.,
2008). Here, and previously, we have shown that brainonly irradiation decreases post-stroke scarring, predominately by down-regulation of GFAP expression (Titova
et al., 2011). Our data here conﬁrm that glial scarring is
reduced that may lead to a permissive tissue state that
promotes repair mechanisms. One result of reduced scarring can be the improved regeneration of the microvasculature and formation of glio-vascular units, the critical

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

241

Fig. 8. T-lymphocyte inﬁltration is greatly reduced in the irradiated peri-ischemic zone. Immunoﬂuorescence with antibodies against CD3, a panmarker for T-lymphocytes (green) revealed numerous T-lymphocytes in the ischemic-only boundary zone (A), compared to the irradiated-ischemic
peri-lesion (B). IC = ischemic cavity. Scale bar = 100 lm. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article.)

components of the BBB (Simard and Nedergaard, 2004;
Arai et al., 2009; Wolburg et al., 2009). In our present
study, irradiated ischemic rats revealed the presence of
structural re-establishment of disrupted astrocyte–
endothelial contacts that occurred concomitantly with an
accelerated reduction in brain edema and decreased
expression of the brain water channel, acquaporin 4
(AQP4) (Titova et al., 2011). This suggests that morphological BBB reintegration could be related to return of a
proper functioning of the permeability barrier (Barreto
et al., 2011) and ultimately improving neurological outcomes as we observed.
The glio-vascular unit modulates multiple metabolic
functions, including the protection and support of
neuronal and synaptic metabolism and the maintenance
of neuro-glio-vascular interactions for normal brain
function and homeostasis (Simard and Nedergaard,
2004; Hallenbeck et al., 2006; Arai et al., 2009; Halassa
and Haydon, 2010). Metabolic support provided by an
improved or newly formed cerebral microvasculature
encourages survival of ischemia-injured neurons
(Taguchi et al., 2004; Arai et al., 2009) likely contributed
to the increased neuronal viability found in our irradiated,
ischemic animals. It is important to note that we did not
test the functionality of the new microvasculature, but
demonstration of viable and functional vessels is important in future experiments. Also, accelerated reduction
of brain edema in irradiated ischemic brain tissue
(Titova et al., 2011) slows the progression of initial ischemic damage (and associated inﬂammatory cascade) that
may underlie the improved neuronal survival. Our data
indicate that both mechanisms – neuroprotection and
improved neurorepair – contribute to increased neuronal
viability within the peri-lesional tissues in MCAO + Rad
animals.
Our ﬁndings demonstrate that improvements in
post-stroke protective and reparative mechanisms are
associated with brain irradiation-induced immune
modulation. In the MCAO-only rats we found
upregulated microglial/macrophage activity, an extended
area of phagocytotic distribution, and massive inﬁltration

of T-lymphocytes that coexist with a signiﬁcant decrease
in blood lymphocytes. Unlike the ischemic-only animals,
the lymphocyte counts returned to basal levels in
irradiated, ischemic animals. Also, inﬁltration of
T-lymphocytes into injured tissues was notably
decreased in the irradiated, ischemic rats compared
with ischemic-only animals.
In the ischemia-only animals, our results are
consistent with experimental and clinical data reported
in the literature. In the late post-stroke period, the
majority of phagocytes in the ischemic lesion are bloodderived macrophages that invade the lesion as early as
6 h and remain for years in a phagocytic state
(Schroeter et al., 1994; Mena et al., 2004; Buga et al.,
2008; Gelderblom et al., 2009; Popa-Wagner et al.,
2011). Acutely, macrophages exhibit the proinﬂammatory
M1 phenotype that removes tissue debris and setting the
stage for tissue repair. Later, during the cellular proliferation phase, alternatively activated (M2) macrophages
stimulate angiogenesis via expression of cytokines and
various growth factors (Kovacs et al., 1996; Koh and
Dipietro, 2011). In aging, there is an imbalance between
inﬂammation/proliferation phases (Popa-Wagner et al.,
2011) where phagocytic capability for ‘‘clearing’’ is altered
and the transition from proinﬂammatory to pro-healing M2
macrophage phenotype is impaired (Gomez et al., 2008;
Popa-Wagner et al., 2011). Defective M1/M2 transition
states are retained in the chronic post-stroke inﬂammatory state common in older individuals (Mena et al.,
2004) and are associated with delayed wound repair
(Koh and Dipietro, 2011).
Also, the massive inﬁltration of T-lymphocytes into the
lesion site and lymphopenia found in the ischemic-only
animals is typical for CNS injuries (Dirnagl et al., 2007;
Oﬀner et al., 2009). T-lymphocytes rapidly invade and
can accumulate in the injured brain tissue up to 42 days
post-stroke (Schroeter et al., 1994; Popovich et al.,
2003; Oﬀner et al., 2009; Kleinschnitz et al., 2010).
Lymphocytic decline indicates a profound systemic immunosuppression post-stroke in both animals and humans
(Dirnagl et al., 2007; Oﬀner et al., 2009; Urra et al.,

242

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

2009) that directly corresponds to indices of brain damage
severity, and is associated with poor stroke outcomes
(Czlonkowska et al., 1979; Prass et al., 2003; Dirnagl
et al., 2007). Extensive lymphocyte apoptosis, spleen
and thymus atrophy (Oﬀner et al., 2009) and lowered
blastogenesis decrease the number of circulating
T-lymphocytes (Czlonkowska et al., 1979), leading to
life-threatening infections in stroke patients (Dirnagl
et al., 2007). CNS injury-induced immunosuppression is
aggravated in the elderly due to deterioration in immune
function (Czlonkowska et al., 1979; Mocchegiani and
Malavolta, 2004; Gomez et al., 2008). In view of the current literature, our data showing a restored proportion of
WBC with return of the lymphocyte blood count to control
levels and lessened T-lymphocyte invasion into the stroke
tissue are further evidence of stabilization of the homeostatic systemic and local immune in irradiated ischemic
rats. A possible explanation for the observed improvement of WBC proportion could be that radiation-induced
local activation of innate immunity mediates systemic
immune-modulating eﬀects (Formenti and Demaria,
2009), which evoke self-renewal cellular mechanisms
(Pecaut et al., 2003). These activating self-renewal
eﬀects of radiation have been demonstrated in clinical
(Formenti, 2010) and experimental settings (Pecaut
et al., 2003). Pecaut et al. (2003) found that whole-head
irradiation in rats, ten days after exposure to 1.5–4 Gy
protons resulted in a dose-dependent activation of spontaneous blastogenesis of blood and spleen leukocytes
and increased populations of the GRA–macrophage progenitors in the bone marrow (Pecaut et al., 2003). Hematopoietic radiation eﬀects are transient (Gridley et al.,
2008) and at the ﬁnal time point of our study (38 days after
irradiation) were no longer apparent in irradiated-only
controls. Further exploration of the dynamics of immune
cell repopulation requires that additional time points need
be studied. However, radiation-induced immune modulation at the time of stroke remains the likely hypothesis
for explaining the rapid improvement in ischemia-related
immunosuppression and normalization of the lymphocyte
counts in the irradiated ischemic animals.
As noted above, ionizing radiation modulates
immunity selectively on cell populations. Also, it
modulates the functional state of immune cells (McBride
et al., 2004; Coates et al., 2008; Huang et al., 2011).
Exposure to radiation facilitates DC maturation and activates mature DCs, thus promoting cytokine production
and upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules (Huang
et al., 2011). Ionizing radiation increases the lysosomal
and respiratory burst activity of macrophages (Lorimore
et al., 2001) and modiﬁes an intrinsic cell phenotype to
a pro-healing, M2 phenotype (Coates et al., 2008).
Coates et al. (2008) showed that the radiation-induced
activation of M2 macrophage transition occurs by reduction of nitric oxide synthase enzyme (NOS2) activity and
increased arginase and STAT6 activity (a signal transducer and activator of transcription characteristic of prohealing M2 responses). Importantly, this in vivo eﬀect
cannot be induced in vitro, indicating a potential bystander
signaling mechanism for activation (Coates et al., 2008).
It remains to be further studied whether radiation-induced

acceleration of M1/M2 macrophage transition is the
mechanism responsible for improvements of post-stroke
recovery in irradiated, ischemic rats. Our data indirectly
support such a schema wherein irradiated, ischemic
peri-lesional tissue ED1 expression (phagolysosome
marker) declines, but Iba-1 expression (microglia–
macrophage cells marker) is unchanged. Moreover, these
ﬁndings support our theory of a pro-healing phenotypic
transformation in Iba1-positive cells.
In regard to the translational perspective, our
overarching goal is to ultimately improve the aging
stroke patients’ survival and improve their outcomes.
Pre-irradiation is not a viable option for stroke therapy
but early post-stroke irradiation in theory could modulate
the tissue environment suﬃciently to promote
neuroprotection and neurorepair. Indeed there may be a
longer time window post-stroke where brain-only
irradiation could have a positive impact on recovery.
Clearly more studies need to be done to understand this
potential novel approach.

CONCLUSION
We conﬁrmed that at 28 days post-stroke, there was a
positive correlation between T2 values (edema and
water content) and improvements in neurological
outcomes
that
reﬂect
the
favorable
cellular
improvements in the brain tissue injured following
stroke. Thus, clinically and experimentally, such
correlations could serve as a biomarker for initiation of
therapeutic and rehabilitative interventions. In aged rats
undergoing stroke, we characterized the late phase of
brain repair. We found that a favorable repair milieu
exists that is related to immune system ‘‘steady state’’
as indicated by attenuated chronic phagocytosis,
reduced T-lymphocyte inﬁltration in the brain, and
normalized lymphocyte counts in the blood. In the aged
ischemia-only animals, similar to the aged stroke
patient, the process of post-stroke reorganization
remains in a transition phase of reparative glial
proliferation disrupting the recovery process. Overall,
our ﬁndings extend the knowledge about the role of
immune system in repair of the ‘‘immunologically
healthy’’ aged brain and may have a signiﬁcant impact
on future clinical applications.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
ET performed the experiments and bulk of analysis
including writing of the manuscript and making the
ﬁgures. ZV assisted in the immunohistochemical
analysis. NG provided computer code for phagocytic rim
analysis. JZ provided expertise and advice for this
study. DB provided expertise and edited the ﬁnal
manuscript. AO was involved in all aspects of the study,
editing manuscript and ﬁgures.
Acknowledgment—This work was supported in part by research
funds from the Non-Invasive Imaging Laboratory, Department of
Radiation Medicine.

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

REFERENCES
Arai K, Jin G, Navaratna D, Lo EH (2009) Brain angiogenesis in
developmental and pathological processes: neurovascular injury
and angiogenic recovery after stroke. FEBS J 276:4644–4652.
Barreto GE, Gonzalez J, Torres Y, Morales L (2011) Astrocyticneuronal crosstalk: implications for neuroprotection from brain
injury. Neurosci Res 71:107–113.
Black JE, Polinsky M, Greenough WT (1989) Progressive failure of
cerebral angiogenesis supporting neural plasticity in aging rats.
Neurobiol Aging 10:353–358.
Buga AM, Dunoiu C, Balseanu A, Popa-Wagner A (2008) Cellular
and molecular mechanisms underlying neurorehabilitation after
stroke in aged subjects. Rom J Morphol Embryol 49:279–302.
Burns EM, Kruckeberg TW, Gaetano PK (1981) Changes with age in
cerebral capillary morphology. Neurobiol Aging 2:283–291.
Cadet JL, Krasnova IN (2009) Cellular and molecular neurobiology of
brain preconditioning. Mol Neurobiol 39:50–61.
Carson MJ, Thrash JC, Walter B (2006) The cellular response in
neuroinﬂammation: the role of leukocytes, microglia and
astrocytes in neuronal death and survival. Clin Neurosci Res
6:237–245.
Coates PJ, Rundle JK, Lorimore SA, Wright EG (2008) Indirect
macrophage responses to ionizing radiation: implications for
genotype-dependent
bystander
signaling.
Cancer
Res
68:450–456.
Czlonkowska A, Cyrta B, Korlak J (1979) Immunological observations
on patients with acute cerebral vascular disease. J Neurol Sci
43:455–464.
Dinapoli VA, Huber JD, Houser K, Li X, Rosen CL (2008) Early
disruptions of the blood–brain barrier may contribute to
exacerbated neuronal damage and prolonged functional
recovery following stroke in aged rats. Neurobiol Aging
29:753–764.
Dirnagl U, Becker K, Meisel A (2009) Preconditioning and tolerance
against cerebral ischaemia: from experimental strategies to
clinical use. Lancet Neurol 8:398–412.
Dirnagl U, Klehmet J, Braun JS, Harms H, Meisel C, Ziemssen T,
Prass K, Meisel A (2007) Stroke-induced immunodepression:
experimental evidence and clinical relevance. Stroke 38:770–773.
Eady TN, Khoutorova L, Obenaus A, Mohd-Yusof A, Bazan NG,
Belayev L (2014) Docosahexaenoic acid complexed to albumin
provides neuroprotection after experimental stroke in aged rats.
Neurobiol Dis 62:1–7.
Endres M, Engelhardt B, Koistinaho J, Lindvall O, Meairs S, Mohr JP,
Planas A, Rothwell N, Schwaninger M, Schwab ME, Vivien D,
Wieloch T, Dirnagl U (2008) Improving outcome after stroke:
overcoming the translational roadblock. Cerebrovasc Dis
25:268–278.
Formenti SC (2010) Immunological aspects of local radiotherapy:
clinical relevance. Discov Med 9:119–124.
Formenti SC, Demaria S (2009) Systemic eﬀects of local
radiotherapy. Lancet Oncol 10:718–726.
Franceschi C (2007) Inﬂammaging as a major characteristic of old
people: can it be prevented or cured? Nutr Rev 65:S173–S176.
Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, Behrens D, Choe CU, Siler
DA, Arumugam TV, Orthey E, Gerloﬀ C, Tolosa E, Magnus T
(2009) Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell
accumulation in stroke. Stroke 40:1849–1857.
Gomez CR, Nomellini V, Faunce DE, Kovacs EJ (2008) Innate
immunity and aging. Exp Gerontol 43:718–728.
Gridley DS, Rizvi A, Luo-Owen X, Makinde AY, Coutrakon GB, Koss
P, Slater JM, Pecaut MJ (2008) Variable hematopoietic responses
to acute photons, protons and simulated solar particle event
protons. In Vivo 22:159–169.
Halassa MM, Haydon PG (2010) Integrated brain circuits: astrocytic
networks modulate neuronal activity and behavior. Annu Rev
Physiol 72:335–355.
Hallenbeck J, Del ZG, Jacobs T, Hakim A, Goldman S, Utz U, Hasan
A (2006) Immunomodulation strategies for preventing vascular

243

disease of the brain and heart: workshop summary. Stroke
37:3035–3042.
Huang J, Wang QJ, Yang S, Li YF, El-Gamil M, Rosenberg SA,
Robbins PF (2011) Irradiation enhances human T-cell function by
upregulating CD70 expression on antigen-presenting cells in vitro.
J Immunother 34:327–335.
Iadecola C, Anrather J (2011) The immunology of stroke: from
mechanisms to translation. Nat Med 17:796–808.
Kettenmann H, Hanisch UK, Noda M, Verkhratsky A (2011)
Physiology of microglia. Physiol Rev 91:461–553.
Kleinschnitz C, Schwab N, Kraft P, Hagedorn I, Dreykluft A, Schwarz
T, Austinat M, Nieswandt B, Wiendl H, Stoll G (2010) Early
detrimental T-cell eﬀects in experimental cerebral ischemia are
neither related to adaptive immunity nor thrombus formation.
Blood 115:3835–3842.
Koh TJ, Dipietro LA (2011) Inﬂammation and wound healing: the role
of the macrophage. Expert Rev Mol Med 13:e23.
Kovacs Z, Ikezaki K, Samoto K, Inamura T, Fukui M (1996) VEGF
and ﬁt. Expression time kinetics in rat brain infarct. Stroke
27:1865–1872.
Levegrun S, Hof H, Essig M, Schlegel W, Debus J (2004) Radiationinduced changes of brain tissue after radiosurgery in patients with
arteriovenous malformations: correlation with dose distribution
parameters. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 59:796–808.
Liu F, Yuan R, Benashski SE, McCullough LD (2009) Changes in
experimental stroke outcome across the life span. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 29:792–802.
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R (1989) Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20:84–91.
Lorimore SA, Coates PJ, Scobie GE, Milne G, Wright EG (2001)
Inﬂammatory-type responses after exposure to ionizing radiation
in vivo: a mechanism for radiation-induced bystander eﬀects?
Oncogene 20:7085–7095.
McBride WH, Chiang CS, Olson JL, Wang CC, Hong JH, Pajonk F,
Dougherty GJ, Iwamoto KS, Pervan M, Liao YP (2004) A sense of
danger from radiation. Radiat Res 162:1–19.
Mena H, Cadavid D, Rushing EJ (2004) Human cerebral infarct: a
proposed histopathologic classiﬁcation based on 137 cases. Acta
Neuropathol 108:524–530.
Mocchegiani E, Malavolta M (2004) NK and NKT cell functions in
immunosenescence. Aging Cell 3:177–184.
Obenaus A, Robbins M, Blanco G, Galloway NR, Snissarenko E,
Gillard E, Lee S, Curras-Collazo M (2007) Multi-modal magnetic
resonance imaging alterations in two rat models of mild
neurotrauma. J Neurotrauma 24:1147–1160.
Oﬀner H, Vandenbark AA, Hurn PD (2009) Eﬀect of experimental
stroke on peripheral immunity: CNS ischemia induces profound
immunosuppression. Neuroscience 158:1098–1111.
Pecaut MJ, Nelson GA, Moyers MF, Rabin B, Gridley DS (2003)
‘‘Out-of-ﬁeld’’ eﬀects of head-localized proton irradiation on
peripheral immune parameters. In Vivo 17:513–521.
Petcu EB, Smith RA, Miroiu RI, Opris MM (2010) Angiogenesis in oldaged subjects after ischemic stroke: a cautionary note for
investigators. J Angiogenes Res 2:26.
Popa-Wagner A, Buga AM, Kokaia Z (2011) Perturbed
cellular response to brain injury during aging. Ageing Res Rev
10:71–79.
Popovich PG, Longbrake EE (2008) Can the immune system be
harnessed to repair the CNS? Nat Rev Neurosci 9:481–493.
Popovich PG, van RN, Hickey WF, Preidis G, McGaughy V (2003)
Hematogenous macrophages express CD8 and distribute to
regions of lesion cavitation after spinal cord injury. Exp Neurol
182:275–287.
Prass K, Meisel C, Hoﬂich C, Braun J, Halle E, Wolf T, Ruscher K,
Victorov IV, Priller J, Dirnagl U, Volk HD, Meisel A (2003) Strokeinduced immunodeﬁciency promotes spontaneous bacterial
infections and is mediated by sympathetic activation reversal by
poststroke T helper cell type 1-like immunostimulation. J Exp Med
198:725–736.

244

E. M. Titova et al. / Neuroscience 283 (2014) 231–244

Qi Q, Zhang DW, Weyand CM, Goronzy JJ (2014) Mechanisms
shaping the naive T cell repertoire in the elderly – thymic
involution or peripheral homeostatic proliferation? Exp Gerontol
54:71–74.
Schaue D, McBride WH (2010) Links between innate immunity and
normal tissue radiobiology. Radiat Res 173:406–417.
Schroeter M, Jander S, Witte OW, Stoll G (1994) Local immune
responses in the rat cerebral cortex after middle cerebral artery
occlusion. J Neuroimmunol 55:195–203.
Sharma G, Hanania NA, Shim YM (2009) The aging immune system
and its relationship to the development of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Proc Am Thorac Soc 6:573–580.
Simard M, Nedergaard M (2004) The neurobiology of glia in the
context of water and ion homeostasis. Neuroscience
129:877–896.
Sugawara T, Ayer R, Jadhav V, Zhang JH (2008) A new grading
system evaluating bleeding scale in ﬁlament perforation
subarachnoid hemorrhage rat model. J Neurosci Methods
167:327–334.
Taguchi A, Soma T, Tanaka H, Kanda T, Nishimura H, Yoshikawa H,
Tsukamoto Y, Iso H, Fujimori Y, Stern DM, Naritomi H,
Matsuyama T (2004) Administration of CD34+ cells after stroke

enhances neurogenesis via angiogenesis in a mouse model. J
Clin Invest 114:330–338.
Titova E, Ostrowski RP, Adami A, Badaut J, Lalas S, Ghosh N,
Vlkolinsky R, Zhang JH, Obenaus A (2011) Brain irradiation
improves focal cerebral ischemia recovery in aged rats. J Neurol
Sci 306:143–153.
Toﬁlon PJ, Fike JR (2000) The radioresponse of the central nervous
system: a dynamic process. Radiat Res 153:357–370.
Urra X, Cervera A, Villamor N, Planas AM, Chamorro A (2009) Harms
and beneﬁts of lymphocyte subpopulations in patients with acute
stroke. Neuroscience 158:1174–1183.
Wolburg H, Noell S, Mack A, Wolburg-Buchholz K, Fallier-Becker P
(2009) Brain endothelial cells and the glio-vascular complex. Cell
Tissue Res 335:75–96.
Yoles E, Hauben E, Palgi O, Agranov E, Gothilf A, Cohen A, Kuchroo
V, Cohen IR, Weiner H, Schwartz M (2001) Protective
autoimmunity is a physiological response to CNS trauma. J
Neurosci 21:3740–3748.
Zhang W, Brahmakshatriya V, Swain SL (2014) CD4 T cell defects in
the aged: Causes, consequences and strategies to circumvent.
Exp Gerontol 54:67–70.

(Accepted 10 September 2014)
(Available online 18 September 2014)

