Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 308: H456–H466, 2015.
First published December 31, 2014; doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014.

SOD1 overexpression prevents acute hyperglycemia-induced cerebral
myogenic dysfunction: relevance to contralateral hemisphere and
stroke outcomes
Maha Coucha,2 Weiguo Li,1,2 Sherif Hafez,1,5 Mohammed Abdelsaid,1,2 Maribeth H. Johnson,3
Susan C. Fagan,1,4,5 and Adviye Ergul1,2,5
1

Charlie Norwood Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Augusta, Georgia; 2Department of Physiology, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia; 3Department of Biostatistics, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia; 4Department of
Neurology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia; and 5Program in Clinical and Experimental Therapeutics,
University of Georgia College of Pharmacy, Augusta, Georgia

Coucha M, Li W, Hafez S, Abdelsaid M, Johnson MH, Fagan SC,
Ergul A. SOD1 overexpression prevents acute hyperglycemia-induced cerebral myogenic dysfunction: relevance to contralateral hemisphere and
stroke outcomes. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 308: H456–H466, 2015.
First published December 31, 2014; doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014.—
Admission hyperglycemia (HG) amplifies vascular injury and neurological deficits in acute ischemic stroke, but the mechanisms remain
controversial. We recently reported that ischemia-reperfusion (I/R)
injury impairs the myogenic response in both hemispheres via increased nitration. However, whether HG amplifies contralateral myogenic dysfunction and whether loss of tone in the contralateral
hemisphere contributes to stroke outcomes remain to be determined.
Our hypothesis was that contralateral myogenic dysfunction worsens
stroke outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke in an oxidative
stress-dependent manner. Male wild-type or SOD1 transgenic rats
were injected with saline or 40% glucose solution 10 min before
surgery and then subjected to 30 min of ischemia/45 min or 24 h of
reperfusion. In another set of animals (n ⫽ 5), SOD1 was overexpressed only in the contralateral hemisphere by stereotaxic adenovirus
injection 2–3 wk before I/R. Myogenic tone and neurovascular outcomes were determined. HG exacerbated myogenic dysfunction in
contralateral side only, which was associated with infarct size expansion, increased edema, and more pronounced neurological deficit.
Global and selective SOD1 overexpression restored myogenic reactivity in ipsilateral and contralateral sides, respectively, and enhanced
neurovascular outcomes. In conclusion, our results show that SOD1
overexpression nullified the detrimental effects of HG on myogenic
tone and stroke outcomes and that the contralateral hemisphere may
be a novel target for the management of acute hyperglycemic stroke.
ischemia-reperfusion injury; admission hyperglycemia; contralateral
hemisphere; superoxide dismutase; myogenic tone; stroke outcomes
MORE THAN ONE-THIRD of acute ischemic stroke patients have
acute hyperglycemia upon admission (1, 42), which leads to
poor clinical outcomes and a higher risk of mortality (1, 7, 32,
43). Intriguingly, patients who have hyperglycemia but no
history of diabetes suffer the poorest outcomes (24). We
previously showed that a modest acute elevation in blood
glucose at the time of stroke amplifies vascular injury and
neurological deficits (15). In addition, previous studies have
reported a reduction in regional cerebral blood flow (CBF)
during acute hyperglycemia (14, 21), which could accentu-

Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: A. Ergul, Dept. of
Physiology, Georgia Regents Univ., 1120 15th St., CA 2094, Augusta, GA
30912 (e-mail: aergul@gru.edu).
H456

ate brain dysfunction after ischemia (13, 22). Together, all
these findings emphasize the detrimental impact of acute
hyperglycemia on the cerebrovasculature and the importance of an intact vascular system in functional outcomes
after stroke.
Myogenic reactivity is an intrinsic property of smooth muscle cells to constrict in response to pressure by which the brain
can maintain adequate blood flow during changes in perfusion
pressure (12). We recently showed that ischemia-reperfusion
(I/R) injury has a short-term global effect, impairing cerebrovascular myogenic reactivity and lowering perfusion in both
ischemic and contralateral hemispheres (11). However, the role
of contralateral myogenic dysfunction on stroke outcomes and
especially under conditions that amplify I/R injury remain
unknown. Thus, our first goal in the present study was to test
the hypothesis that hyperglycemia worsens contralateral myogenic dysfunction and that enhancement of contralateral myogenic tone improves stroke outcomes.
It is well established that increased generation of ROS could
alter myogenic function after I/R with or without hyperglycemia (11, 35, 38). We have previously shown that 1) I/R injury
has a short-term global effect impairing myogenic reactivity in
both hemispheres, 2) impaired myogenic tone was due to
excess peroxynitrite generation and actin nitration leading to
actin depolymerization, and 3) middle cerebral arteries (MCAs)
isolated from diabetic rats exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation ex vivo experience loss of tone due to excess peroxynitrite generation and nitration (11, 26). Therefore, antioxidant
agents are a promising therapeutic intervention for acute hyperglycemic stroke. Cu/ZnSOD (SOD1) is one of the antioxidant agents that catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide into
oxygen and hydrogen peroxide. Previous studies using SOD1
transgenic rats have supported the beneficial role of SOD1 in
improving stroke outcomes after I/R injury (25, 30). Therefore,
the second goal of the present study was to test the hypothesis
that improvement of myogenic dysfunction by local SOD1
overexpression limits stroke injury and improves functional
outcomes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Animals. Experiments were performed on weight-matched (250 –
350 g) male Wistar rats, SOD1 transgenic rats, and Sprague-Dawley
(SD) rats (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN), which served as the control group
for experiments involving transgenic animals. Animals were subjected
to MCA occlusion (MCAO) with and without acute hyperglycemia.
http://www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Submitted 14 May 2014; accepted in final form 26 December 2014

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

and nitrotyrosine was detected by an anti-nitrotyrosine monoclonal
antibody (Millipore, Lake Placid, NY). Relative levels of nitrotyrosine
were quantified by densitometry software (Alpha Innotech).
Pressurized arteriograph system. MCA segments from ischemic
and contralateral hemispheres were quickly excised and pressurized in
an arteriograph chamber (Living Systems, Burlington, VT) at 15
mmHg for 1 h within 45 min of isolation to ensure vessel viability
(11). Pressure-diameter curves were obtained first in the presence of
Ca2⫹ (active condition) and then in Ca2⫹-free buffer (passive condition) with the addition of 0.2 mM papaverine hydrochloride. A video
dimension analyzer connected to the arteriograph system was used to
measure wall thickness and lumen diameter at pressures ranging from
0 to 180 mmHg in 20-mmHg increments. Using the wall thickness and
lumen diameter measurements, percent myogenic tone [percent myogenic tone ⫽ 1 ⫺ (active outer diameter/passive outer diameter) ⫻
100] was determined.
Neurovascular injury assessment. All animals were anesthetized
with pentobarbital sodium (Fatal-Plus, Vortech Pharmaceuticals) and
underwent intracardiac perfusion of ice-cold saline to flush blood out
of the vessels at the end of 24 h of reperfusion. Brains were extracted,
sliced into 2-mm slices, and then stained with 2% solution of 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride (Sigma) to evaluate tissue viability and
delineate the infarcted area. Images were captured using a digital
scanner, and SPOT Advanced 3.4 software (Diagnostic Instruments,
Sterling Heights, MI) was used to quantify grossly visible infarction
zones. The infarct volume was determined as a percentage of the
ischemic hemisphere. Edema is reported as the percent increase in
ischemic hemisphere size to the contralateral hemisphere.
Neurological outcomes assessment. Beam walk and grip strength
tests, which assess sensorimotor function, were performed at baseline
and at the end of 24 h of reperfusion. Forelimb grip strength was
determined using a digital grip strength meter (Columbus Instruments,
Columbus, OH) (46). Beam walk evaluation was done based on the
seven-point scale method previously described by Feeney et al. (18).
Statistics. The area under the curve (AUC) was calculated across
intraluminal pressure for vessels from each animal for myogenic tone
(40 to 180 mmHg) using NCSS 2007 (NCSS, Kaysville, UT) and was
used in the analyses for these variables. Myogenic tone AUC was
analyzed using two stroke (sham vs. ischemia or nonischemia) by two
hyperglycemia (no vs. yes) ANOVA with interactions where the
ischemic and nonischemic sides of the brain were analyzed separately.
Data from Wistar rats were analyzed using two stroke (sham vs.
MCAO) by two hyperglycemia (no vs. yes) ANOVA to determine the
effect of stroke and hyperglycemia on blood glucose at baseline,
MCAO, and reperfusion. One-way ANOVA (sham, MCAO, MCAO ⫹
hyperglycemia) was used to determine the effect of MCAO and
hyperglycemia on myogenic tone AUC for SD and SOD1 transgenic
rats. A two-sample t-test was used to establish differences in SOD
activity and expression (SD vs. SOD1). A series of two SOD1 (no vs.
yes) by two hyperglycemia (no vs. yes) ANOVAs with interactions
were used to determine the effect of hyperglycemia and SOD1 on
blood glucose at baseline, MCAO, and reperfusion as well as infarct
size, edema, beam walk, grip strength, and nitrotyrosine levels. Two
stroke (sham vs. MCAO) by two SOD1 (no vs. yes) ANOVA was
used to determine the effect of MCAO and SOD1 on nitrotyrosine
levels. One-way ANOVA using Wistar rats (MCAO, MCAO ⫹
hyperglycemia, and SOD1 adenovirus MCAO ⫹ hyperglycemia) was
used to determine the effect of hyperglycemia and SOD1 on blood
glucose at baseline, MCAO, and reperfusion as well as myogenic tone
for both ischemic and nonischemic vessels and infarct size, edema,
beam walk, and grip strength. One-way ANOVA using Wistar rats
(MCAO, MCAO ⫹ hyperglycemia, and SOD1 adenovirus MCAO ⫹
hyperglycemia) was used to determine the effect of stroke, hyperglycemia, and SOD1 adenovirus on blood glucose at baseline, MCAO,
and reperfusion as well as myogenic tone for both ischemic and
nonischemic vessels. SAS 9.3 (SAS, Cary, NC) was used for all
analyses. Statistical significance was determined at ␣ ⬍ 0.05, and a

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Animals were housed at the Georgia Regents University animal care
facility, which has been approved by the American Association for
Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. All protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Animals
were fed standard rat chow and tap water ad libitum. All animals were
euthanized by decapitation after being anesthetized with pentobarbital
sodium (Fatal-Plus, Vortech Pharmaceuticals, Dearborn, MI).
Model of ischemia. Focal cerebral ischemia was achieved in a
blinded manner for the various groups using the monofilament suture
MCAO model previously described by our group (15). The skin on the
cervical region was incised to access the common carotid artery. The
external carotid artery was separated, ligated, and severed. Nylon
suture with a rounded tip was inserted into the internal carotid artery
to approach the origin of the MCA. The nylon suture occluding the
MCA was secured along the external carotid artery at its base, and the
incision was closed. Rats were subjected to sham operation (sham) or
30 min of MCAO followed by 45 min or 24 h of reperfusion. Acute
hyperglycemia was achieved by 2 ml ip of 40% glucose injection 10
min before MCAO and was maintained during 24 h of reperfusion by
another injection at the end of the MCAO. Blood glucose levels were
measured from a tail vein using a glucometer (Freestyle, Alameda,
CA) and reported at baseline, MCAO, and reperfusion. In sham
groups, animals were dissected in the neck region, and the common
carotid artery was ligated as in stroke surgery but was not subjected to
MCAO. At the end of 30 min, the suture was released, and animals
were euthanized similarly to the MCAO group.
CBF measurement. Cerebral perfusion was measured by a scanning
laser Doppler imaging system (PeriScan PIM 3 System). In brief, the
top of the skull was exposed by a median incision of the skin after the
animal was anesthetized with 2% isoflurane inhalation. It was programmed to scan an area covering somatosensory cortex, which is
supplied by the MCA. The laser beam was directed at the skull surface
(2 mm posterior and 5 mm lateral to the bregma) by a moving-mirror
system in the scanner without tissue contact. In this system, a built-in
photo detector identifies the reflected light from moving blood cells
within 0.5 cm of the cortical surface, and a color-coded image is
acquired based on the concentration and mean velocity of these blood
cells using LDPIwin software (Perimed, North Royalton, OH).
SOD1 transgenic rats. Heterozygous SOD1 transgenic rats on the
SD background, with increased SOD1 activity, were generously
provided by Dr. Pak H. Chan. SOD1 transgenic rats were genotyped
by PCR using a mixture of primer sequences (5=-CCATCTCCCTTTTGAGGACA-3= and 5=-AGGCATGAGGATCAATGGAG3=, IDT, San Diego, CA), which yielded a 505-bp band.
Stereotaxic injections. Wistar rats were anesthetized with isoflurane
and immobilized on a stereotaxic device 2–3 wk before MCAO.
SOD1 adenovirus [3 ␮l of 1.85 ⫻ 1012 viral particles/ml, Ad-r-SOD1/
enhanced green fluorescent protein (GFP), Vector Biolabs, Philadelphia, PA] or an empty vector was injected in the contralateral
hemisphere over 6 min via a 30-gauge needle adjacent to the MCA at
stereotaxic coordinates ⫹0.9 mm anterior, ⫺5.2 mm lateral, and ⫺8.7
mm ventral relative to the bregma (4). SOD1 overexpression was
confirmed by Western blot analysis and GFP expression.
SOD assay. SOD activity was determined in brain homogenates
using a Sigma SOD assay kit (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) following the
manufacturer’s instructions.
Western blot analysis. SOD1 expression in brain homogenates
close to the injection site was analyzed by Western blot analysis. In
brief, equal volumes of homogenized tissues were separated by 15%
SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. SOD1 was
determined using anti-SOD1 antibody (1:500, Sigma). Primary antibodies were detected using horseradish peroxidase-conjugated antibody and enhanced chemiluminescence. Band intensity was quantified
by densitometry software (Alpha Innotech, Santa Clara, CA).
Tissue markers of nitrosative stress. Total nitrotyrosine levels were
determined in brain homogenates via slot-blot analysis. In brief, equal
amounts of protein were immobilized onto nitrocellulose membranes,

H457

H458

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

Tukey’s post hoc test was used to compare means from significant
ANOVAs.
RESULTS

Fig. 1. Acute hyperglycemia (HG) at the time of stroke exacerbated contralateral myogenic dysfunction. A: ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) with or without HG led
to complete loss of the myogenic response in middle cerebral arteries (MCAs) isolated from the ischemic (IS) hemisphere compared with sham-operated (sham)
right (RT) and sham RT with HG sides. B: the myogenic response was significantly reduced in the left (LT) hemisphere after I/R injury [nonischemic (NIS) side]
or HG alone (sham LT ⫹ HG) compared with the sham LT side. Contralateral myogenic dysfunction was aggravated when I/R injury was superimposed with
acute HG. a,b,cDifferent letters for pairs of means are significantly different (P ⬍ 0.05 by Tukey’s test, n ⫽ 5– 8). C: blood glucose levels at baseline, MCA
occlusion (MCAO), and reperfusion in sham, sham ⫹ HG, stroked Wistar (Wis MCAO), and Wis MCAO ⫹ HG rats. #P ⬍ 0.001 vs. sham and Wis MCAO
rats (n ⫽ 4).
AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Effect of hyperglycemia on myogenic tone. I/R impaired
myogenic tone of MCAs isolated from both ischemic and
nonischemic hemispheres compared with sham right and left
hemispheres, respectively. When I/R injury was superimposed
with acute hyperglycemia, myogenic tone impairment was
exacerbated in the nonischemic side only. Interestingly, acute
hyperglycemia alone reduced myogenic tone in MCAs isolated
from the left side of sham hyperglycemic rats but had no effect
on the right hemisphere (Fig. 1, A and B). In all groups,
baseline blood glucose levels were similar. We achieved an
acute elevation in blood glucose levels ranging between 200
and 250 mg/dl in the hyperglycemic group during MCAO and
reperfusion (Fig. 1C).
Effect of global SOD1 overexpression on myogenic tone
after acute hyperglycemic stroke. To determine the role of
oxidative stress on decreased myogenic tone in hyperglycemic
I/R injury, pressurized arteriography experiments were repeated in SOD1 transgenic rats. Since this model has a SD

background, SD rats were used as proper controls. Short-term
I/R impaired myogenic tone of MCAs obtained from normoglycemic SD rats compared with sham SD rats. MCAs
isolated after I/R from normoglycemic and hyperglycemic SD
rats displayed similar myogenic tone (Fig. 2A). SOD1 transgenic rats maintained a well-developed myogenic tone, similar
to sham SOD1 rats after I/R with or without hyperglycemia
(Fig. 2B). We achieved a similar reduction in CBF during
MCAO in both SD and SOD1 rats. Percent CBF after reperfusion was improved in SOD transgenic rats exposed to
MCAO, which was significantly reduced after acute hyperglycemic stroke (Fig. 2, D and E). SOD1 overexpression was
confirmed by measuring SOD1 expression and activity in brain
homogenates, which was significantly greater in brain homogenates of transgenic rats compared with wild-type SD rats (Fig.
3, A and B). In all groups, baseline blood glucose levels were
similar and elevated at MCAO and reperfusion due to anesthesia. Hyperglycemic SD and SOD1 rats had higher blood
glucose levels compared with normoglycemic groups at both
time points (Fig. 3C). Nitrotyrosine levels, a marker of increased oxidative stress and peroxynitrite-mediated nitration,
were significantly increased in SD rats after 30 min of ish-

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

H459

emia/24 h of reperfusion, whereas SOD1 overexpression prevented the elevation of nitrotyrosine levels after I/R with or
without hyperglycemia (Fig. 3D).
Effect of global SOD1 overexpression on neurovascular
outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Acute hyperglycemia led to infarct size and edema expansion in SD rats after 30
min of ischemi/24 h of reperfusion. Global SOD1 overexpression significantly reduced infarct size and edema compared
with wild-type SD rats and prevented hyperglycemia-mediated
increases in infarct size and edema (Fig. 4, A and B).
Effect of global SOD1 overexpression on behavioral outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Acute hyperglycemia
worsened beam walk performance and induced grip strength
deficits in SD rats after 30 min of ischemia/24 h of reperfusion.
Hyperglycemic SOD1 transgenic rats displayed better beam

walk performance and reduced grip strength deficits compared
with hyperglycemic SD rats (Fig. 4, C and D).
Effect of focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression on myogenic tone after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Focal SOD1
overexpression in the MCA territory of the contralateral hemisphere significantly improved the myogenic response of vessels isolated from the nonischemic hemisphere but had no
effect on the ischemic side compared with the effect of an
empty vector injection and with MCAs isolated from rats
exposed to acute hyperglycemic stroke (Fig. 5, B and C).
Myogenic reactivity curves across pressure range under active
and passive conditions for the nonischemic side showed a
well-maintained autoregulatory response after focal SOD1
overexpression only (Fig. 5D). Passive vasodilation was significantly improved after contralateral SOD1 overexpression

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Fig. 2. SOD1 transgenic rats maintained well-developed vascular reactivity after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Sprague-Dawley (SD) and SOD1 rats were
subjected to 30 min of MCAO/45 min of reperfusion with or without HG. A: I/R injury with or without HG led to loss of the myogenic response in ipsilateral
MCAs isolated from SD rats compared with sham SD rats. a,bDifferent letters for pairs of means are significantly different (P ⬍ 0.05 by Tukey’s test, n ⫽ 5– 6).
B: SOD1 transgenic rats maintained a well-developed myogenic response after I/R injury with or without HG (n ⫽ 4 – 6). C: representative images acquired by
the Pim3 laser Doppler at baseline, MCAO, and after reperfusion (Post Rep). D: percent cerebral blood flow (CBF) reduction during MCAO was similar among
all groups. E: percent CBF after reperfusion was improved in SOD transgenic rats exposed to MCAO, which was significantly reduced after acute hyperglycemic
stroke. **P ⬍ 0.01 vs. SOD1 MCAO (n ⫽ 4 – 6).

H460

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

compared with the effect of an empty vector injection and with
MCAs isolated from rats exposed to acute hyperglycemic
stroke (Fig. 5E). To confirm contralateral SOD1 overexpression, SOD1 levels and activity were measured in brain
homogenates. We found that SOD1 expression (Fig. 5F) and
activity (Fig. 5G) were significantly upregulated in brain
homogenates of the left injected hemisphere by nearly 50%
compared with the right uninjected side, the left side injected with an empty vector, and control Wistar rats. In all
groups, baseline blood glucose levels were similar. We
achieved an acute elevation in blood glucose levels ranging
between 200 and 250 mg/dl in hyperglycemic groups during
MCAO and reperfusion (Fig. 5H).
Effect of focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression on CBF
after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Mean CBF was significantly
reduced in ischemic and nonischemic hemispheres, albeit to a
different degree during MCAO and after reperfusion after
acute hyperglycemic stroke compared with baseline (Fig. 6, A
and B). Rats injected with SOD1 adenovirus 2 wk before acute
hyperglycemic stroke displayed an improvement in CBF in
both hemispheres after reperfusion (Fig. 6, A and B). We
achieved a similar reduction in CBF during MCAO in both
groups exposed to acute hyperglycemic stroke (Fig. 6C). Contralateral SOD1 overexpression increased CBF after reperfu-

sion in both ischemic and nonischemic hemispheres after acute
hyperglycemic stroke (Fig. 6D).
Effect of focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression on neurovascular outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Acute
hyperglycemia significantly increased the infarct size and
edema in Wistar rats after 30 min of ischemia/24 h of reperfusion. Contralateral SOD1 overexpression prevented hyperglycemia-mediated increases in infarct size and edema (Fig. 7,
A and B).
Effect of focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression on behavioral outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Acute
hyperglycemia worsened beam walk performance and induced
grip strength deficits in Wistar rats after 30 min of ischemia/24
h of reperfusion. SOD1 overexpression in the contralateral
hemisphere significantly improved neurological outcomes after
acute hyperglycemic stroke (Fig. 7, C and D).
DISCUSSION

In the present study, we revealed a novel association between contralateral myogenic dysfunction and stroke outcomes
after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Furthermore, we highlighted
the critical role of SOD1 overexpression in improving vascular
function and stroke outcomes. We provided evidence that

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Fig. 3. Physiological parameters of SOD1 transgenic rats. A: increased total SOD1 expression in brain homogenates of SOD1 transgenic rats compared with SD
rats. **P ⬍ 0.01 vs. SD rats (n ⫽ 4). B: increased total SOD activity in brain homogenates of SOD1 transgenic rats compared with SD rats. *P ⬍ 0.05 vs. SD
rats (n ⫽ 7). C: blood glucose levels at baseline, MCAO, and reperfusion in SD, SD ⫹ HG, SOD1, and SOD1 ⫹ HG groups. ***P ⬍ 0.001 vs. SD MCAO
and SOD1 MCAO (n ⫽ 3– 8). D: nitration was significantly upregulated after I/R injury with and without HG in SD rats, whereas global SOD1 overexpression
blunted that increase. a,bDifferent letters for pairs of means are significantly different (P ⬍ 0.05 by Tukey’s test, n ⫽ 4).

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

H461

contralateral myogenic dysfunction was exacerbated in hyperglycemia and was associated with poor stroke outcomes. We
showed that improving vascular function specifically in the
nonischemic hemisphere ameliorated neurovascular outcomes
after acute hyperglycemic stroke. These findings are very
important because they identify the contralateral hemisphere as
a therapeutic target. Once the mechanisms and modulators of
cerebrovascular function in both hemispheres are known, it
will be possible to develop more effective strategies to deliver
neuroprotective therapies to improve stroke outcomes and
recovery.
Admission hyperglycemia (⬎7.8 mmol/l) is very common in
ischemic stroke patients due to a history of diabetes or acute
elevations in blood glucose (29). Both human and animal
studies have reported that elevated blood glucose at stroke
onset is associated with a larger infarct size, poor clinical
outcomes, and an increased risk of mortality (2, 5, 7, 15). Until
now, the only Federal Drug Administration-approved treatment for ischemic stroke is the intravenous administration of
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator to restore blood flow
(1). However, hyperglycemia at the time of ischemic stroke
increases the risk of hemorrhagic transformation and poor
clinical outcomes with recombinant tissue plasminogen activa-

tor administration (45). Moreover, several animal studies have
shown that the exacerbated neurovascular injury in hyperglycemic stroke is more common with transient occlusion, suggesting that reperfusion contributes to increased brain damage
by hyperglycemia (28, 39). However, the mechanisms by
which acute hyperglycemia and diabetes aggravate vascular
injury and neurological outcomes are multifactorial and still
controversial (24, 28, 40). Since the only successful therapeutic
target identified for the 800,000 annual victims of ischemic
stroke is the cerebral vasculature (23), in our study, we focused
on the impact of acute hyperglycemic reperfusion on cerebrovascular function. While diabetes also has a detrimental effect
of cerebrovascular function and stroke outcomes, as recently
reviewed (16, 26, 27), nondiabetic hyperglycemic patients may
suffer the most from acute ischemic stroke compared with
diabetic or normoglycemic patients (7, 23). As such, we
narrowed our study to acute hyperglycemia.
The cerebrovascular myogenic response, discovered ⬎100
yr ago by Bayliss (3), is the change in smooth muscle tone in
response to pressure fluctuation. The myogenic response is an
inherent property of smooth muscle cells that is crucial for
maintaining vascular resistance and constant blood flow (31).
Several experimental studies have shown a detrimental effect

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Fig. 4. Global SOD1 overexpression improved stroke outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. SD and SOD1 rats were subjected to 30 min of MCAO/24 h
of reperfusion with or without HG. A and B: acute HG at time of stroke led to infarct size and edema expansion in SD rats, whereas normoglycemic and
hyperglycemic SOD1 transgenic rats showed smaller infarct size and edema compared with SD rats exposed to I/R injury with or without HG. C: hyperglycemic
SD rats showed poor beam walk performance compared with normoglycemic SD rats after I/R injury, whereas normoglycemic and hyperglycemic SOD1
transgenic rats experienced better performance compared with stroked SD rats with or without HG. D: acute HG at the time of stroke exacerbated grip strength
deficits in SD rats but had no additional effect on SOD1 rats. P values indicate an interaction such that HG affects infarct size, edema, and neurological tests
differently in SD vs. SOD rats. a,b,cDifferent letters on pairs of means are significantly different by Tukey’s post hoc pairwise comparison test (n ⫽ 5– 8).

H462

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

of I/R on the myogenic response of cerebral vessels isolated
from ischemic hemispheres (9, 10). We recently showed in an
animal model of transient MCAO, that I/R has a short-term
global effect on cerebrovascular function. We reported that 30
min of MCAO/45 min of reperfusion reduced cerebral perfusion in both hemispheres and led to myogenic tone impairment
in ischemic and contralateral hemispheres via increased peroxynitrite generation and nitration (11). The aim of the present
study was to expand our previous findings by determining 1)
the impact of admission hyperglycemia, a condition associated
with poor outcomes, on myogenic tone in both hemispheres; 2)
the role of oxidative stress on myogenic tone regulation in

hyperglycemic stroke; and 3) the role of contralateral myogenic dysfunction reactivity on hyperglycemic stroke outcomes. We found that acute elevation of blood glucose at the
time of stroke exacerbated myogenic dysfunction in MCAs
isolated from the contralateral hemisphere, which was associated with infarct size expansion, increased edema, and poor
neurological outcomes. However, acute hyperglycemia did not
display any further effect on the myogenic reactivity of vessels
isolated from the ischemic hemisphere compared with I/R
alone. These results suggest that augmented contralateral myogenic dysfunction could contribute to poor outcomes after
acute hyperglycemic stroke. Understanding this phenomenon

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Fig. 5. Contralateral SOD1 overexpression in control Wistar rats. Wistar rats were subjected to a stereotaxic injection of SOD1 adenovirus (AD) or an empty
vector in the LT hemisphere 2–3 wk before acute hyperglycemic stroke. A: representative image of the stereotaxic injection of SOD1 AD in the contralateral
hemisphere. B: focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression significantly improved contralateral myogenic dysfunction compared with NIS ⫹ HG and with acutely
hyperglycemic stroked rats injected with an empty vector. C: contralateral SOD1 overexpression did not improve the myogenic response of vessels obtained from
IS hemisphere (IS ⫹ HG SOD1 AD) after acute hyperglycemic stroke compared with IS ⫹ HG and with rats injected with an empty vector. a,bDifferent letters
on pairs of means are significantly different (P ⬍ 0.05 by Tukey’s test, n ⫽ 3– 6). D: focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression increased lumen diameter under
active conditions while maintaining a well-developed autoregulatory response in the contralateral hemisphere compared with acute hyperglycemic stroke with
and without the empty vector injection. E: focal contralateral SOD1 overexpression improved passive vasodilation in the contralateral hemisphere compared with
the effect of an empty vector injection and with MCAs isolated from rats exposed to acute hyperglycemic stroke. *P ⬍ 0.001 vs. NIS ⫹ HG and NIS ⫹ HG
empty vector (n ⫽ 3– 6). F: SOD1 expression was significantly upregulated after stereotaxic injection of SOD1 AD in the LT hemisphere compared with the
RT uninjected (unij) side, LT side injected with an empty vector, and control Wistar rats. *P ⬍ 0.05 vs. RT uninjected side; **P ⬍ 0.01 vs. control and LT empty
vector (n ⫽ 4 –5). G: SOD activity was significantly upregulated after stereotaxic injection of SOD1 AD in the LT hemisphere compared with the RT uninjected
side, LT side injected with an empty vector, and control Wistar rats. ***P ⬍ 0.001 vs. control, RT uninjected side, and LT empty vector (n ⫽ 3– 6). H: blood
glucose levels at baseline, MCAO, and reperfusion in hyperglycemic stroked Wistar rats (Wis MCAO ⫹ HG), Wistar rats injected with SOD1 AD (SOD1 AD
MCAO ⫹ HG), or Wistar rats injected with empty vector before hyperglycemic stroke (MCAO ⫹ HG empty vector) (n ⫽ 3– 6).

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

H463

is essential for the development of rational therapies that
reduce hyperglycemic reperfusion injury in both hemispheres
and thus improve clinical outcomes in patients.
Growing evidence indicates the involvement of oxidative
stress in the pathogenesis of stroke through different mechanisms at neuronal and vascular levels (8, 36). Superoxide
anion, a ROS, has emerged as an important mediator of
vascular dysfunction (17). Besides its direct effect on blood
vessels, superoxide is also the precursor for other ROS and
some reactive nitrogen species. Considerable attention has
been dedicated to the interaction of superoxide and nitric
oxide, which reduces nitric oxide bioavailability, leading to
peroxynitrite generation (44), which profoundly influences
vascular function at multiple levels (33, 35). Our laboratory has
previously reported the detrimental effect of excess peroxynitrite generation on myogenic reactivity in control and diabetic
rats after I/R (11) or short periods of oxygen-glucose deprivation (26). Another study (38) showed that MCAs perfused
intraluminally with plasma of acutely hyperglycemic rats that
underwent 2 h of MCAO/2 h of reperfusion experienced
increased myogenic tone and that this was reversed by peroxynitrite decomposition. It is well established that ROS play
a pivotal role in altering cerebrovascular function after I/R with
or without hyperglycemia. Therefore, to test if depleting peroxynitrite parent radical (superoxide) could reverse myogenic
dysfunction and hence improve stroke outcomes in our model
of acute hyperglycemic stroke, we used SOD1 transgenic rats.
We found that global SOD1 overexpression decreased brain

nitrotyrosine levels (a marker for peroxynitrite generation),
reserved myogenic behavior, and improved neurovascular injury after I/R with and without hyperglycemia compared with
wild-type animals. These findings were in agreement with
previous studies (25, 30, 37) that revealed the protective effect
of SOD1 after cerebral ischemia. We then investigated whether
improving myogenic tone only in the contralateral side could
ameliorate poor neurovascular outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. SOD1 expression was upregulated in the contralateral hemisphere using a stereotaxic injection of SOD1
adenovirus 2–3 wk before I/R. Our results showed that increased SOD1 activity in the contralateral hemisphere improved contralateral myogenic dysfunction after acute hyperglycemic stroke, which was associated with reduced infarct
size and edema and better neurological performance. Several
studies (19, 24, 25) have shown the protective role of SOD1 in
improving stroke outcomes via modifying matrix metalloproteinase-9 activity, Akt activation, and others. Since we did not
measure the effect of SOD1 overexpression on any of the
previously proposed mechanisms in both hemispheres, we
cannot conclude that the enhanced stroke outcomes are solely
dependent on myogenic tone. However, the improvements in
stroke outcomes after contralateral SOD1 overexpression seem
to be due, in part, to the maintenance of a well-functioning
myogenic response, as loss of contralateral myogenic tone was
associated with poor neurovascular outcomes. These findings
suggest that the nonischemic hemisphere may be a novel target
for the management of stroke. The findings of the present study

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Fig. 6. Contralateral SOD1 overexpression improved CBF after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Wistar rats were subjected to a stereotaxic injection of SOD1 AD
or an empty vector in the LT hemisphere 2–3 wk before acute hyperglycemic stroke. A and B: mean percent CBF was significantly decreased in both hemispheres
during MCAO and postreperfusion after acute hyperglycemic stroke compared with baseline. Contralateral SOD1 overexpression improved CBF after reperfusion
in both IS and NIS hemispheres. C: percent CBF reduction during MCAO in IS and NIS hemispheres was similar between the two groups. D: contralateral SOD1
overexpression improved postreperfusion CBF in IS and NIS hemispheres after acute hyperglycemic stroke. P̂ ⬍ 0.001, **P ⬍ 0.01, and *P ⬍ 0.05 vs. baseline;
***P ⬍ 0.001 vs. postreperfusion and baseline; #P ⬍ 0.001 vs. IS ⫹ HG vehicle; ⬃P ⬍ 0.01 vs. NIS ⫹ HG vehicle (n ⫽ 5– 6).

H464

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES

are limited by the fact that isoflurane was used as a method for
anesthesia during stroke surgery, which can reduce myogenic
reactivity. To normalize this effect, vessels were isolated from
sham rats exposed to similar levels of isoflurane. However,
these limitations do not outweigh the significant findings of the
present study.
Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death and one of the
major causes of permanent disability worldwide. The economic burden of stroke is significant, with the expected increase for stroke-related medical costs and disability from
$71.6 to $184.1 billion between 2012 and 2030. Therefore,
more detailed understanding of factors contributing to poor
neurovascular outcomes and functional recovery will decrease
the health and economic burdens of stroke. Several clinical
studies have reported a reduction in CBF after stroke not only
in the ischemic region but also in the contralateral hemisphere,
known as cerebral diaschisis. Moreover, the persistent reduction of CBF in the hemisphere contralateral to the infracted
region proved to be involved in poor outcomes and recovery
(6, 41). In addition, various experimental and clinical studies
have found major pathological changes in the contralateral
hemisphere, including perivascular edema, blood-brain barrier
damage, astrogliosis, and increased apoptosis after acute stroke
(20, 34). Both clinical and experimental studies have suggested
that pathological neurovascular changes in the contralateral
hemisphere may contribute to stroke pathology and impede

recovery processes. In agreement with the aforementioned
studies, our findings showed that CBF was reduced in both
hemispheres after acute hyperglycemic stroke, which was associated with poor neurovascular outcomes. Interestingly, we
demonstrated that improving contralateral myogenic dysfunction in the contralateral hemisphere only was accompanied
with an increase in CBF after reperfusion in both hemispheres,
which led to better stroke outcomes. Although these results
indicate the importance of a well-developed contralateral myogenic tone in improving functional outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke, this study was limited to the acute ischemic phase. Further studies are needed to demonstrate the
impact of contralateral myogenic dysfunction at late ischemic
stages. The role of the contralateral hemisphere in stroke
outcomes and recovery is an intriguing but challenging new
field of research. In our study, we highlight the importance of
establishing effective clinical treatments that target both hemispheres to repair the injured vasculature close and distal to the
site of ischemic injury to achieve better patient quality of life.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Dr. Pak H. Chan for providing SOD1 transgenic
rats.
GRANTS
A. Ergul is a Research Career Scientist at the Charlie Norwood Veterans
Affairs (VA) Medical Center in Augusta, Georgia. This work was supported in

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Fig. 7. Contralateral SOD1 overexpression improved stroke outcomes after acute hyperglycemic stroke. Wistar rats were subjected to a stereotaxic injection of
SOD1 AD in the Lt hemisphere 2–3 wk before acute hyperglycemic stroke. A and B: acute HG at the time of stroke led to infarct size and edema expansion
in Wistar rats (MCAO ⫹ HG), which were significantly reduced by contralateral SOD1 overexpression (SOD1 AD ⫹ HG). C and D: hyperglycemic Wistar rats
showed poor beam walk performance and grip strength deficits compared with normoglycemic SD rats after I/R injury. Contralateral SOD1 overexpression
(SOD1 AD ⫹ HG) significantly enhanced behavioral outcomes compared with MCAO ⫹ HG. a,bDifferent letters on pairs of means are significantly different
(P ⬍ 0.05 by Tukey’s test, n ⫽ 5–7).

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES
part by VA Merit Award BX000347, a VA Research Career Scientists Award,
and National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant R01-NS-083559 (to A. Ergul);
VA Merit Award BX000891 and NIH Grant NS-063965 (to S. C. Fagan); and
American Heart Association Predoctoral Fellowship 12PRE11300001 (to M.
Coucha).
DISCLOSURES
No conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise, are declared by the author(s).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

REFERENCES
1. Adams HP Jr, del Zoppo G, Alberts MJ, Bhatt DL, Brass L, Furlan
A, Grubb RL, Higashida RT, Jauch EC, Kidwell C, Lyden PD,
Morgenstern LB, Qureshi AI, Rosenwasser RH, Scott PA, Wijdicks
EF. Guidelines for the early management of adults with ischemic stroke:
a guideline from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke Council, Clinical Cardiology Council, Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention Council, and the Atherosclerotic Peripheral
Vascular Disease and Quality of Care Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary Working Groups: the American Academy of Neurology affirms the
value of this guideline as an educational tool for neurologists. Stroke 38:
1655–1711, 2007.
2. Baker L, Juneja R, Bruno A. Management of hyperglycemia in acute
ischemic stroke. Curr Treat Options Neurol 13: 616 –628, 2011.
3. Bayliss WM. On the local reactions of the arterial wall to changes of
internal pressure. J Physiol 28: 220 –231, 1902.
4. Biernaskie J, Corbett D, Peeling J, Wells J, Lei H. A serial MR study
of cerebral blood flow changes and lesion development following endothelin-1-induced ischemia in rats. Magn Reson Med 46: 827–830, 2001.
5. Bruno A, Biller J, Adams HP Jr, Clarke WR, Woolson RF, Williams
LS, Hansen MD. Acute blood glucose level and outcome from ischemic
stroke Trial of ORG 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) Investigators. Neurology 52: 280 –284, 1999.
6. Cao Y, D’Olhaberriague L, Vikingstad EM, Levine SR, Welch KM.
Pilot study of functional MRI to assess cerebral activation of motor
function after poststroke hemiparesis. Stroke 29: 112–122, 1998.
7. Capes SE, Hunt D, Malmberg K, Pathak P, Gerstein HC. Stress
hyperglycemia and prognosis of stroke in nondiabetic and diabetic patients: a systematic overview. Stroke 32: 2426 –2432, 2001.
8. Chan PH. Reactive oxygen radicals in signaling and damage in the
ischemic brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 21: 2–14, 2001.
9. Cipolla MJ, Curry AB. Middle cerebral artery function after stroke: the
threshold duration of reperfusion for myogenic activity. Stroke 33: 2094 –
2099, 2002.
10. Cipolla MJ, Lessov N, Hammer ES, Curry AB. Threshold duration of
ischemia for myogenic tone in middle cerebral arteries: effect on vascular
smooth muscle actin. Stroke 32: 1658 –1664, 2001.
11. Coucha M, Li W, Johnson M, Fagan SC, Ergul A. Protein nitration
impairs myogenic tone of rat middle cerebral arteries in both ischemic and
nonischemic hemispheres after ischemic stroke. Am J Physiol Heart Circ
Physiol 305: H1726 –H1735, 2013.
12. Davis MJ, Hill MA. Signaling mechanisms underlying the vascular
myogenic response. Physiol Rev 79: 387–423, 1999.
13. Dietrich WD, Alonso O, Busto R. Moderate hyperglycemia worsens
acute blood-brain barrier injury after forebrain ischemia in rats. Stroke 24:
111–116, 1993.
14. Duckrow RB, Beard DC, Brennan RW. Regional cerebral blood flow
decreases during hyperglycemia. Ann Neurol 17: 267–272, 1985.
15. Elgebaly MM, Ogbi S, Li W, Mezzetti EM, Prakash R, Johnson MH,
Bruno A, Fagan SC, Ergul A. Neurovascular injury in acute hyperglycemia and diabetes: a comparative analysis in experimental stroke. Transl
Stroke Res 2: 391–398, 2011.
16. Ergul A, Kelly-Cobbs A, Abdalla M, Fagan SC. Cerebrovascular
complications of diabetes: focus on stroke. Endocr Metab Immune Disord
Drug Targets 12: 148 –158, 2012.

17. Faraci FM. Reactive oxygen species: influence on cerebral vascular tone.
J Appl Physiol (1985) 100: 739 –743, 2006.
18. Feeney DM, Gonzalez A, Law WA. Amphetamine, haloperidol, and
experience interact to affect rate of recovery after motor cortex injury.
Science 217: 855–857, 1982.
19. Fujimura M, Morita-Fujimura Y, Narasimhan P, Copin JC, Kawase
M, Chan PH. Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase prevents the early
decrease of apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease and subsequent DNA
fragmentation after transient focal cerebral ischemia in mice. Stroke 30:
2408 –2415, 1999.
20. Garbuzova-Davis S, Rodrigues MC, Hernandez-Ontiveros DG, Tajiri
N, Frisina-Deyo A, Boffeli SM, Abraham JV, Pabon M, Wagner A,
Ishikawa H, Shinozuka K, Haller E, Sanberg PR, Kaneko Y, Borlongan CV. Blood-brain barrier alterations provide evidence of subacute
diaschisis in an ischemic stroke rat model. PLos One 8: e63553, 2013.
21. Ginsberg MD, Welsh FA, Budd WW. Deleterious effect of glucose
pretreatment on recovery from diffuse cerebral ischemia in the cat. I. Local
cerebral blood flow and glucose utilization. Stroke 11: 347–354, 1980.
22. Gisselsson L, Smith ML, Siesjo BK. Hyperglycemia and focal brain
ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 19: 288 –297, 1999.
23. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ,
Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Franco S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern
SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, Kissela BM,
Kittner SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Mackey RH,
Magid DJ, Marcus GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, McGuire DK,
Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, Mussolino ME, Neumar RW, Nichol G,
Pandey DK, Paynter NP, Reeves MJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A,
Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D, Turner MB. Heart disease
and stroke statistics–2014 update: a report from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 129: e28 –e292, 2014.
24. Hafez S, Coucha M, Bruno A, Fagan SC, Ergul A. Hyperglycemia,
acute ischemic stroke, and thrombolytic therapy. Transl Stroke Res 5:
442–453, 2014.
25. Kamada H, Yu F, Nito C, Chan PH. Influence of hyperglycemia on
oxidative stress and matrix metalloproteinase-9 activation after focal
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion in rats: relation to blood-brain barrier dysfunction. Stroke 38: 1044 –1049, 2007.
26. Kelly-Cobbs AI, Prakash R, Coucha M, Knight RA, Li W, Ogbi SN,
Johnson M, Ergul A. Cerebral myogenic reactivity and blood flow in type
2 diabetic rats: role of peroxynitrite in hypoxia-mediated loss of myogenic
tone. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 342: 407–415, 2012.
27. Kelly-Cobbs AI, Prakash R, Li W, Pillai B, Hafez S, Coucha M,
Johnson MH, Ogbi SN, Fagan SC, Ergul A. Targets of vascular
protection in acute ischemic stroke differ in type 2 diabetes. Am J Physiol
Heart Circ Physiol 304: H806 –H815, 2013.
28. Kent TA, Soukup VM, Fabian RH. Heterogeneity affecting outcome
from acute stroke therapy: making reperfusion worse. Stroke 32: 2318 –
2327, 2001.
29. Kiers L, Davis SM, Larkins R, Hopper J, Tress B, Rossiter SC, Carlin
J, Ratnaike S. Stroke topography and outcome in relation to hyperglycaemia and diabetes. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 55: 263–270, 1992.
30. Kinouchi H, Epstein CJ, Mizui T, Carlson E, Chen SF, Chan PH.
Attenuation of focal cerebral ischemic injury in transgenic mice overexpressing CuZn superoxide dismutase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 11158 –
11162, 1991.
31. Koller A, Toth P. Contribution of flow-dependent vasomotor mechanisms
to the autoregulation of cerebral blood flow. J Vasc Res 49: 375–389,
2012.
32. Kruyt ND, Biessels GJ, Devries JH, Roos YB. Hyperglycemia in acute
ischemic stroke: pathophysiology and clinical management. Nat Rev
Neurol 6: 145–155, 2010.
33. Li J, Li W, Altura BT, Altura BM. Peroxynitrite-induced relaxation in
isolated canine cerebral arteries and mechanisms of action. Toxicol Appl
Pharmacol 196: 176 –182, 2004.
34. Lorberboym M, Blankenberg FG, Sadeh M, Lampl Y. In vivo imaging
of apoptosis in patients with acute stroke: correlation with blood-brain
barrier permeability. Brain Res 1103: 13–19, 2006.
35. Maneen MJ, Cipolla MJ. Peroxynitrite diminishes myogenic tone in
cerebral arteries: role of nitrotyrosine and F-actin. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol 292: H1042–H1050, 2007.
36. Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C. The science of stroke: mechanisms
in search of treatments. Neuron 67: 181–198, 2010.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

Author contributions: M.C. and A.E. conception and design of research;
M.C., W.L., S.H., and M.A. performed experiments; M.C. and M.H.J. analyzed data; M.C. interpreted results of experiments; M.C. prepared figures;
M.C. drafted manuscript; M.C., S.C.F., and A.E. edited and revised manuscript; M.C., W.L., S.H., M.A., M.H.J., S.C.F., and A.E. approved final version
of manuscript.

H465

H466

ROLE OF THE CONTRALATERAL HEMISPHERE IN STROKE OUTCOMES
43. Stead LG, Gilmore RM, Bellolio MF, Mishra S, Bhagra A, Vaidyanathan L, Decker WW, Brown RD Jr. Hyperglycemia as an independent
predictor of worse outcome in non-diabetic patients presenting with acute
ischemic stroke. Neurocrit Care 10: 181–186, 2009.
44. Szabo C, Ischiropoulos H, Radi R. Peroxynitrite: biochemistry, pathophysiology and development of therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov 6:
662–680, 2007.
45. Tanne D, Kasner SE, Demchuk AM, Koren-Morag N, Hanson S,
Grond M, Levine SR. Markers of increased risk of intracerebral hemorrhage after intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator therapy
for acute ischemic stroke in clinical practice: the Multicenter rt-PA Stroke
Survey. Circulation 105: 1679 –1685, 2002.
46. Terry AV Jr, Gearhart DA, Beck WD Jr, Truan JN, Middlemore ML,
Williamson LN, Bartlett MG, Prendergast MA, Sickles DW, Buccafusco JJ. Chronic, intermittent exposure to chlorpyrifos in rats: protracted
effects on axonal transport, neurotrophin receptors, cholinergic markers,
and information processing. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 322: 1117–1128,
2007.

AJP-Heart Circ Physiol • doi:10.1152/ajpheart.00321.2014 • www.ajpheart.org

Downloaded from http://ajpheart.physiology.org/ by 10.220.32.247 on October 4, 2016

37. Noshita N, Sugawara T, Lewen A, Hayashi T, Chan PH. Copper-zinc
superoxide dismutase affects Akt activation after transient focal cerebral
ischemia in mice. Stroke 34: 1513–1518, 2003.
38. Palomares SM, Gardner-Morse I, Sweet JG, Cipolla MJ. Peroxynitrite
decomposition with FeTMPyP improves plasma-induced vascular dysfunction and infarction during mild but not severe hyperglycemic stroke.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 32: 1035–1045, 2012.
39. Quast MJ, Wei J, Huang NC, Brunder DG, Sell SL, Gonzalez JM,
Hillman GR, Kent TA. Perfusion deficit parallels exacerbation of cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in hyperglycemic rats. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 17: 553–559, 1997.
40. Quinn TJ, Lees KR. Hyperglycaemia in acute stroke–to treat or not to
treat. Cerebrovasc Dis 27, Suppl 1: 148 –155, 2009.
41. Riecker A, Groschel K, Ackermann H, Schnaudigel S, Kassubek J,
Kastrup A. The role of the unaffected hemisphere in motor recovery after
stroke. Hum Brain Mapp 31: 1017–1029, 2010.
42. Scott JF, Robinson GM, French JM, O’Connell JE, Alberti KG, Gray
CS. Prevalence of admission hyperglycaemia across clinical subtypes of
acute stroke. Lancet 353: 376 –377, 1999.

