Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

INFLAMMATORY CELL RECRUITMENT AFTER EXPERIMENTAL
THROMBOEMBOLIC STROKE IN RATS
J. LEHMANN, a W. HÄRTIG, b A. SEIDEL, a C. FÜLDNER, a
C. HOBOHM, c J. GROSCHE, b M. KRUEGER d AND
D. MICHALSKI c*

enhanced major histocompatibility complex class II expression and allocation with vessels exhibiting impaired blood–
brain barrier integrity. Microglia remained numerically unaltered in ischemic hemispheres, but shifted to an activated
phenotype indicated by CD45/CD86 expression and morphological changes toward an ameboid appearance in the
bordering zone. Ischemia caused an increase of lymphoid
cells in close vicinity to the aﬀected vasculature, while
further analyses allowed separation into natural killer
cells, natural killer T cells, T cells (added by an unconventional CD11b+/CD3+ population) and two subpopulations
of B cells. Taken together, our study provides novel data
on the local inﬂammatory response to experimental thromboembolic stroke. As concomitantly present neutrophils,
monocytes/macrophages and lymphoid cells in the early
stage after ischemia induction correspond to changes seen
in human stroke, future stroke research should preferably
use animal models with relevance for clinical translation.
Ó 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

a
Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology,
Leipzig, Germany
b
Paul Flechsig Institute for Brain Research, University of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
c

Department of Neurology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany

d

Institute of Anatomy, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany

Abstract—Inﬂammatory mechanisms were recently identiﬁed as contributors to delayed neuronal damage after ischemic stroke. However, therapeutic strategies are still lacking,
probably related to the outstanding standardization on
inﬂammatory cell recruitment emerging from predominantly
artiﬁcial stroke models, and the uncertainty on functional
properties of distinct subpopulations. Using a rodent model
of stroke that closely reﬂects human embolic ischemia, this
study was focused on the local recruitment of immunoreactive cells as well as their functional and regional characterization. Wistar rats underwent thromboembolic middle
cerebral artery occlusion, followed by intravenous injection
of the blood–brain barrier permeability marker ﬂuoresceinconjugated albumin at 24 h. One hour later, brain tissue
was subjected to multi-parameter ﬂow cytometry and Pappenheim staining to characterize cells invaded into the
ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere, compared to the contralateral side. Immunoﬂuorescence labeling was applied to
explore the distribution patterns of recruited cells and their
spatial relationships with the vasculature. One day after
ischemia onset, a 6.12-fold increase of neutrophils and a
5.43-fold increase of monocytes/macrophages was found
in aﬀected hemispheres, while these cells exhibited

Key words: inﬂammation, cellular recruitment, stroke, thromboembolic model.

INTRODUCTION
Despite intensiﬁed experimental and clinical research,
stroke remains a major cause of death worldwide and
contributes to an enormous ﬁnancial burden (Donnan
et al., 2008). On the cellular level, the gleaned pathophysiological knowledge on ischemic stroke enabled a more
comprehensive perspective of tissue damage considering
time-dependent mechanisms of neuronal aﬀection
(Dirnagl et al., 1999). While excitotoxicity causes cell
death mainly within minutes to hours after ischemia onset,
inﬂammation became increasingly important since this
mechanism peaks later, appropriating a clinically relevant
target for interventions (Dirnagl et al., 1999; Endres et al.,
2008).
Based on studies using predominantly histological
techniques, it is generally accepted that the
inﬂammatory response includes inﬁltration of myeloid
cells and lymphocytes into the ischemia-aﬀected area,
complemented by local glial activation (Kochanek and
Hallenbeck, 1992; Tomita and Fukuuchi, 1996; Stoll
et al., 1998; Danton and Dietrich, 2003; Wang et al.,
2007; Jin et al., 2010; Denes et al., 2010). Using ﬂow
cytometry and ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting in
rodent brains subjected to experimental ischemia,
Campanella et al. (2002), Stevens et al. (2002) and

*Corresponding author. Address: Department of Neurology, University of Leipzig, Liebigstr. 20, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. Tel: +49-3419724206; fax: +49-341-9724199.
E-mail addresses: joerg.lehmann@izi.fraunhofer.de (J. Lehmann),
wolfgang.haertig@medizin.uni-leipzig.de (W. Härtig), seidel_andre@
gmx.net
(A.
Seidel),
christiane.fueldner@izi.fraunhofer.de
(C. Füldner), carsten.hobohm@medizin.uni-leipzig.de (C. Hobohm),
jens.grosche@eﬃgos.de (J. Grosche), martin.krueger@medizin.
uni-leipzig.de (M. Krueger), dominik.michalski@medizin.uni-leipzig.
de (D. Michalski).
Abbreviations: FCS, fetal calf serum; FITC-albumin, ﬂuoresceinconjugated albumin; FSC, forward scatter; HBSS, Hank’s balanced
salt solution; IFN, interferon; IL, interleukin; MCP-1, monocytechemoattractant protein-1; MIP-3a, macrophage inﬂammatory
protein-3a; MFI, mean ﬂuorescence intensity; MHC, major
histocompatibility
complex;
NK,
natural
killer;
PFA,
paraformaldehyde; SSC, side scatter; TBS, Tris-buﬀered saline.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.08.023
0306-4522/Ó 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
139

140

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Gelderblom et al. (2009) have investigated involved
cellular populations and their temporal characteristics in
more detail. Thereby, rising numbers of neutrophils and
macrophages in the ischemic hemisphere were found to
occur within hours continuing until day 2 and 3 after ischemia onset, while lymphoid cells appeared delayed in time
and in a much lower amount. After a ﬁrst attempt to
explore the functional relevance of cellular inﬁltration by
Weston et al. (2007), demonstrating an association of
numerically increased myeloid cells (i.e. neutrophils) with
larger infarct volumes after experimental ischemic stroke
in rats, two recent studies addressed the role of T lymphocytes in transient and permanent cerebral ischemia in
mice, yielding contradicting neuroprotective (Liesz et al.,
2009) and detrimental (Kleinschnitz et al., 2010) properties (Magnus et al., 2012).
Even prior to these reports, a discussion emerged
about the role of ischemia-induced inﬂammatory
processes, while both deleterious consequences (such
as cytokine-mediated cell death) and beneﬁcial eﬀects
(i.e. the initiation of neuronal recovery and plasticity)
were discussed (Stoll et al., 1998; Chamorro and
Hallenbeck, 2006; Endres et al., 2008; Kriz and
Lalancette-Hébert, 2009; Lakhan et al., 2009). The
remaining uncertainty might hamper the development of
drugs inﬂuencing the inﬂammatory response following
ischemic stroke. The situation is further complicated by
recent data indicating that the course of cellular recruitment critically depends on the applied animal model:
Comparing ﬁlament-based models in mice with varying
times of ischemia, Zhou et al. (2013) found an increasing
number of neutrophils during the ﬁrst 5 days after permanent ischemia, but a decreasing number following transient ischemia. Analyses of microglia activation at 24 h
revealed that permanent ischemia led to a numerical
increase of cells while transient ischemia caused cell
counts not diﬀerent from sham-operated animals. A very
recent report by Möller et al. (2014) focused on ischemic
consequences in spontaneous hypertensive rats, which
became attractive due to the naturally existing arterial
hypertension as a shared risk factor for stroke in humans.
In these rats, permanent cerebral ischemia caused a neutrophil accumulation at day 1 followed by a decline at day
4, which was also found for monocytes – quite diﬀerent
from earlier studies.
These observations together with the ongoing
attempts to improve preclinical stroke research with
emphasis on translational issues (Young et al., 2007;
Fisher et al., 2009) lead to the question on details about
the local inﬂammatory response in a rodent model of
stroke that is comparable to the pathophysiology of stroke
in man. The present study applied for the ﬁrst time ﬂow
cytometric analyses combined with in situ immunohistochemical staining to characterize the early inﬂammatory
cell recruitment after thromboembolic stroke in rats. This
model is currently believed to best mimic the human condition due to shared mechanisms of stroke formation
(Durukan and Tatlisumak, 2007; Bräuninger and
Kleinschnitz, 2009): a blood clot running inside of the
internal carotid artery that ﬁnally occludes the middle
cerebral artery.

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Experimental design
All experiments involving animals had been conducted
according to the European Communities Council
Directive (86/609/EEC) and were approved by local
authorities (Landesdirektion Sachsen, Leipzig, Germany,
reference number TVV-34/11). Generally, eﬀorts were
made to minimize the number of animals in total and
suﬀering of animals, which were housed in a
temperature and humidity controlled room with 12 h of
light/dark cycle and free access to food and water. The
here presented data originated from n = 31 male Wistar
rats with a mean body weight of 307 ± 20 g provided by
Charles River Wiga (Sulzfeld, Germany), which
underwent right-sided thromboembolic middle cerebral
artery occlusion (details below). Suﬃcient cerebral
ischemia was ensured by the presence of a relevant
neurobehavioral deﬁcit as indicated by a value of at
least 1 on the Menzies score (naturally ranging from 0,
no deﬁcit, to 4, spontaneous contralateral circling;
Menzies et al., 1992), which was assessed 4 and 24 h
after ischemia induction. Immediately after the second
neurobehavioral evaluation (at 24 h), ﬂuorescein-conjugated (FITC)-albumin (20 mg/1 ml saline; Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany) was intravenously administered, which
allows ﬂuorescence-based localization of ischemic damage at later stages by respective leakage in areas with
blood–brain barrier impairment (Michalski et al., 2010).
One hour after FITC-albumin injection (representing an
overall circulation period of 60 min), animals were deeply
anesthetized with CO2 and transcardially perfused with
either 200 ml saline (n = 21; for ﬂow cytometry and cell
sorting, divided into n = 13 for model establishment and
optimization of remaining cell count, and n = 8 for quantiﬁcation/characterization) or 200 ml saline followed by
200 ml paraformaldehyde (PFA; up to 4%) in phosphate-buﬀered saline (n = 10; for immunohistological
analyses). Afterward, brains were removed from the
skulls and processed as described below.
Induction of thromboembolic focal cerebral ischemia
Unilateral middle cerebral artery occlusion was induced
using a model originally described by Zhang et al.
(1997) with minor modiﬁcations. Brieﬂy, after careful preparation of right-sided cervical arteries, a polyethylene tubing with tapered end was inserted into the external carotid
artery via a small incision and moved forward through the
internal carotid artery up to the origin of the middle cerebral artery (distance about 1.6 cm from bifurcation). At this
position, a blood clot with a medium length of about
45 mm, originating from rat blood that has been collected
in a polyethylene tube at the previous day, allowed to clot
on a heading pad at 37 °C for 2 h followed by overnight
storage at 4 °C, was injected with about 40 ll of saline.
Finally, the catheter was removed, the stump of the external carotid artery ligated and the wound closed. During
surgery, additional polyethylene tubes were inserted into
the femoral vein allowing future FITC-albumin administration, and femoral artery for peri-procedural measurement

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

of vital parameters. Prior surgical procedures, all animals
were anesthetized with 2.0–2.5% isoﬂurane (Isoﬂuran
Baxter, Baxter, Unterschleißheim, Germany; mixture:
70% N2O/30% O2) using a commercial vaporisator (VIP
3000, Matrix, New York, USA). To avoid anesthesiarelated cooling, the body temperature was adjusted to
37.0 °C with a thermostatically controlled warming pad
(Fine Science Tools, Heidelberg, Germany) including rectal probe. Post-surgical pain control was ensured by
metamizol-enriched (Novaminsulfon-ratiopharm, Ratiopharm, Ulm, Germany) drinking water.
Flow cytometry
For ﬂow cytometry, brains were quickly removed from the
skulls and divided into an aﬀected and a non-aﬀected
hemisphere excluding the cerebellum. The obtained
native material was primarily stored in sterile isotonic
phosphate-buﬀered saline containing 100 U/ml penicillin
and 60 U/ml streptomycin until further processing. To
consider translational issues, i.e. to reﬂect variations
between individual animals with respect to the
recruitment of inﬂammatory cells into the infarcted area,
individual brain hemispheres were analyzed by ﬂow
cytometry without pooling. Only for additional (ex vivo)
morphological characterization of inﬂammatory cell
populations, pooling of hemispheres (usually n = 5–6)
was required due to limited cell numbers originating
from individual brains. In order to minimize the inﬂuence
of autolytic processes, tissue dissociation of the brain
had to be started within 1–2 h post mortem. Individual
hemispheres were mechanically and enzymatically
processed as described by Campanella et al. (2002) with
some modiﬁcations: Brain tissue was cut into small pieces
in a Petri disk followed by enzymatic digestion in 20 ml
Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) containing 5 % fetal
calf serum (FCS, Biochrom, Berlin, Germany), 0.2 % Collagenase II (Biochrom) and 250 ll DNase I (Fermentas,
St. Leon-Rot, Germany) within a water bath under movement for 30 min at 37 °C. Afterward, the digested brain
was passed through a sterile 40 lm-mesh sieve (Cell
strainer, Falcon, BD Bioscience, Heidelberg, Germany)
using a piston. The resulting cell suspension was centrifuged and washed twice in 10 ml HBSS/FCS (400g,
10 min, 4 °C). Finally, the cell pellet was re-suspended
in 4 ml 30 % Percoll (GE Healthcare, Freiburg, Germany)
solution and applied on a 3-step Percoll density gradient
(3.5 ml 70% Percoll solution, 3.5 ml 37% Percoll solution)
and centrifuged with low acceleration and without break
(1000g, 20 min, 4 °C). After aspiration of the top layer
containing predominantly myelin, the interphase layer
between the 70% and the 37% Percoll phase was harvested carefully, washed twice in 10 ml HBSS/FCS
(400g, 10 min, 4 °C), and ﬁnally re-suspended in 1 ml
HBSS/FCS. Living cells were counted by trypan blue
exclusion using a Neubauer hemocytometer (Paul Marienfeld, Lauda-Königshofen, Germany). The cell density was
usually adjusted to 1  107/ml resulting in 1  106 cells
per staining variant (tube number 1–5, Table 1).
Mono- and polymorphonuclear cells derived from
aﬀected and non-aﬀected brain hemispheres were
stained for ﬂow cytometric analyses according to

141

standard protocols: Brieﬂy, cells were washed twice in
2 ml HBSS/FCS (400g, 10 min, 4 °C) followed by
incubation with irrelevant murine IgG antibodies (40 lg/ml
mouse anti-human VEGF) for 20 min in order to block
unspeciﬁc Fc binding. Afterward, several combinations
of ﬂuorochromated monoclonal antibodies were added
to the cells and incubated for 45 min at 4 °C in the
dark, washed twice again, re-suspended in 250 ll
HBSS/FCS containing 1% formalin and analyzed using
a conventional multi-color ﬂow cytometer (Navios,
Beckman Coulter, Krefeld, Germany) with associated
acquisition and analysis software (Kaluza, Beckman
Coulter). All antibodies used for ﬂow cytometry and their
sources and stock concentrations are listed in Table 2
(working concentrations: 1:20).
Cell sorting and morphological characterization of
separated cell populations
Cell populations identiﬁed by ﬂow cytometric analysis
were separated by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting
using the high-speed cell sorter MoFlo XDP (Beckman
Coulter) with the same monoclonal antibodies (Table 2)
and the same gating strategy as deﬁned by ﬂow
cytometry. Following separation, cytospin smears were
prepared from the cell populations using a conventional
cytocentrifuge (Cytospin 4, Thermo Scientiﬁc Shandon,
Dreieich, Germany), which were then stained according
to the method of Pappenheim.
Multi-color immunoﬂuorescence in-situ staining,
microscopy and imaging
Brains from randomly selected animals were removed
from the skulls and subsequently post-ﬁxed with PFA
overnight. Next, 30 lm-thick frontal forebrain sections
were cut using a Vibratome (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany)
and collected in 0.1 M Tris-buﬀered saline, pH 7.4 (TBS)
containing sodium azide. Prior all staining procedures,
free-ﬂoating sections were extensively rinsed with TBS
and blocked with 5% normal donkey serum in TBS
containing 0.3% Triton X-100 (NDS-TBS-T) for 1 h. To
gain an overview of the whole ischemia-aﬀected region,
several sections were applied to immunolabeling of the
ionized calcium binding adapter molecule-1 (Iba), known
to be a highly sensitive marker of ischemia-related
microglial alterations (Ito et al., 2001): Sections were incubated with rabbit-anti-Iba (Wako, Neuss, Germany; 1:400
in NDS-TBS-T) overnight, rinsed with TBS and then
reacted with carbocyanine (Cy)3-conjugated donkeyanti-rabbit IgG (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany; 20 lg/ml
TBS containing 2% bovine serum albumin = TBS-BSA)
for 1 h. In addition, FITC-albumin in vivo labeling was
combined with double immunoﬂuorescence staining as
listed in Table 3. After incubation with primary antibodies
overnight, sections were rinsed with TBS followed by
visualizing biotinylated immunoreagents with Cy3-streptavidin and detection of Iba with Cy5-donkey-anti-rabbit
IgG, both from Dianova and used at 20 lg/ml TBS-BSA
for 1 h. Control experiments were performed including
the omission of primary antibodies, which resulted in the
absence of cellular staining.

142

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Table 1. Marker combinations used for ﬂow cytometry
Fluorochrome

Paciﬁc Blue (PB)

Phycoerythrin (PE) cyanin (APC)

Tube
Tube
Tube
Tube
Tube

CD11b
CD11b
CD11b

RT1b

#1
#2
#3
#4
#5

CD3
CD3
CD45RC

Allophyco-(AF647)

AlexaFluor 647 (APC-Cy7)

APC-Cyanin7

CD11c
CD86

CD45
CD45
CD4
CD4
CD4

CD8
CD161
CD8

Table 2. List of antibodies and sources used for ﬂow cytometry
Antibody speciﬁcity/ﬂuorochrome (clone)

Concentration

Supplier

Mouse anti-rat CD11b/c/APC (OX-42)

0.2 mg/ml

Mouse anti-rat CD11b/Paciﬁc Blue (OX-42)

0.05 mg/ml

Mouse anti-rat CD11b/PE (WT.5)

0.2 mg/ml

Mouse
Mouse
Mouse
Mouse

0.05 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml

BioLegend
London, UK
AbD Serotec,
Düsseldorf, Germany
BD Pharmingen
Heidelberg, Germany
AbD Serotec
BioLegend,
BioLegend
eBioscience,
Frankfurt, Germany
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
BioLegend
Beckman Coulter
BioLegend
BioLegend
eBioscience
BioLegend
BioLegend
AbD Serotec
Wako Chemicals,
Neuss, Germany

anti-rat
anti-rat
anti-rat
anti-rat

CD11c/AlexaFluor647 (8A2)
CD161AlexaFluor647 (10/78)
CD3/FITC (1F4)
CD3/PE (G4.18)

Mouse anti-rat CD45/APC/Cy7 (OX-1)
Mouse anti-rat CD45/FITC (OX-1)
Mouse anti-rat CD45RC/PE (OX-22)
Mouse anti-rat CD4/APC/Cy7 (W3/25)
Mouse anti-rat CD4/PE (OX-35)
Mouse anti-rat CD86/AlexaFluor647 (24F)
Mouse anti-rat CD8a/APC (G28)
Mouse IgG1 isotype/AlexaFluor647 (MOPC-21)
Mouse IgG1 isotype/FITC (MOPC-21)
Mouse IgG1 isotype/PE (MOPC-21)
Mouse IgG2a isotype/AlexaFluor647 (MOPC-173)
Mouse IgG2a isotype/APC (7T4–1F5)
Mouse IgG2a isotype/PE (MOPC-173)
Mouse IgM isotype/FITC (MM-30)
Mouse anti-rat macrophage/PE (HIS36)
Mouse anti-rat RT1b/FITC (OX-6)
Mouse anti-rat RT1b/PE (OX-6)
Mouse anti-rat CD11b/Biotin (OX-42)
Rabbit anti-rat Iba1 (polyclonal)

0.2 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/ml
0.1 mg/ml
0.05 mg/ml

Table 3. List of antibodies and sources used for immunoﬂuorescence in situ staining. Double ﬂuorescence staining of immune cells after in vivo prelabeling with FITC-albumin to allow co-localization with areas of impaired blood–brain barrier integrity. Fluorochrome-labeled secondary antibodies and
Cy3-streptavidin were obtained from Dianova (Hamburg, Germany) and used at 20 lg/ml
First primary antibodies

First visualizing
immunoreagent

Second primary antibodies

Second visualizing
immunoreagent

Biotinylated mouse-anti-RT1b
(1:25; BD Pharmingen)
Biotinylated mouse-anti-CD11b
(1:40; AbD, Serotec
Biotinylated mouse-anti-CD11b
(1:40; AbD Serotec)
Biotinylated mouse-anti-CD45RC
(1:10; AbD Serotec)

Cy3-streptavidin

Rabbit-anti-Iba (1:200; Wako)

Cy5-donkey-anti-rabbit IgG

Cy3-streptavidin

AlexaFluor647-mouse-anti-CD11c (1:50; AbD Serotec)

–

Cy3-streptavidin

AlexaFluor647-mouse-anti-CD161 (1:40; BioLegend)

–

Cy3-streptavidin

AlexaFluor647-mouse-anti-CD11c (1:10; AbD Serotec)

–

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

After all staining procedures, the sections were
washed with TBS, brieﬂy rinsed with distilled water,
mounted onto slides, air-dried and coverslipped with
Entellan (in toluene; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
An Axioplan ﬂuorescence microscope (Zeiss,
Oberkochen,
Germany)
served
for
screening
microscopy, while for photo documentation an Olympus
BX51 ﬂuorescence microscope equipped with an XM10
digital camera (Olympus, Hamburg, Germany) as well
as the laser-scanning microscope LSM 510 Meta
(Zeiss) was used. Original images were processed with
CorelDraw/Photo-Paint version 12.0 (Corel Corp.,
Ottawa, Canada). Brightness, contrast and sharpness of
some ﬁnal pictures were slightly adjusted.
Statistical analyses
Statistical calculations were performed with the
SigmaStat software package (version 18.0, Sysstat,
Erkrath, Germany). Thereby, the Mann–Whitney U test,
the Wilcoxon test or – if normal distribution has been
conﬁrmed by the Shapiro–Wilk test – Student’s t-test
served for testing inter-group diﬀerences. Generally, a
p < 0.05 was considered as statistically signiﬁcant.
Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD)
or as median values in the context of the 25/75
percentiles unless otherwise indicated.

RESULTS
The applied thromboembolic stroke model led to
neurobehavioral alterations as evaluated by a mean
Menzies score of 2.7 ± 0.7 at 4 h as well as 2.8 ± 0.9
at 24 h after ischemia induction (p = 0.602 between the
time points). Therefore, animals fulﬁlled the pre-deﬁned
study inclusion criterion of a suﬃcient neurobehavioral
deﬁcit indicating right-hemispheric focal cerebral
ischemia in the middle cerebral artery territory as a
pre-condition for the intended cellular characterization at
day 1.
Overall cellular characterization
Flow cytometry revealed an approximately 1.5-fold
numerical increase of cells detectable in the ischemiaaﬀected hemisphere when compared to the contralateral
side (means, 2.73  105 ± 2.25 versus 1.81  105 ±
1.61). For further characterization of accumulating
immune cell populations, a model-speciﬁc gating
strategy was established (Fig. 1): As a ﬁrst step, single
cells were discriminated from cell aggregates by plotting
the forward scatter (FSC) against the FSC time-of-ﬂight
(TOF) signal, followed by gating on living cells in the
FSC/side scatter (SSC) dot plot in order to exclude
dead cells and debris. Leukocytes were successfully
discriminated from other cells via CD45 expression in
the CD11b-PaciﬁcBlue/CD45-APC/Cy7 dot plot. Based
on the results from back-gating to the FSC/SSC dot plot
and supported by morphological analyses of separated
cell fractions in Pappenheim-stained cytospin smears,
CD45+ subpopulations were classiﬁed as follows:
CD11bhigh/CD45high
designated
as
neutrophils,

143

CD11bmedium/CD45high as monocytes/macrophages,
CD11bmedium/CD45low as microglia, CD11b-/CD45high as
lymphocytes 1, and CD11blow/CD45high were denoted as
lymphocytes 2. Based on this classiﬁcation, invading
inﬂammatory cell populations were quantiﬁed and
functionally characterized, while phenotypes of both
lymphoid cell fractions (lymphocytes 1 and 2) could be
further characterized in natural killer (NK) cells
(CD161+), NKT cells (CD161+/CD3+), T cells (CD3+,
CD4+ and CD8a+) or B cells (CD45RC+).
Inﬂammatory cell recruitment associated with focal
cerebral ischemia
In ischemic hemispheres, neutrophils, monocytes/
macrophages and lymphocytes 2 were found to
increase signiﬁcantly concerning both the proportion of
living cells (Fig. 2a) and the absolute cell numbers
(Fig. 2b), while lymphocytes 1 only increased
numerically. Unexpectedly, microglial cells did not show
a signiﬁcant inter-hemispheric diﬀerence, although the
absolute number of cells tended to be increased in the
ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere (median, 5965 versus
5573 cells). When focusing on the overall amount of
cellular recruitment best captured by the absolute cell
number within the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere
dominant populations were neutrophils and monocytes/
macrophages with a 6.12-fold (median, 9577 versus
1565 cells) and 5.42-fold (median, 7486 versus 1382
cells) increase when compared to the non-aﬀected
hemisphere (Fig. 2b).
Notably, the applied thromboembolic stroke model
allowed the detection of innate lymphoid cells exhibiting
a NK or NKT cell phenotype. Typically, rat NK cells can
be identiﬁed by ﬂuorescence staining of the cell surface
marker CD161, whereas NKT cells can be identiﬁed as
CD161 and CD3 co-expressing cells. This staining
pattern revealed three distinct cell populations in
aﬀected brain hemispheres of rats that underwent focal
cerebral ischemia: a CD161+/CD3+ population
representing NKT cells and 2 NK cell subpopulations,
one deﬁned as CD161high/CD3- and the other as
CD161low/CD3- (Fig. 3). As indicated by back gating to
the FSC/SSC dot plot, both the CD161low/CD3 and the
CD161+/CD3+ population showed a relatively large
size, whereas the CD161high/CD3 subpopulation was
characterized by a much smaller size (Fig. 3, upper
panel).
Further analyses of lymphoid cells revealed a 2.48fold increase of CD3+ conventional T cells (median,
6187 versus 2497) as well as a 2.94-fold increase of the
subpopulation CD3+/CD4+ (median, 4560 versus 1552)
and a 2.18-fold increase of the subpopulation CD3+/
CD8+ (median, 1499 versus 688) in the ischemiaaﬀected hemisphere when compared to the control side:
However, statistical signiﬁcance was not achieved,
except for the population co-expressing CD8+ (Fig. 4).
In addition to conventional T cells, the applied gating
strategy yielded an unconventional CD11b+/CD3+
T cell population which – to its major proportion – did
neither belong to the CD4+ nor to the CD8+ T cell
subpopulation. This can be concluded from the ﬁnding

144

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Fig. 1. Gating strategy for ﬂow cytometric discrimination and deﬁnition/isolation by ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting of inﬂammatory cell
populations from ischemia-aﬀected rat brain hemispheres. Single, living cells were gated on the basis of their CD11b versus CD45 expression
pattern using a high-quality ﬂow cytometer (Navios, Beckman Coulter) and the respective acquisition and analysis software (Kaluza, Beckman
Coulter; left panel). For further morphological characterization, deﬁned cell populations were isolated from pooled rat brain hemispheres and
immediately applied to a high-speed ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorter instrument (MoFlo XDP, Beckman Coulter; right panel) and successively
spun down onto a glass slide, ﬁxed in methanol and stained by the May-Grünwald/Giemsa staining protocol (so-called Pappenheim staining) for
hematological diﬀerentiation of the harvested cells (inserted microphotographs in the middle panel). Finally, the deﬁned and morphologically
characterized inﬂammatory cell populations were designated as ‘neutrophils’ (CD45high/CD11bhigh), ‘monocytes/macrophages’ (CD45high/
CD11bmedium), ‘microglia’ (CD45low/CD11bmedium), ‘lymphocytes 1’ (CD45high/CD11bnegative) and ‘lymphocytes 2’ (CD45high/CD11blow).

that only the total CD3+/CD11b+ population was found to
be signiﬁcantly increased in the ischemia-aﬀected
hemisphere, but neither CD4+/CD3+/CD11b+ nor
CD8+/CD3+/CD11b+ subpopulations (Fig. 4).
Addressing B cells by immunodetection of CD45RC,
clear evidence emerged that these cells occurred in
close association with ischemia. In general, the two
phenotypically distinguishable B cell subpopulations
CD4-/CD45RClow and CD4-/CD45RChigh were identiﬁed,
designated as ‘B cells 1’ and ‘B cells 2’ (Fig. 5). Both
subpopulations were found to be signiﬁcantly increased
in the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere: B cells 1 with 2283
versus 444 cells, representing a 5.14-fold increase, and
B cells 2 with 1603 versus 518 cells, representing a 3.1fold increase.

Functional characterization of inﬂammatory cells in
the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere
Since microglia failed to provide signiﬁcant numerical
changes, emphasis was laid on their functional
characterization. Using an inter-hemispheric comparison, the mean ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) of CD45stained microglial cells was analyzed as a correlative to
the density of surface molecule expression per cell,
resulting in a signiﬁcant up-regulation of CD45 on
microglial cells in the ischemic versus the non-ischemic
side (mean, 5.31 ± 0.49 versus 4.44 ± 0.38; p = 0.003).
With the intention to determine the antigen-presenting
potential of microglia and invaded inﬂammatory cell
populations, the expression of major histocompatibility

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

145

complying with a nearly 1.5-fold decrease, respectively,
indicating lower density of MHC II+ molecules on
immigrated inﬂammatory cells (Fig. 6, lower left). In
contrast, the MFI values of MHC II+ staining on
microglia or lymphoid cells did not diﬀer between
ischemia- and non-aﬀected hemispheres. Notably,
microglial cells also positive for CD86 provided a 1.86fold increase of the MFI value in the ischemic versus
the non-ischemic hemisphere (median, 9.7 versus 5.2),
indicating a higher antigen-presenting capacity of
microglia aﬀected by ischemia (Fig. 6, lower right).
Spatial distribution of immunoreactive cells
To add a morphological perspective to the observed
functional
characteristics
of
microglia,
indirect
immunoﬂuorescence of Iba was applied resulting in a
tripartite shell-like pattern with regard to the ischemic

Fig. 2. Interhemispheric comparison of classiﬁed cell populations
1 day after thromboembolic focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. The cell
populations that have been deﬁned and classiﬁed by means of ﬂow
cytometry (CD11b versus CD45 expression) and subsequent Pappenheim staining, were quantiﬁed by ﬂow cytometric analysis and
demonstrated as median values of the proportional distribution (A) or
the absolute cell numbers (B) in an inter-hemispheric comparison
following thromboembolic stroke in rats. Thereby, neutrophils and
monocytes/macrophages displayed the most drastic increase due to
ischemia, which became evident both by the proportional distribution
and the absolute cell numbers. Although the proportions as well as
the absolute cell counts of both lymphocytic populations (lymphocytes 1 and 2) increased after ischemia, statistical signiﬁcance was
only found for lymphocytes 2. However, neither the proportion nor the
absolute cell numbers of microglia were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
between the ischemia-aﬀected and the non-aﬀected hemisphere.
Data are given as median values with added 25/75 percentiles
originating from 8 animals. Level of statistical signiﬁcance: ⁄p < 0.05;
⁄⁄
p < 0.01; ⁄⁄⁄p < 0.001.

complex (MHC) class II molecules (detected by antiRT1b) or CD86 was analyzed (Fig. 6). The proportions
of living cells as well as the absolute cell counts of
MHC II+ and CD86+ neutrophils (median absolute cell
count MHC II+, 2723 versus 599), monocytes/
macrophages (median, 3921 versus 873 cells) or
lymphocytes 1 (median, 3989 versus 1237 cells), and in
terms of absolute cell counts also lymphocytes 2
(median, 1813 versus 782 cells) were found to increase
signiﬁcantly in the ischemia-aﬀected versus non-aﬀected
hemisphere (Fig. 6, upper panel). However, ischemia
led to a signiﬁcantly lower MFI value of the RT1brelated signal of neutrophils (median, 218 versus 323)
and monocytes/macrophages (median, 279 versus 422)

Fig. 3. Gating strategy for identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of NK cells
and NKT cells in the rat brain 1 day after thromboembolic stroke. Rat
NK cells and NKT cells were ﬂuorescently labeled using monoclonal
antibodies directed against CD161 (clone 10/78) or CD161/CD3,
respectively. Three distinct cell populations could be identiﬁed in
hemispheres from rats after thromboembolic stroke: the CD161+/
CD3+ population representing NKT cells and 2 NK cell subpopulations deﬁned as CD161high/CD3- and CD161low/CD3-, respectively.
These 3 subpopulations were back-gated to the FSC/SSC dot plot in
order to reveal their size and granularity (upper panel). The resulting
box plot graph demonstrates the absolute cell numbers of the 3 NK/
NKT cell subpopulations and additionally the absolute cell number of
T cells (lower panel). Data are given as the median values of absolute
cell numbers added by the 25/75 percentiles originating from 8
animals. Level of statistical signiﬁcance: ⁄p < 0.05.

146

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Fig. 4. Gating strategy for identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of distinct
T cell subpopulations in the rat brain 1 day after thromboembolic
stroke. T cells were ﬂuorescence-stained using 2 diﬀerent monoclonal antibodies directed against CD3 (clones 1F4 and G4.18). CD4+
and CD8+ T-cell subpopulations were identiﬁed by 2 diﬀerent
monoclonal antibodies directed against rat CD4 (clones W3/25, OX35) or a monoclonal antibody recognizing rat CD8a (clone G28),
respectively. The simultaneous application of anti-CD3 (clone G4.18)
and anti-CD11b (clone OX-42) revealed a special CD11b+/CD3+
T-cell subpopulation apart from classical CD11b-/CD3+ T cells. This
subpopulation (obviously not expressing CD4 or CD8 molecules) was
found to be signiﬁcantly increased in the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere as compared to the contralateral (unaﬀected) hemisphere (left
panel). However, the numbers of the CD11b+/CD3+ cells expressing
CD4 or CD8 were comparable in ischemia-aﬀected and non-aﬀected
hemispheres (middle and right panel). Although the classical T cell
population (CD11b-/CD3+) appeared increased in the ischemic
hemisphere too, this diﬀerence was not signiﬁcant (left panel).
Additional immunolabeling of CD4 and CD8 revealed an increase of
both classical T-cell subpopulations, which was signiﬁcant only in the
case of CD8 T cells (middle panel). Data are given as box plots
showing the median values of absolute cell numbers, added by the
25/75 percentiles originating from 8 animals. Level of statistical
signiﬁcance: ⁄p < 0.05.

lesion. While the area exhibiting the most ischemiaassociated tissue damage was found to be nearly
devoid of microglia, an ameboid conﬁguration
coincidental with a reduced length of cellular processes
was detected in the ischemic border zone (Fig. 7).
Beyond this zone, microglia appeared as ramiﬁed cells
without signs of activation.
Further, multiple immunoﬂuorescence labeling was
performed to provide details on the spatial pattern of
myeloid and lymphoid subpopulations with reference to
the ischemic area. Thereby, brain sections were
screened for extravasation of FITC-album from cerebral
vessels into the brain’s parenchyma indicating disruption
of the blood–brain barrier due to ischemia. In addition to
parenchymal leakage, FITC-albumin was found in
association with cellular structures: Counterstaining of
Iba and CD11b revealed a clear regional association to
myeloid cells, predominantly without exact colocalization (Fig. 8A–A000 ). When focusing on the regional

Fig. 5. Gating strategy for identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of B cell
subpopulations in the rat brain 1 day after experimental focal
ischemia. Rat B cells were ﬂuorescently labeled with a monoclonal
antibody directed against CD45RC (clone OX-22). Two distinct B cell
subpopulations could be identiﬁed in the hemispheres of rats after
thromboembolic stroke: CD45RClow cells (designated as ‘B cells 1’)
and the CD45RChigh population (designated as ‘B cells 2’; A). These
subpopulations were found to be signiﬁcantly increased in the
ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere compared to the non-aﬀected hemisphere (B, C). Although the median values of both subpopulations are
at the same level in both hemispheres, in some animals a higher
inﬁltration of B cells 1 compared to B cells 2 could be observed as
indicated by the higher 75 percentile in the box plots for relative as
well as absolute cell counts (B, C). Data are given as median values
with added 25/75 percentiles originating from 8 animals. Level of
statistical signiﬁcance: ⁄p < 0.05.

relationship to the vasculature, RT1b as marker for the
antigen-presenting immunoreactive cells was found to
cumulate in close association with vessels, whereas

147

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Fig. 6. Antigen-presenting and co-stimulating capacity of identiﬁed inﬂammatory cell populations in separated hemispheres of rats 1 day after
thromboembolic stroke. Using ﬂow cytometry, antigen-presenting capacity was derived from the distribution (upper left), the absolute cell numbers
(upper right), or the mean ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) values (lower left) of MHC class II molecule expression (stained by anti-RT1b, clone OX-6),
while co-stimulating capacity of inﬂammatory cells was indicated by the MFI values of CD86 expression (stained by anti-rat CD86, clone 24F; lower
right). The proportion and the absolute count of cells expressing MHC-class II molecules were signiﬁcantly increased in the ischemic brain
hemispheres in terms of neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages and lymphocytes 1. In response to ischemia, the absolute number but not the
proportion of cells expressing MHC class II molecules was signiﬁcantly increased also in the population designated as lymphocytes 2. The amount
of MHC class II molecules per cell (indicated by MFI value) was not aﬀected by ischemia in microglial cells and both lymphocytic populations.
Neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages displayed signiﬁcantly lower MFI values of MHC class II molecule expression in ischemia-aﬀected
hemispheres. A signiﬁcant increase of CD86 molecules per cell (MFI) was only found in microglial cells. Data are given as median values added by
the 25/75 percentiles originating from 8 animals. Level of statistical signiﬁcance: ⁄p < 0.05; ⁄⁄p < 0.01.

microglia as visualized by Iba-immunoreactivity provided
a homogenous allocation in the perivascular zone
(Fig. 8B). Additional analyses at higher magniﬁcations
indicate that antigen-presenting immunoreactive cells
(identiﬁed by anti-RT1b) are located in vessels with
decreased blood–brain barrier integrity (demonstrated
by FITC-albumin leakage) and in the parenchyma in
close vicinity to these vessels (Fig. 8C). This ﬁnding
strongly indicates a predominantly vessel-associated
route of inﬂammatory cell recruitment into the ischemiaaﬀected tissue.
Additional experiments focused on the regional
association between extravasated FITC-albumin (either
if associated with cellular structures or the vasculature
per se) and markers addressing the subpopulations of
NK/NKT cells (CD161), T/B cells (CD45RC) and
dendritic cells (CD11c), while the latter one is
considered to represent subpopulations of both
monocytes and lymphocytes (Fig. 9). Thereby, CD11b,
representing predominantly myeloid cells, was found to
be regularly co-localized with CD11c (Figure 9A0 –A000 ),
while CD161+ cells provided a much lower overlap with

CD11b (Figure 9B0 –B000 ). Remarkably, a partial overlap
of CD45RC and CD11c was observed in close
relationship to ischemia-aﬀected vessels (Figure 9C000 ,
color-coded in purple), whereas dendritic cells clearly
dominated the intravascular compartment and lymphoid
(B/T) cells the juxta-/perivascular space.

DISCUSSION
The present study aimed on the cellular inﬂammatory
response during the ﬁrst day after cerebral ischemia
using a rat model of thromboembolic stroke, which has
been chosen to closely mimic the human pathophysiology (Durukan and Tatlisumak, 2007; Young
et al., 2007). With respect to earlier studies which applied
ﬂow cytometry for characterization of invading cells into
the ischemic brain as induced by ﬁlament insertion or
electrocoagulation (Campanella et al., 2002; Stevens
et al., 2002; Gelderblom et al., 2009), this is – to the best
of our knowledge – the ﬁrst work on consequences of
experimental stroke caused by a blood clot-mediated
cerebral vessel occlusion.

148

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Fig. 7. Morphological changes of microglial cells in a coronal
forebrain section from a rat 1 day after thromboembolic stroke.
Indirect immunoﬂuorescence labeling of Iba allows the discrimination
between unaﬀected striatal tissues containing ramiﬁed microglia from
the infarct border zone displaying activated, more ameboid microglial
cells with shortened processes whereas the area of maximum tissue
damage is apparently devoid of Iba-immunoreactivity. The delineation of the diﬀerent zones is clariﬁed by dashed lines. Scale bar:
200 lm.

Technical considerations
A major challenge of the performed approach was the
limited availability of monoclonal antibodies to rat cell
surface molecules. Therefore, this study required a
variety of antibody combinations to allow identiﬁcation of
diﬀerent cell populations, naturally not purporting to be
complete. Thus, future studies are requested to use the
here found speciﬁcations in addition to newly elaborated
antibodies in order to explore cellular diﬀerentiation in
more detail. Our concept for identifying leukocyte and
microglial populations predominantly based on the
staining patterns for CD11b and CD45 as suggested by
Sedgwick et al. (1991), who demonstrated discrimination
of microglia from monocytes/macrophages/neutrophils
and lymphocytes. This strategy was conﬁrmed by Ford
et al. (1995), who identiﬁed CD45low/CD11bhigh expressing cells as microglia and CD45high/CD11bhigh expressing
cells as myeloid cells. However, after cytometry-based
separation and histological characterization by Pappenheim staining, we showed that in our model CD45low/
CD11bmedium expressing cells represent microglia. Additionally, neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages (both
expressing high amounts of CD11b) were discriminated
by their MFI, while neutrophils as identiﬁed by a typical
morphology visualized by the Pappenheim staining provided higher MFI values. Therefore, we designated this
population (CD45high/CD11bhigh) as neutrophils and the
other cell population with a somewhat lower MFI value
(CD45high/CD11bmedium, similar MFI level as microglia)
as monocytes/macrophages. Since the CD45/CD11b proﬁle also allowed the diﬀerentiation of lymphocytes in
terms of a CD45high/CD11b and a CD45high/CD11blow

population, we decided to diﬀerentiate between lymphocytes 1 and 2. Based on their morphological appearance,
a few of the lymphocytes in the CD11blow group were
characterized by a small nucleus/plasma ratio and some
granularity, while the majority exhibited a diﬀerent morphology – i.e. big nucleus/plasma ratio and high-dense
nucleus. Therefore, some cells of the lymphocytes 2 population might represent monocytes/macrophages or even
speciﬁc subtypes of lymphocytes (e.g. NK or other innate
cells), which need to be investigated by further studies
using multiple labeling with antibodies directed against
CD45, CD11b, CD45RC, CD3 and CD161.
As a further limitation of this study, observations were
restricted to a single time point, in detail 25 h after
ischemia induction. However, in this ﬁrst approach of
characterizing the inﬂammatory response in the
thromboembolic model the authors focused on tissues
which are deﬁnitively aﬀected by inﬂammatory
mechanisms, known to occur within hours or days after
ischemia (Dirnagl, 1999). Consequently, future studies
are required to add data on the time-dependency of
cellular reactions described here.

Changes in microglia
Microglial alterations in response to ischemic stroke have
been described comprehensively (Sedgwick et al., 1991;
Aloisi, 2001; Campanella et al., 2002; Stevens et al.,
2002; Lalancette-Hebert et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2007;
Hu et al., 2012). Thereby, previous studies provided evidence that the up-regulation of CD45 represents a sensitive signal for the activated state of microglial cells in
conjunction with inﬂammatory processes (Campanella
et al., 2002; Stevens et al., 2002). A conclusive observation in the present work is based on inter-hemispheric
comparison: the CD45 expression was found to be upregulated on microglia cells in the ischemic hemisphere.
This ﬁnding indicates comparable mechanisms of microglial activation also in the thromboembolic rat model of
stroke. Remarkably, in models with transient cerebral
ischemia the number of microglial cells and the extent of
tissue damage concomitantly increased (Denker et al.,
2007; Gelderblom et al., 2009), except for a report by
Denes et al. (2007) who found an inverse association
after 30 min of transient focal cerebral ischemia in mice.
Thus, the quite low and non-signiﬁcant numerical
increase of microglial cells in the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere observed in the present study might be related to
the used thromboembolic model, typically devoid of a controlled recanalization, thereby leading to more severe tissue damage than in transient models. Although the
number of microglial cells was not signiﬁcantly changed
after ischemia, in addition to CD45 levels also the degree
of CD86 expression per cell was signiﬁcantly increased in
the ischemic hemisphere suggesting an activated state,
which was supported by the observed morphological
alterations. Although previous studies reported morphological changes toward an ameboid appearance in the
ischemic border zone (Walberer et al., 2010), future
eﬀorts are requested to explore the functional relevance
of this observation, aﬃrmed by a recent study from

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

149

Fig. 8. Concomitant ﬂuorescence labeling of FITC-albumin and diﬀerent markers of immune cells in ischemia-aﬀected rat brain tissue 1 day after
experimentally induced stroke, captured by confocal laser-scanning microscopy. FITC-albumin (FITC-alb.) as leakage marker indicating an
impaired blood–brain barrier integrity – found to be concentrated in cells of the striatal parenchyma (A) – is counterstained in (A0 ) with indirect Cy5immunolabeling of Iba (color-coded in blue) and in (A000 ) with CD11b-immunostaining based on a biotinylated mouse antibody and red ﬂuorescent
Cy3-streptavidin. The merged picture (A00 0 ) clearly shows the occurrence of stained markers in regionally allocated, but typically not the same cells.
(B) The simultaneous visualization of FITC-alb., Iba-immunoreactivity (blue) and RT1b, a marker for MHC class II molecules (revealed by a
biotinylated mouse antibody and Cy3-streptavidin, red) indicates the cellular distribution associated to the vasculature within the striatal border zone
of ischemia (C). Scale bars: 50 lm (in A00 0 and B) and 100 lm (in C).

Hu et al. (2012) who demonstrated a shift in the cellular
polarization of microglia after transient experimental
stroke in mice that indicates diﬀerent phenotypes of activated microglia. In this context, concomitant morphological alterations need to be matched with the currently
discussed pro- and/or anti-inﬂammatory properties of
microglia (Biber et al., 2014).

Inﬁltration of monocytes/macrophages and
neutrophils
The limited proliferation of microglial cells in contrast to
the massive recruitment of monocytes/macrophages
and neutrophils into ischemia-aﬀected brain is one of
the major ﬁndings of the present work. This observation

150

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Fig. 9. Triple ﬂuorescence labeling of FITC-albumin as leakage marker for ischemia-induced blood–brain barrier disruption and its co-localization
with diverse markers of immunoreactive cells in the rat brain 1 day after thromboembolic stroke. CD11b-immunoreactivity revealed by biotinylated
mouse antibodies and red ﬂuorescent Cy3-streptavidin (A0 and B0 ) was combined with the immunodecoration of CD11c (A00 ) and CD161 (B00 ) based
on mouse antibodies conjugated to Alexa647 (infrared immunosignal, color-coded in blue). CD45RC also visualized by biotinylated mouse
antibodies and Cy3-streptavidin (C0 ) was stained simultaneously with CD11c, visualized by Alexa647 (C00 ). The merged pictures A000 and B000
exclusively indicate co-expression of markers for immunoreactive cells (most prominent structures are marked by arrows), added by insets showing
selected cells at higher magniﬁcations while co-localization of CD11b and CD11c as well as CD11b and CD161 appeared in purple. The merged
picture C000 reveals predominantly in the marked vessel zone cellular elements containing both FITC-alb. and CD45RC (yellow), as well as coexpression of CD45RC and CD11c (purple), and a few structures with all 3 markers (white). Scale bars = 25 lm (in A000 and B000 ) and 50 lm (in C000 ).

appears impressively robust, because earlier studies
based on diﬀerent techniques of ischemia induction
revealed comparable results (Campanella et al., 2002;
Stevens et al., 2002; Schilling et al., 2003; Tanaka
et al., 2003; Kokovay et al., 2006; Gelderblom et al.,
2009).
Remarkably, monocytes/macrophages recruited to
the ischemic brain were found to express MHC class II
molecules indicating an activated phenotype, which
leads to the hypothesis that these cells may play a
signiﬁcant role in antigen presentation and T-cell
activation. Moreover, invaded monocytes/macrophages

were considered to directly trigger the local inﬂammation
by secreting pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as
interleukin (IL)-1b, TNF-a and IL-23 (Fu et al., 2004;
Liesz et al., 2009; Shichita et al., 2009). Concerning the
mechanisms of monocyte accumulation, earlier studies
indicated a critical role for the CC-chemokine monocytechemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1). Accordingly, MCP-1
– not detectable in the unaﬀected brain – was found in
the cerebrospinal ﬂuid of stroke patients (Losy and
Zaremba, 2001), while animal data suggested that this
chemokine contributes to the progression of brain damage by recruitment of monocytes/macrophages (Hughes

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

et al., 2002). Consequently, MCP-1/ mice exposed to
focal cerebral ischemia exhibited smaller lesion sizes,
decreased macrophage invasion as well as IL-1 b, IL-6
and G-CSF secretion (Hughes et al., 2002; Strecker
et al., 2011). In addition to MCP-1, the CC-chemokine
macrophage inﬂammatory protein-3a (MIP-3a) was identiﬁed by Terao et al. (2009) as a further regulating protein
involved in monocyte/macrophage recruitment after
experimental ischemic stroke in rats. In this context, ﬂow
cytometry-based quantiﬁcation of monocytes/ macrophages in the thromboembolic stroke model might represent a useful way, ﬁrst, to conﬁrm the impact of regulatory
proteins like MCP-1 or MIP-3a in this human-like model,
and second, to explore therapeutic strategies dealing with
drug-based modulations of these proteins.
Inﬁltration of neutrophils into the infarcted brain was
demonstrated in several studies as for instance by
Garcia et al. (1994), who used a permanent model of focal
cerebral ischemia in the rat, and found accumulation of
neutrophils already 30 min after ischemia induction.
Recently, neutrophils became interesting since both animal and human studies of cerebral ischemia indicated a
close relationship between blood–brain barrier breakdown
and matrix metalloproteinases (i.e. MMP-9), a group of
enzymes predominantly secreted by neutrophils
(Justicia et al., 2003; Rosell et al., 2008). Further studies
conﬁrmed this observation by adding a signiﬁcant correlation between the degree of neutrophil accumulation and
the ischemic lesion size (Price et al., 2004). Thus,
MMP-9 expression together with the capacity to produce
reactive oxygen species mainly implies an exacerbating
rather than a protective role of neutrophils during the
inﬂammatory response after ischemia. In our translationoriented study the thromboembolic stroke model in the
rat resulted in a striking invasion of neutrophils into the
ischemia-aﬀected brain within the ﬁrst 25 h. These data
are in line with previous observations in ischemic stroke
models using (electro)coagulation or ﬁlament-based vessel occlusion (Stevens et al., 2002; Gelderblom et al.,
2009; Zhou et al., 2013; Möller et al., 2014). A strong indication for the activated state of invaded neutrophils in our
model was their MHC class II expression. Although neutrophils are typically devoid of MHC class II molecules
under physiological conditions, certain pathological processes including the accumulation of cytokines like
interferon (IFN)-c, IL-3 or GM-CSF lead to its expression
(Smith et al., 1995; Wright et al., 2010; Abi Abdallah et al.,
2011). Based on the assumed complex interactions, also
a role for neutrophils as antigen-presenting cells with consecutive T-cell activation appears obvious. This perspective is supported by immunoﬂuorescence labeling shown
in this work, since RT1b+ cells were closely associated
with the ischemic area, especially in vicinity to the vasculature with impaired blood–brain barrier integrity. The
recruitment of neutrophils from the blood seems to be predominantly induced by the CXC chemokine cytokineinduced neutrophil chemoattractant protein-1/chemokine
(C–X–C motif) ligand 1 (CINC-1/CXCL1) since this chemokine was found to be quickly up-regulated in response
to ischemic stroke (Barone et al., 1991; Liu et al., 1993;
Garcia et al., 1994; Denker et al., 2007; Yamagami

151

et al., 1999). While focusing on the inﬁltration process
from the vasculature into the brain’s parenchyma, a variety of involved adhesion molecules – e.g., the intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and the vascular adhesion
molecule-1 (VCAM-1) – had been identiﬁed (Danton and
Dietrich, 2003; Wang et al., 2007; Denes et al., 2010).
It is noteworthy that our data on the thromboembolic
model of stroke diﬀer in some aspects from the ﬁndings
reported for other models. Gelderblom et al. (2009) have
shown that inﬁltration of the ischemic hemisphere by macrophages, lymphocytes and dendritic cells preceded the
neutrophil inﬂux in mice suﬀering from a transient (1 h)
focal cerebral ischemia. In contrast, we were able to demonstrate a strong and apparently simultaneous recruitment of neutrophils together with monocytes/
macrophages and lymphocytes within 25 h after ischemia
induction. Moreover, Stevens et al. (2002) could show a
2.5-fold increase of neutrophils in the ischemic versus
the non-ischemic hemisphere after 24 h in a mouse model
of transient (1 h) focal cerebral ischemia, which peaked
after 72 h to a 7.5-fold increase. The present study
revealed a drastic sixfold accumulation of neutrophils
already at 25 h, which is in line with the results from
Möller et al. (2014) who performed a permanent distal
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in spontaneously
hypertensive rats.
These discrepancies might be attributed to the degree
of tissue damage caused by transient as well as
permanent cerebral ischemia, probably accompanied by
species-related peculiarities. However, a recent study by
Zhou et al. (2013) investigated the recruitment of neutrophils after 30 and 90 min of transient versus permanent
focal cerebral ischemia in mice. Thereby, transient ischemia caused more invading neutrophils within the ﬁrst day
than permanent ischemia. When considering histological
data from human stroke to verify the ﬁndings from animal
studies, Chuaqui and Tapia (1993) described the occurrence of neutrophils starting already at day one after the
ischemic event, which could be recently conﬁrmed by
Enzmann et al. (2013). Regarding translational issues,
ﬂow cytometry-based quantiﬁcation of neutrophils in the
rat model of thromboembolic stroke might therefore represent a useful setting to investigate the related pathophysiology in more detail, and to test potential treatment
strategies inﬂuencing the degree of neutrophil inﬂux.
Remarkably,
all
three
cellular
populations
(neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages and microglia)
revealed only low levels of CD11c in ﬂow cytometric
analyses (data not shown). Thus, it was not possible to
clearly identify dendritic cells by the applied gating
strategy, but immunoﬂuorescence labeling identiﬁed
CD11c-expressing cells allocated with the ischemic
area, suggesting the recruitment and/or diﬀerentiation of
dendritic cells also in the rat model of thromboembolic
stroke. This ﬁnding is in agreement with previous
observations: Kostulas et al. (2002) reported the presence of dendritic cells in ischemic brain hemispheres after
ﬁlament-based permanent focal cerebral ischemia in rats,
and Möller et al. (2014) demonstrated a transient increase
of dendritic cells in the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere at
one day after thermocoagulation-induced occlusion of

152

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

the middle cerebral artery in rats. However, the functional
role of dendritic cells in stroke-related cerebral inﬂammation is still a matter of debate.
Inﬁltration of lymphocytes, NK cells and NKT cells
In our model, a signiﬁcant inﬁltration of lymphocytes as
well as cells with lymphocyte-like morphology (i.e. the
populations designated as lymphocytes 1 and
lymphocytes 2) into the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere
was observed at 25 h after stroke induction.
Immunophenotyping revealed that these cell populations
are predominantly T cells, B cells, NK cells and NKT
cells. This ﬁnding is in agreement with observations in
other stroke models (Jander et al., 1995; Campanella
et al., 2002; Stevens et al., 2002; Gelderblom et al.,
2009).
Although the functional role of T cells in strokeinduced inﬂammation remains subject of further
investigation, there is increasing evidence for a diseasepromoting role of lymphocytes in stroke, since mice
devoid of functional T and B cells developed
signiﬁcantly smaller infarct sizes and neurological
deﬁcits than wild-type mice (Kleinschnitz et al., 2010).
Adoptive transfer experiments using puriﬁed B and T cells
suggest that T cells are the most critical lymphocyte subpopulation exacerbating cerebral damage after stroke
(Kleinschnitz et al., 2010; Yilmaz et al., 2010). Additionally, Shichita et al. (2009) have shown that cdT cells, a
primordial T cell population which belong to innate lymphoid cells like NKT cells as well, might signiﬁcantly trigger the cerebral inﬂammation following stroke by
secreting IL-17 in an IL-23-dependent manner (as demonstrated for IL-17-/- mice or by administration of a neutralizing anti-IL-17 antibody) in a transient mouse model of
stroke. The pivotal role of cdT cells including related cytokines like IL-17 with speciﬁc eﬀects on neutrophils should
be veriﬁed in the thromboembolic rat model of stroke by
future studies.
In contrast to the disease-promoting role of cdT cells,
CD4+/CD25+/Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (so-called Treg
cells) were found to play a crucial role as counterregulators of cerebral inﬂammation after experimental
stroke in mice (Chamorro et al., 2012; Magnus et al.,
2012). Analyses of underlying mechanisms revealed
anti-inﬂammatory properties of IL-10, down-regulating
TNF-a and IFN-c as the probably most potent inﬂammatory cytokines (Liesz et al., 2009; Chamorro et al., 2012).
Although the present work did not focus on Treg cells,
their course and functional impact needs to be veriﬁed
in the thromboembolic model of stroke in order to gain
translationally relevant details. Interestingly, in our ﬁrst
approach to capture the lymphoid inﬂux after thromboembolic stroke, we observed an untypical T cell subpopulation expressing CD11b, which might be a special feature
of this model. Since the functional relevance of this special population remains unclear at this stage, additional
analyses should focus on a regional characterization
and potential co-localization with other markers.
In addition to T cells, we were able to identify B cells
with subsequent diﬀerentiation into two distinct
subpopulations. Resolving the uncertainty regarding the

function of B lymphocytes, a recent study delivered
evidence for a protective role of regulatory B cells
mediated by IL-10 (Ren et al., 2011). With respect to
translational aspects, further studies have to explore
whether B cell subpopulations found in our study might
express a regulatory phenotype as characterized by IL10 production.
Finally, we could show that two distinct NK cell
subpopulations (CD161high/CD3 and CD161low/CD3)
as well as NKT cells (CD161+/CD3+) inﬁltrated the
ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere following thromboembolic
stroke. As indicated by back-gating to the FSC/SSC dot
plot, both the CD161low/CD3- and the CD161+/CD3+
population displayed a relatively large cell size,
suggesting that these populations exhibited an activated
phenotype. Probably one or even both of these cell
populations might represent a phenotype that was
previously described as large granular lymphocytes,
which were later identiﬁed as NK cells (Born et al.,
1983; Sheehy et al., 1983). Further immunohistochemical
and ﬂow cytometric analyses are requested to clarify
whether these cells – in the setting of stroke – may
secrete perforin and/or granzymes as typical features of
NK cells. Future studies have to elucidate whether these
cells are involved in stroke-induced inﬂammation, for
example by the secretion of IFN-c – known to be involved
in the early inﬂammatory response (Liesz et al., 2011;
Magnus et al., 2012).

CONCLUSIONS
Our study provides for the ﬁrst time details on the
inﬂammatory cell recruitment within ischemia-aﬀected
brain regions after thromboembolic stroke in rats, a
model that has become attractive concerning
translational aspects. While microglia failed to increase
numerically in the ischemia-aﬀected hemisphere, ﬂow
cytometry indicated a clear shift to an immunoreactive
state, which was supported by histochemically
visualized morphological alterations toward an ameboid
conﬁguration in the ischemic border zone. These
ﬁndings strengthened the relevance of microglial cells in
the local inﬂammatory response after stroke,
irrespective of numerical changes. In contrast to earlier
reports, our data suggested a simultaneous inﬂux of
monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils within the ﬁrst
25 h after focal cerebral ischemia, since we were able to
demonstrate their occurrence after experimental
thromboembolic stroke, which is in line with
observations following human stroke. This similarity
impressively
underlines
the
need
for
further
investigations addressing the inﬂammatory response in
translationally relevant rodent models. As a conﬁrmation
and an extension of previous studies using diﬀerent
stroke models, the present work elucidated a signiﬁcant
increase of T and B cells in the ischemia-aﬀected
hemisphere, allowed discrimination between NK and
NKT cells, and further revealed a newly described cell
population co-expressing CD11b and CD3 as well as 2
subpopulations of B cells. The functional impact of

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

these subtypes needs to be further addressed in future
studies.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments—The authors would like to thank Dr. Petra
Fink-Sterba and Ms. Sigrid Weisheit (Medical Experimental
Centre, University of Leipzig, Leipzig) for animal care. Ms. Ulrike
Scholz (Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology,
Dept. Cell Engineering/GLP, Leipzig) is acknowledged for excellent technical assistance.

REFERENCES
Abi Abdallah DS, Egan CE, Butcher BA, Denkers EY (2011) Mouse
neutrophils are professional antigen-presenting cells programmed
to instruct Th1 and Th17 T-cell diﬀerentiation. Int Immunol
23:317–326.
Aloisi F (2001) Immune function of microglia. Glia 36:165–179.
Barone FC, Hillegass LM, Price WJ, White RF, Lee EV, Feuerstein
GZ, Sarau HM, Clark RK, Griswold DE (1991) Polymorphonuclear
leukocyte inﬁltration into cerebral focal ischemic tissue:
myeloperoxidase activity assay and histologic veriﬁcation. J
Neurosci Res 29:336–345.
Biber K, Owens T, Boddeke E (2014) What is microglia neurotoxicity
(Not)? Glia 62:841–854.
Born W, Ben-Nun A, Bamberger U, Nakayama M, Speth V, Sun D,
Thornton M (1983) Killer-cell lines derived from mouse thymus,
resembling large granular lymphocytes and expressing natural
killer-like cytotoxicity. Immunobiology 165:63–77.
Bräuninger S, Kleinschnitz C (2009) Rodent models of focal cerebral
ischemia: procedural pitfalls and translational problems. Exp
Transl Stroke Med 1:8.
Campanella M, Sciorati C, Tarozzo G, Beltramo M (2002) Flow
cytometric analysis of inﬂammatory cells in ischemic rat brain.
Stroke 33:586–592.
Chamorro A, Hallenbeck J (2006) The harms and beneﬁts of
inﬂammatory and immune responses in vascular disease.
Stroke 37:291–293.
Chamorro A, Meisel A, Planas AM, Urra X, van de Beek D, Veltkamp
R (2012) The immunology of acute stroke. Nat Rev Neurol
8:401–410.
Chuaqui R, Tapia J (1993) Histologic assessment of the age of recent
brain infarcts in man. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 52:481–489.
Danton GH, Dietrich WD (2003) Inﬂammatory mechanisms after
ischemia and stroke. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 62:127–136.
Denes A, Vidyasagar R, Feng J, Narvainen J, McColl BW, Kauppinen
RA, Allan SM (2007) Proliferating resident microglia after focal
cerebral ischaemia in mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
27:1941–1953.
Denes A, Thornton P, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM (2010) Inﬂammation
and brain injury: acute cerebral ischaemia, peripheral and central
inﬂammation. Brain Behav Immun 24:708–723.
Denker SP, Ji S, Dingman A, Lee SY, Derugin N, Wendland MF,
Vexler ZS (2007) Macrophages are comprised of resident brain
microglia not inﬁltrating peripheral monocytes acutely after
neonatal stroke. J Neurochem 100:893–904.
Dirnagl U, Iadecola C, Moskowitz MA (1999) Pathobiology of
ischaemic stroke: an integrated view. Trends Neurosci
22:391–397.
Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M, Davis SM (2008) Stroke. Lancet
371:1612–1623.
Durukan A, Tatlisumak T (2007) Acute ischemic stroke: overview of
major experimental rodent models, pathophysiology, and therapy
of focal cerebral ischemia. Pharmacol Biochem Behav
87:179–197.

153

Endres M, Engelhardt B, Koistinaho J, Lindvall O, Meairs S, Mohr JP,
Planas A, Rothwell N, Schwaninger M, Schwab ME, Vivien D,
Wieloch T, Dirnagl U (2008) Improving outcome after stroke:
overcoming the translational roadblock. Cerebrovasc Dis
25:268–278.
Enzmann G, Mysiorek C, Gorina R, Cheng YJ, Ghavampour S,
Hannocks MJ, Prinz V, Dirnagl U, Endres M, Prinz M, Beschorner
R, Harter PN, Mittelbronn M, Engelhardt B, Sorokin L (2013) The
neurovascular unit as a selective barrier to polymorphonuclear
granulocyte (PMN) inﬁltration into the brain after ischemic injury.
Acta Neuropathol 125:395–412.
Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, Hurn PD, Kent TA, Savitz SI,
Lo EH, STAIR Group (2009) Update of the stroke therapy
academic industry roundtable preclinical recommendations.
Stroke 40:2244–2250.
Ford AL, Goodsall AL, Hickey WF, Sedgwick JD (1995) Normal adult
ramiﬁed microglia separated from other central nervous system
macrophages by ﬂow cytometric sorting. Phenotypic diﬀerences
deﬁned and direct ex vivo antigen presentation to myelin basic
protein-reactive CD4+ T cells compared. J Immunol 154:
4309–4321.
Fu D, Ng YK, Gan P, Ling EA (2004) Permanent occlusion of the
middle cerebral artery upregulates expression of cytokines and
neuronal nitric oxide synthase in the spinal cord and urinary
bladder in the adult rat. Neuroscience 125:819–831.
Garcia JH, Liu KF, Yoshida Y, Lian J, Chen S, del Zoppo GJ (1994)
Inﬂux of leukocytes and platelets in an evolving brain infarct
(Wistar rat). Am J Pathol 144:188–199.
Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, Behrens D, Choe CU, Siler
DA, Arumugam TV, Orthey E, Gerloﬀ C, Tolosa E, Magnus T
(2009) Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell
accumulation in stroke. Stroke 40:1849–1857.
Hu X, Li P, Guo Y, Wang H, Leak RK, Chen S, Gao Y, Chen J (2012)
Microglia/macrophage polarization dynamics reveal novel
mechanism of injury expansion after focal cerebral ischemia.
Stroke 43:3063–3070.
Hughes PM, Allegrini PR, Rudin M, Perry VH, Mir AK, Wiessner C
(2002) Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 deﬁciency is
protective in a murine stroke model. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
22:308–317.
Ito D, Tanaka K, Suzuki S, Dembo T, Fukuuchi Y (2001) Enhanced
expression of Iba1, ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1,
after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rat brain. Stroke
32:1208–1215.
Jander S, Kraemer M, Schroeter M, Witte OW, Stoll G (1995)
Lymphocytic inﬁltration and expression of intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 in photochemically induced ischemia of the rat cortex.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 15:42–51.
Jin R, Yang G, Li G (2010) Inﬂammatory mechanisms in
ischemic stroke: role of inﬂammatory cells. J Leukoc Biol
87:779–789.
Justicia C, Panés J, Solé S, Cervera A, Deulofeu R, Chamorro A,
Planas AM (2003) Neutrophil inﬁltration increases matrix
metalloproteinase-9 in the ischemic brain after occlusion/
reperfusion of the middle cerebral artery in rats. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 23:1430–1440.
Kleinschnitz C, Schwab N, Kraft P, Hagedorn I, Dreykluft A, Schwarz
T, Austinat M, Nieswandt B, Wiendl H, Stoll G (2010) Early
detrimental T-cell eﬀects in experimental cerebral ischemia are
neither related to adaptive immunity nor thrombus formation.
Blood 115:3835–3842.
Kochanek PM, Hallenbeck JM (1992) Polymorphonuclear leukocytes
and monocytes/macrophages in the pathogenesis of cerebral
ischemia and stroke. Stroke 23:1367–1379.
Kokovay E, Li L, Cunningham LA (2006) Angiogenic recruitment of
pericytes from bone marrow after stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 26:545–555.
Kostulas N, Li HL, Xiao BG, Huang YM, Kostulas V, Link H (2002)
Dendritic cells are present in ischemic brain after permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat. Stroke 33:
1129–1134.

154

J. Lehmann et al. / Neuroscience 279 (2014) 139–154

Kriz J, Lalancette-Hébert M (2009) Inﬂammation, plasticity and realtime imaging after cerebral ischemia. Acta Neuropathol
117:497–509.
Lakhan SE, Kirchgessner A, Hofer M (2009) Inﬂammatory
mechanisms in ischemic stroke: therapeutic approaches. J
Transl Med 7:97.
Lalancette-Hebert M, Gowing G, Simard A, Weng YC, Kriz J (2007)
Selective ablation of proliferating microglial cells exacerbates
ischemic injury in the brain. J Neurosci 27:2596–2605.
Liesz A, Suri-Payer E, Veltkamp C, Doerr H, Sommer C, Rivest S,
Giese T, Veltkamp R (2009) Regulatory T cells are key
cerebroprotective immunomodulators in acute experimental
stroke. Nat Med 15:192–199.
Liesz A, Zhou W, Mracskó É, Karcher S, Bauer H, Schwarting S, Sun
L, Bruder D, Stegemann S, Cerwenka A, Sommer C, Dalpke AH,
Veltkamp R (2011) Inhibition of lymphocyte traﬃcking shields the
brain against deleterious neuroinﬂammation after stroke. Brain
134:704–720.
Liu T, Young PR, McDonnell PC, White RF, Barone FC, Feuerstein
GZ (1993) Cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant
mRNA expressed in cerebral ischemia. Neurosci Lett 164:
125–128.
Losy J, Zaremba J (2001) Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 is
increased in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid of patients with ischemic
stroke. Stroke 32:2695–2696.
Magnus T, Wiendl H, Kleinschnitz C (2012) Immune mechanisms of
stroke. Curr Opin Neurol 25:334–340.
Menzies SA, Hoﬀ JT, Betz AL (1992) Middle cerebral artery occlusion
in rats: a neurological and pathological evaluation of a
reproducible model. Neurosurgery 31:100–106.
Michalski D, Grosche J, Pelz J, Schneider D, Weise C, Bauer U,
Kacza J, Gärtner U, Hobohm C, Härtig W (2010) A novel
quantiﬁcation of blood–brain barrier damage and histochemical
typing after embolic stroke in rats. Brain Res 1359:186–200.
Möller K, Boltze J, Pösel C, Seeger J, Stahl T, Wagner DC (2014)
Sterile inﬂammation after permanent distal MCA occlusion in
hypertensive rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34:307–315.
Price CJ, Menon DK, Peters AM, Ballinger JR, Barber RW, Balan KK,
Lynch A, Xuereb JH, Fryer T, Guadagno JV, Warburton EA
(2004) Cerebral neutrophil recruitment, histology, and outcome in
acute ischemic stroke: an imaging-based study. Stroke
35:1659–1664.
Ren X, Akiyoshi K, Dziennis S, Vandenbark AA, Herson PS, Hurn
PD, Oﬀner H (2011) Regulatory B cells limit CNS inﬂammation
and neurologic deﬁcits in murine experimental stroke. J Neurosci
31:8556–8563.
Rosell A, Cuadrado E, Ortega-Aznar A, Hernández-Guillamon M, Lo
EH, Montaner J (2008) MMP-9-positive neutrophil inﬁltration is
associated to blood–brain barrier breakdown and basal lamina
type IV collagen degradation during hemorrhagic transformation
after human ischemic stroke. Stroke 39:1121–1126.
Sedgwick JD, Schwender S, Imrich H, Dorries R, Butcher GW, ter
Meulen V (1991) Isolation and direct characterization of resident
microglial cells from the normal and inﬂamed central nervous
system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88:7438–7442.
Schilling M, Besselmann M, Leonhard C, Mueller M, Ringelstein EB,
Kiefer R (2003) Microglial activation precedes and predominates
over macrophage inﬁltration in transient focal cerebral ischemia: a
study in green ﬂuorescent protein transgenic bone marrow
chimeric mice. Exp Neurol 183:25–33.
Sheehy MJ, Quintieri FB, Leung DY, Geha RS, Dubey DP, Limmer
CE, Yunis EJ (1983) A human large granular lymphocyte clone

with natural killer-like activity and T cell-like surface markers. J
Immunol 130:524–526.
Shichita T, Sugiyama Y, Ooboshi H, Sugimori H, Nakagawa R,
Takada I, Iwaki T, Okada Y, Iida M, Cua DJ, Iwakura Y,
Yoshimura A (2009) Pivotal role of cerebral interleukin-17producing gamma delta T cells in the delayed phase of
ischemic brain injury. Nat Med 15:946–950.
Smith WB, Guida L, Sun Q, Korpelainen EI, van den Heuvel C, Gillis
D, Hawrylowicz CM, Vadas MA, Lopez AF (1995) Neutrophils
activated by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
express receptors for interleukin-3 which mediate class II
expression. Blood 86:3938–3944.
Stevens SL, Bao J, Hollis J, Lessov NS, Clark WM, Stenzel-Poore
MP (2002) The use of ﬂow cytometry to evaluate temporal
changes in inﬂammatory cells following focal cerebral ischemia in
mice. Brain Res 932:110–119.
Stoll G, Jander S, Schroeter M (1998) Inﬂammation and glial
responses in ischemic brain lesions. Prog Neurobiol 56:149–171.
Strecker JK, Minnerup J, Gess B, Ringelstein EB, Schabitz WR,
Schilling M (2011) Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1-deﬁciency
impairs the expression of IL-6, IL-1beta and G-CSF after transient
focal ischemia in mice. PLoS One 6:e25863.
Tanaka R, Komine-Kobayashi M, Mochizuki H, Yamada M, Furuya T,
Migita M, Shimada T, Mizuno Y, Urabe T (2003) Migration of
enhanced green ﬂuorescent protein expressing bone marrowderived microglia/macrophage into the mouse brain following
permanent focal ischemia. Neuroscience 117:531–539.
Terao Y, Ohta H, Oda A, Nakagaito Y, Kiyota Y, Shintani Y (2009)
Macrophage inﬂammatory protein-3alpha plays a key role in the
inﬂammatory cascade in rat focal cerebral ischemia. Neurosci
Res 64:75–82.
Tomita M, Fukuuchi Y (1996) Leukocytes, macrophages and
secondary brain damage following cerebral ischemia. Acta
Neurochir Suppl 66:32–39.
Walberer M, Rueger MA, Simard ML, Emig B, Jander S, Fink GR,
Schroeter M (2010) Dynamics of neuroinﬂammation in the
macrosphere model of arterio-arterial embolic focal ischemia: an
approximation to human stroke patterns. Exp Transl Stroke Med
2:22.
Wang Q, Tang XN, Yenari MA (2007) The inﬂammatory response in
stroke. J Neuroimmunol 184:53–68.
Weston RM, Jones NM, Jarrott B, Callaway JK (2007) Inﬂammatory
cell inﬁltration after endothelin-1-induced cerebral ischemia:
histochemical and myeloperoxidase correlation with temporal
changes in brain injury. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27:100–114.
Wright HL, Moots RJ, Bucknall RC, Edwards SW (2010) Neutrophil
function in inﬂammation and inﬂammatory diseases.
Rheumatology 49:1618–1631.
Yamagami S, Tamura M, Hayashi M, Endo N, Tanabe H, Katsuura Y,
Komoriya K (1999) Diﬀerential production of MCP-1 and cytokineinduced neutrophil chemoattractant in the ischemic brain after
transient focal ischemia in rats. J Leukoc Biol 65:744–749.
Yilmaz G, Granger DN (2010) Leukocyte recruitment and ischemic
brain injury. Neuromolecular Med 12:193–204.
Young AR, Ali C, Duretête A, Vivien D (2007) Neuroprotection and
stroke: time for a compromise. J Neurochem 103:1302–1309.
Zhang RL, Chopp M, Zhang ZG, Jiang Q, Ewing JR (1997) A rat
model of focal embolic cerebral ischemia. Brain Res 766:83–92.
Zhou W, Liesz A, Bauer H, Sommer C, Lahrmann B, Valous N, Grabe
N, Veltkamp R (2013) Postischemic brain inﬁltration of leukocyte
subpopulations diﬀers among murine permanent and transient
focal cerebral ischemia models. Brain Pathol 23:34–44.

(Accepted 17 August 2014)
(Available online 26 August 2014)

