Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672
DOI 10.1007/s12035-014-8658-0

Mode of Action of S-Methyl-N, N-Diethylthiocarbamate Sulfoxide
(DETC-MeSO) as a Novel Therapy for Stroke in a Rat Model
Payam Mohammad-Gharibani & Jigar Modi &
Janet Menzie & Rafaella Genova & Zhiyuan Ma & Rui Tao &
Howard Prentice & Jang-Yen Wu

Received: 26 November 2013 / Accepted: 5 February 2014 / Published online: 28 February 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract One approach for protecting neurons from excitotoxic
damage in stroke is to attenuate receptor activity with specific
antagonists. S-Methyl-N, N-diethylthiocarbamate sulfoxide
(DETC-MeSO), the active metabolite of disulfiram, has been
shown to be a partial antagonist of glutamate receptors and
effective in reducing seizure. First, we investigated neuroprotective effect of DETC-MeSO on primary cortical neuronal
P. Mohammad-Gharibani : J. Modi : J. Menzie : R. Genova :
Z. Ma : R. Tao : H. Prentice : J.<Y. Wu (*)
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Charles and Schmidt College of
Medicine, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA
e-mail: jwu@fau.edu
P. Mohammad-Gharibani
e-mail: pgharibani@gmail.com
J. Modi
e-mail: jmodi@fau.edu
J. Menzie
e-mail: jmenzie@my.fau.edu
R. Genova
e-mail: rgenova85@me.com
Z. Ma
e-mail: zma@fau.edu
R. Tao
e-mail: rtao@fau.edu
H. Prentice
e-mail: hprentic@fau.edu
R. Tao : H. Prentice : J.<Y. Wu
Program in Integrative Biology, Florida Atlantic University, Boca
Raton, FL 33431, USA

culture under hypoxia/reoxygenation condition in vitro. Then,
DETC-MeSO was administered subcutaneously for 4 and
8 days with the first injection occurring 1 h before or 24 h
after reperfusion in the rat middle cerebral artery occlusion
stroke model. Rats were subjected to the neuroscore test, and
the brain was analyzed for infarct size. Monitoring neurotransmitter release was carried out by microdialysis. Heat shock
proteins, key proteins involved in apoptosis and endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress, were analyzed by immunoblotting.
DETC-MeSO greatly reduced both cell death following
hypoxia/reoxygenation and brain infarct size. It improved
performance on the neuroscore test and attenuated proteolysis
of αII-spectrin. The level of pro-apoptotic proteins declined,
and anti-apoptotic and HSP27 protein expressions were markedly increased. Levels of the ER stress protein markers
p-PERK, p-eIF2α, ATF4, JNK, XBP-1, GADD34, and CHOP
significantly declined after DETC-MeSO administration. Microdialysis data showed that DETC-MeSO increased high
potassium-induced striatal dopamine release indicating that
more neurons were protected and survived under ischemic
insult in the presence of DETC-MeSO. We also showed that
DETC-MeSO can prevent gliosis. DETC-MeSO elicits neuroprotection through the preservation of ER resulting in reduction of apoptosis by increase of anti-apoptotic proteins and
decrease of pro-apoptotic proteins.
Keywords Neuroprotection . Primary cortical neuronal
culture . Stroke . Excitotoxicity . DETC-MeSO .
Endoplasmic reticulum stress

J. Modi : H. Prentice : J.<Y. Wu
Center of Complex Systems and Brain Sciences, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL 33431, USA

Introduction

J.<Y. Wu
China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University,
Taichung 40447, Taiwan

Stroke, a major cause of ischemic cerebrovascular disease,
leads to oxygen and glucose deprivation which in turn induces
excessive release of glutamate and other neurotransmitters.

656

Excessive activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors by glutamate is thought to mediate calcium-dependent
neurotoxicity, the main cause of the death of neurons in
hypoxic–ischemic brain injury [1]. There has been little progress toward the development of treatments to improve its
prognosis. Many glutamate antagonists have been developed,
but these have failed in clinical trials [2]. The outcome of these
clinical trials may not be so surprising since glutamate is a
major excitatory neurotransmitter needed for important normal physiological functions, and hence, total blocking of
glutamate neurotransmission could potentially lead to serious
adverse effects. The dual role of NMDA receptors for normal
and abnormal functioning of the nervous system necessitates
new investigations into possible therapeutic strategies aimed
at ameliorating neurological diseases. A desirable approach
would be development of a new treatment for partial blocking
of glutamate receptors, hence maintaining basal glutamate
neurotransmission. It has been shown that S-methyl-N,Ndiethylthiocarbamate sulfoxide (DETC-MeSO), a metabolite
of disulfiram which has been used for more than five decades
for alcoholism, is a partial glutamate receptor antagonist [1].
In addition, DETC-MeSO also protects primary neuronal
cultures against glutamate-induced toxicity, as well as prevents seizures induced by NMDA or by hyperbaric oxygen,
suggesting that it can cross the blood–brain barrier [2]. The
inhibition of glutamate receptor binding by DETC-MeSO
reached a plateau at maximum inhibition of 55 % at
100 μM, and no further increase of inhibition was observed
even at 1,000 μM suggesting that DETC-MeSO is a partial
glutamate receptor antagonist and is likely to have little adverse effect even at high dose. The maximum plasma concentration of DETC-MeSO was reached within 0.5 h, with halflife of 2 h after administration [3]. It is known that shortly after
ischemic stroke onset, the core of the ischemic brain tissue is
exposed to reduced blood flow that subsequently undergoes
necrotic cell death. This necrotic core is surrounded by a zone
of less severely affected tissue known as the “ischemic penumbra” which remains metabolically active [4]. Apoptosis in
the penumbra appears to proceed over a long duration after
stroke; therefore, there is opportunity to recover after the onset
of stroke [4]. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is an important
subcellular organelle that is responsible for intracellular calcium homeostasis, protein secretion, and lipid biosynthesis [5].
ER stress plays a crucial role in ischemia-induced cell dysfunction [6]. Ischemia triggers the accumulation of unfolded
proteins in the ER, leading to the unfolded protein response
(UPR) [6]. Pathways that are initiated in response to the UPR
include activation of PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK), transcription factor 6 (ATF6), and inositol requiring
enzyme 1 (IRE1), which in turn activate distinct signaling
cascades mediating the ER stress response [6]. In ER dysfunction, glucose-regulated protein (GRP)78 dissociates from
PERK, ATF6, and IRE1, inducing the dimerization and

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

phosphorylation of PERK and IRE1 and cleavage of ATF6.
Finally, these components cause more apoptosis through the
action of the CHOP protein [7]. In this study, we firstly proved
that DETC-MeSO can protect primary cortical neuronal cultures in hypoxic/reoxygenation condition. Then we showed
that in the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) stroke
model, DETC-MeSO can exert a protective function against
ischemia-induced neuronal injury as reflected in the reduced
infarct volume presumably through decreased calcium influx
through activated NMDA receptor resulting in reduced
excitotoxicity, apoptosis, and ER stress and improved neurological behavior of rats.

Materials and Methods
Animal Preparation
All animal procedures were carried out in accordance with the
guidelines for care and use of Animals and were approved by
the institutional animal care and use committee of the Florida
Atlantic University, Boca Raton.
In Vitro Study
Primary Neuronal Cell Culture
Pregnant rats were sacrificed after isoflurane exposure, and
embryos at 16–18 days were removed. Brains were isolated
from the fetuses and placed in Basal Medium Eagle (SigmaAldrich) supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 26.8 mM glucose, and 20 % heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gibco).
This medium is referred to as growth media eagle (GME). The
cortices were then dissociated by passing the tissue through a
14-G cannula. Cells were centrifuged at 300×g/min for 5 min
at room temperature. The resulting pellet was resuspended in
GME and plated on appropriate tissue culture plates precoated with 5 m g/ml of poly-D-lysine (Millipore). Cells were
maintained for 1 h in a humidified incubator (37 °C, 99 %
humidity, and 5 % CO2). Incubation medium was replaced
with serum-free neurobasal medium supplemented glutamine,
and the cells were then maintained in an incubator for 12–
18 days until they were ready for handling [7].
Hypoxia and Reoxygenation
To generate hypoxic conditions, 14-day-cultured neurons in
96-well plates were placed in a hypoxia chamber with oxygen
levels maintained at 0.3–0.4 %. The level of oxygen was
continuously monitored using an oxygen electrode. Primary
cortical neuronal cultures in the absence or presence of 25 μM
DETC-MeSO (Toronto Research Company) [2] were subjected to 20 h of hypoxia. Reoxygenation was performed by

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

removing cultured plates from the hypoxic chamber and
transferring them into normal culture incubator remaining
for another 20 h.

657

[8], rats with body core temperature more than 39 °C, 24 h
after reperfusion were excluded from the experiment.
Rat Groups and Treatment Schedules

ATP Assay
Primary cortical neuronal cells in 96-well plates were treated
with or without DETC-MeSO (25 μM) for 1 h, and then cells
were subjected to hypoxia–reoxygenation conditions for 20 h
to induce cell death. ATP solution (Promega) was added to
each well, and cells were incubated for 10 min after which the
amount of ATP was quantified through a luciferase reaction.
The luminescence intensity was determined using a
luminometer with lysates in a standard opaque-walled multiwell plate. The ATP content was determined by running an
internal standard and expressed as a percentage of untreated
cells (control).
In Vivo Study
Animal Preparation
Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats (weighing 260–300 g, Harlem Chicago, IL, USA) were weighed and anesthetized by
intra-peritoneal (IP) injection with ketamine hydrochloride
(80 mg/kg body weight; Putney) and xylazine hydrochloride
(20 mg/kg body weight; Vedco) [7]. During the experiment,
core temperature was maintained at 37 °C by a thermostatically controlled heating pad regulated via a rectal temperature
probe (CMA 450). Local cerebral blood flow (LCBF) was
monitored in the cerebral cortex of left hemisphere in the
supply territory of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) by laser
Doppler flowmeter (LDF) (Perimed Inc., Cleveland, OH,
USA).
Transient Focal Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
Transient focal brain ischemia was induced by the
intraluminal suture occlusion technique as previously described [7]. Briefly, the left common carotid artery and the
left external carotid artery were exposed through a midline
neck incision. A 4–0 monofilament nylon suture coated with
silicon (Doccol Co., Albuquerque, NM, USA) was inserted
through an arteriectomy in the external carotid artery, gently
advanced into the internal carotid artery, and positioned approximately 17 mm from the carotid bifurcation. With the use
of this technique, the tip of the suture occludes the origins of
the MCA, the proximal anterior cerebral artery, and the posterior communicating artery. A reduction in LCBF is detected
when the filament is appropriately inserted. Rats were excluded from the study if they did not show a LCBF reduction of at
least 70 %. Reperfusion was accomplished by withdrawing
the filament 2 h after MCAO [7]. According to Fuhai Li et al

Animals were randomly assigned for sham, control, and experimental groups. Thereafter, in experimental group (DETCMeSO-treated group), DETC-MeSO (5.6 mg/kg in 0.3 mL
saline 0.09 %) [2] was injected subcutaneously 1 h before
reperfusion (groups A and B) or 24 h after reperfusion (groups
C and D). In groups A and C (n=20 and 11, respectively), rats
were received DETC-MeSO for 4 days before sacrifice. Nine
rats in group A were assigned for microdialysis. In groups B
and D (n=22), rats were received DETC-MeSO for 8 days
before sacrifice. In control groups (vehicle-treated
group, n = 53), vehicle (0.3 ml saline 0.09 %) was
injected subcutaneously 1 h before reperfusion (n=22) or
24 h after reperfusion (n=22) for 4 or 8 days. Nine rats were
assigned for microdialysis experiment. All injections were
done by an investigator who was blinded for group assignment. Sham-operated group (n=5) received the same surgical
procedure without insertion of the silicon filament. After
surgery, animals were allowed to recover from the anesthesia
and given food and water ad libitum. The animals were daily
examined for body temperature and weight, and those who
had body temperature more than 39 °C after 24 h were
excluded from the experiment [8].
Neurological Scores
The neuroscore was assessed with small modification [7, 9].
This six-point neuroscore is a rating scale between 0 to 5 as
follows: 0 = indicating no spontaneous movement, 1 = circling spontaneously toward the paretic side, 2 = circling
toward the paretic side if pulled by tail, 3 = with severe
consistently reduced resistance to lateral push toward the
paretic side, 4 = with consistent flexion of the forelimb contralateral to the injured hemisphere, and 5 = with both forelimbs extended toward the floor. This score has been shown to
be correlated with infarct volume in a variety of previous
studies [9].
Determination of Infarct Volume
Animals were deeply anesthetized by isoflurane (Phoenix)
and decapitated, and then brains were rapidly removed. Using
an adult rat brain slicer (Matrix, Zivic Instruments), brains
were sectioned coronally into six 2-mm coronal slices (2, 4, 6,
8, 10, and 12 mm from the frontal pole) and incubated for
5 min in a 2 % (w/v) solution of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride (TTC; J.T. Baker, India) at 37 °C for staining followed by collecting samples for western blot [10]. We assessed
lesion volume as described previously [7]. After the TTC

658

experiment, while the sections were on ice, the ischemic part
of the left hemisphere (core and penumbra, as shown in
Fig. 6d) were quickly dissected and snap frozen [7].
Western Blot Analysis
Rat brain samples (core and penumbra) were lysed in RIPA
buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40,
1 % sodium deoxycholate, 0.1 % SDS) (Thermo Scientific,
Rockford, IL, USA) containing 1 % (v/v) mammalian protease
inhibitor cocktail and 2 % (v/v) phosphatase inhibitor cocktail
from Sigma and Thermo Scientific, respectively. Western blot
was done as described previously [11] with the following
primary antibodies overnight: abcam: GRP78, glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP), HSP70, HSP27, αII-spectrin, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), ATPB and p-IRE1
(1:2,000), BAD, Ask1 and X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP-1)
(1:500); Cell Signaling: GAPDH (1:3,000), Bax, BCL-2
(1:1,000), cleaved caspase-3, AKT, phosphorylated AKT (pAKT), eIF2α, p-eIF2α, cytochrome-c (Cyt-c), Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK), p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(p38MAPK) (1:500); Santa Cruz: CHOP/GADD153,
GADD34, Bak (1:500), β-actin (1:3,000), Perk and p-Perk
(1:1,000); Ann Arbor: Bim (1:1,000); Imgenex: ATF6
(1:1,500); Sigma: m-Calpain (1:2,000); a GAD65 antibody
(Jang-Yen Wu) [12] was employed at 1:1,000 dilution. Membranes were then incubated with ECL horseradish peroxidaseconjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG (1:3,000; GE
Healthcare, UK) for 90 min in room temperature. GAPDH
and β-actin were used as internal loading controls for whole
cell lysate samples, while for fractionation samples, we used
ATPB for mitochondrial lysate and β-actin for nuclear lysate.
For cell subfractionation, we followed Solaroglu et al. [13].
Quantitative western blot results were obtained by densitometric analysis using image processing and analysis in Java
(Image J). Sham-operated core and penumbra samples served
as baseline for left (impaired) hemisphere samples.

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

MCAO (subchronic effect). Specifically, 1 day before
MCAO, a hollow probe was inserted through the cannula into
the striatal regions. The coordinates for the tip of the probe
were 0.5 mm anterior to bregma, 3.0 mm lateral to the midline,
and 7.0 mm below the skull. After probe insertion, rats were
placed in a chamber attached to a fluid swivel that allowed
animals to move freely (Raturn® system; Bioanalytical System Inc., West Lafayette, IN, USA). The dialysis probes were
perfused overnight with Ringer’s buffer at a rate of 1.0 μl/min
(140 mM NaCl, 3.0 mM KCl, 1.5 mM CaCl2, 1.0 mM MgCl2,
0.25 mM NaH2PO4, 1.0 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.4). The next
day, after four baseline samples, animals were subjected to
120-min MCAO. Experimental groups received DETC-MSO
while control groups received saline 0.9 % 1 h before the
reperfusion. Dialysis samples were collected at a 30-min
interval before, during, and after MCAO (6 h) and analyzed
by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)–electrochemical detection (HTEC-500; Eicom, Kyoto, Japan). Separation of DA was achieved on a 150×1-mm i.d. column
packed with a TSK gel ODS-80 TM, 5 μm particle size. The
potential on the graphite working electrode was set at +
500 mV (relative to the Ag/AgCl reference electrode). The
mobile phase was made of 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.0),
1 % methanol, 500 mg/L sodium-1-octanesulfonate, and
50 mg/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid and pumped at a rate
of 0.5 ml/min. To determine the subchronic effect of DETCMSO, separate groups were examined with microdialysis
4 days after an MCAO. A hollow probe was inserted into
the striatal region on day 3. The microdialysis area was locally
infused with the Ringer’s buffer overnight as described earlier.
On day 4, samples were collected at intervals of 30 min. After
four baseline samples, the Ringer’s buffer was switched to a
high potassium solution (41.5 mM NaCl, 100 mM KCl,
1.5 mM CaCl 2 , 1.0 mM MgCl 2 , 0.25 mM NaH 2 PO 4 ,
1.0 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.4.) for 120 min. There was then
another infusion with Ringer’s buffer for more 2 h. DA
analysis using HPLC was the same as described above (for
more details, see Fig. 9c).

Neurochemical Studies
Data Expression and Statistical Analysis
For those animals subjected to microdialysis for measuring
dopamine (DA) release, guide cannulae were pre-implanted at
least 1 week before microdialysis and MCAO. Briefly, rats
were anesthetized as described before and then placed on a
stereotaxic frame (Stoelting Co., Wood Dale, IL, USA). The
skull was surgically exposed for implantation of a sterile 22gauge guide cannula to the striatal region (coordinates:
0.5 mm anterior to bregma, 3.0 mm lateral to the midline,
and 2.0 mm ventral to the skull). The guide cannulae were
then secured into place with acrylic dental cement and skull
screws. The neuroprotective effect of DETC-MeSO on changes in extracellular DA was examined with microdialysis either
on the day of an MCAO (acute effect) or 4 days after an

All data were expressed as the mean±SEM. The statistical
significance of the data was determined with t test or one-way
ANOVA combined with Dunnett post hoc or Tukey test for
comparison between groups.

Results
Surgery Results
There was a low mortality rate following 2 h MCAO after 4
and 8 days in our experiment 7 and 9 %, respectively. All

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

animals with a dropdown of LCBF signal more than 70 %
were included in this study. The LCBF signals were 25.3±
7.4 % of control values (before insertion of the filament)
following occlusion of the MCA and recovered to 88.1±
10.4 % during reperfusion; 18.4 % of the rats showed body
temperature more than 39 °C after 24 h which were excluded
from the experiment.
DETC-MeSO Treatment Attenuates Cell Death, Infarction
Volume, and Neurological Deficits
In our study, we first tested the effect of DETC-MeSO on the
primary neuronal culture in hypoxia/reoxygenation condition.
Our data showed that 25 μM DETC-MeSO can attenuate cell
death in hypoxia/reoxygenation. After hypoxia and reoxygenation, viability of neurons without DETC-MeSO treatment
dropped to approximately 47 % of control. DETC-MeSO
treatment dramatically increased the cell viability to almost
70 % of the control level (Fig. 1). In our in vivo study, in
addition to assessment of the overall improvement in reducing
the brain infarct size, we also analyzed the infarct size at 2, 4,
6, 8, 10, and 12 mm from the frontal pole to determine the
effect of ischemia and DETC-MeSO at different brain sections
as shown in Fig. 2. TTC staining in rats subjected to MCAO in
the vehicle-treated group versus DETC-MeSO-treated groups
is shown in Fig. 2b–e. The infarct is noticeably reduced in the
rats treated with DETC-MeSO. Figure 2d represents mean
infarct volumes resulting from 120 min of transient MCAO
in groups A and C. DETC-MeSO markedly reduced the
volume of the lesion of the sections 2, 4, 6, and 8 mm when
DETC MeSO was injected 1 h before reperfusion (group A),
while this reduction was seen only in the section at 6 mm in
the group which received DETC-MeSO 24 h after reperfusion
(group C). Figure 2e shows mean infarct volumes resulting
from 120 min of transient MCAO in groups B and D. DETCMeSO markedly reduced the volume of the lesion of the

Fig. 1 Neuroprotective effects of DETC-MeSO on neuronal culture
under hypoxia/reoxygenation condition. Neuronal cell culture was exposed to 0.3 % oxygen for 20 h followed by reoxygenation for 20 h. In
DETC + hypoxia, cells were pre-incubated with DETC-MeSO (25 μM)
for 1 h before hypoxia. Cell viability was measured by ATP assay.
Normoxia values were fixed at 100 % (n=5, *significant with hypoxia
group, p<0.05). DETC DETC-MeSO

659

sections at 4, 6, and 8 mm when injection occurred 1 h before
reperfusion (group B), whereas this reduction was seen only in
the section 6 mm in the group which received DETC-MeSO
24 h after reperfusion (group D). The sham-operated group
showed no ischemic injury as determined by TTC staining. In
the data shown in Fig. 3 for neuroscore test, the sham-operated
animals showed no deficit in performance and were excluded
from statistical analysis. Rats were tested before surgery for
absence of performance deficit. Subsequently, they were tested every day in groups as described in “Materials and
Methods” section. Animals that received DETC-MeSO 1 h
before reperfusion showed a significant decrease in neurological deficits 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 days after reperfusion compared to
vehicle-treated group. Animals that received DETC-MeSO
24 h after reperfusion showed a significant decrease in neurological deficits 6, 7, and 8 days after reperfusion compared to
vehicle-treated group. Also animals that received DETCMeSO 1 h before reperfusion showed a significant decrease
in neurological deficits 4, 5, and 7 days after reperfusion
compared to animals that received DETC-MeSO 24 h after
reperfusion. Greater improvement in group A which had received DETC-MeSO 1 h before reperfusion for 4 days motivated us to continue molecular experiments on this specific
group.
DETC-MeSO Treatment Attenuates Proteolysis
of αII-Spectrin in the Ipsilateral Hemisphere by m-Calpain
and Caspase-3 After MCAO Injury
Following MCAO, significant accumulation of m-calpain was
seen in both DETC-MeSO-treated and vehicle-treated groups
in comparison to the sham-operated group. Our results did not
show any changes in m-calpain regulation in the DETCMeSO-treated group, and for this reason, we decided to test
the m-calpain substrate, αII-spectrin. In the ipsilateral core
and penumbra (left hemisphere), MCAO caused a significant
accumulation of the non-specific 150-kDa band (generated by
calcium activated m-calpain and/or caspase-3) and of the mcalpain-specific 145-kDa band as compared with shamoperated group (Fig. 4). Levels of the 150/145-kDa bands in
the vehicle-treated group were significantly higher than in the
sham-operated group (198.6±29.1 and 181±21.3 % in the
core and penumbra, respectively). However, in the DETCMeSO-treated group, levels of the 150/145-kDa bands were
significantly lower than in the vehicle-treated group (9.5±1.8
and 7.6±1.1 % in the core and penumbra, respectively). On
the other hand, MCAO injury resulted in a significant increase
in the 120-kDa band above the levels of the sham-operated
group. Levels of the caspase-3-specific 120-kDa fragment
were 35.2±6.4 and 32±8.3 % in the core and penumbra of
vehicle-treated group. Our data showed that the level of the
120-kDa band in the penumbra, but not the core of DETCMeSO-treated group significantly decreased in comparison to

660

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Fig. 2

Morphological analysis of effect of DETC-MeSO on ischemiainduced brain injury in MCAO stroke model. a The left panel shows the
whole brain infarct size in vehicle-treated group with asterisks versus
DETC-MeSO-treated group (right panel) 1 h before reperfusion after
4 days. b The TTC results of the whole brain infarct size of the vehicletreated group and DETC-MeSO-treated group at 4 and 8 days after
reperfusion. c The TTC brain slices in 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12 mm from
the frontal pole of the vehicle-treated group and DETC-MeSO-treated
group at 4 days after reperfusion in pre-treatment and post-treatment
groups. 1 Vehicle-treated group, 2 DETC-MeSO-treated group 1 h
before reperfusion, 3 DETC-MeSO-treated group 24 h after reperfusion.
d The TTC results of the infarct size of the brain slices of the vehicletreated group and DETC-MeSO-treated group at 4 days after reperfusion.
e The same as d except that the animals were analyzed 8 days after
reperfusion. Quantitative analysis revealed that both treated groups after 4
and 8 days produced a significant reduction in the infarction percent.
Sham-operated group showed no infarct zone (n=11, *significant with
vehicle-treated group, †significant with DETC-MeSO 1 h before
reperfusion-treated group, p<0.05). DM DETC-MeSO

DETC-MeSO Can Decrease Apoptosis by Down-regulation
of Apoptotic Markers
The Bcl-2 protein is known to promote cell survival by
inhibiting mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP)
opening, while Bax, BAD, and/or Bak, all proapoptotic proteins, can translocate from the cytosol into the outer mitochondrial membrane after brain ischemia to elicit MPTP opening
and Cyt-c release. Cyt-c activates caspase-3, which is believed
to be at the final stage of apoptosis [4]. Our results demonstrate
that DETC-MeSO can down-regulate proapoptotic proteins
Bak in the penumbra and Bax and BAD in both core and
penumbra in the whole cell lysate (Fig. 5a, f, g). On the other

the vehicle-treated group (32.7 ± 7.6 and 12.1 ± 3.4 %,
respectively).

Fig. 3 Neuroscore test recovery was seen in both DETC-MeSO-treated
animal groups. The significant recovery was seen by DETC-MeSO
administered 1 h before reperfusion from day 4 until day 8 or by
DETC-MeSO administered 24 h after reperfusion on days 6, 7, and 8.
All sham-operated animals showed no deficit (score 5, data not shown)
(n=11, *significant with vehicle-treated group, †significant with
DETC-MeSO 24 h after reperfusion-treated group). DM DETC-MeSO

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Fig. 4 Activation of m-calpain was measured by cleavage of αIIspectrin. Full-length αII-spectrin (280 kDa) is vulnerable to calcium
activated m-calpain and caspase-mediated cleavage, generating fragments 150/145 and 120 kDa. The low profile of 145/150-kDa band was
seen in the core and penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated groups (1 h
before reperfusion) after 4 days (3 versus 6). On the other hand, caspase
cleavage (120-kDa band) was decreased significantly in penumbra of
DET-MeSO-treated group (5) in comparison to vehicle-treated one (6). 1
core of sham-operated group for 4 days, 2 core of vehicle-treated group
for 4 days, 3 core of DETC-MeSO 1 h before reperfusion-treated group
for 4 days, 4 penumbra of sham-operated group for 4 days, 5 penumbra of
vehicle-treated group for 4 days, 6 penumbra of DETC-MeSO 1 h before
reperfusion-treated group for 4 days. Sham-operated core and penumbra
samples served as baseline for left hemisphere samples (n=5, *significant
with vehicle-treated group, p<0.05)

hand, measurement of anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2 showed an
increase in the ratio of BCL-2/Bax in the core and the penumbra
of the DETC-MeSO-treated versus vehicle-treated group
(Fig. 5a). These data were confirmed by measuring BCL-2 in
a cytoplasmic and mitochondrial cell fractionation protein analysis (Fig. 5b, c). BCL-2 was up-regulated in both the core and
penumbra of mitochondrial and cytoplasmic fractions in the
DETC-MeSO-treated group by comparison to the vehicletreated group. Up-regulation of BCL-2 could decrease the
release of Cyt-c from the mitochondria (Fig. 5e) into the cytoplasm (Fig. 5d) in the core and the penumbra of the DETCMeSO-treated group which in turn decreased cleaved caspase-3
in the core and the penumbra by 3- and 2-fold, respectively, in
comparison to the vehicle-treated group (Fig. 5h).
DETC-MeSO Can Modulate Unfolded Protein Response
and Expression of Heat Shock Proteins and AKT
Our data showed that after MCAO, in both the core and the
penumbra of the DETC-MeSO- and vehicle-treated group,

661

GRP78 dramatically increased after 4 days. GRPs are commonly used as an indicator for the UPR. As we can see in Fig. 6a, b,
in both the core and the penumbra of the mitochondrial fraction
and in the nuclear protein fraction specifically of the penumbra,
DETC-MeSO could increase the expression of GRP78 in comparison to the vehicle-treated group. By contrast, whole cell
lysate did not demonstrate any changes of GRP78 expression
after treatment with DETC-MeSO. On the other hand, HSP70
was unchanged in the core and the penumbra of both DETCMeSO- and vehicle-treated group (data not shown) whereas
HSP27 showed greater over-expression in the core and the
penumbra. DETC-MeSO resulted in increased expression of HSP27 in both the core and the penumbra of
DETC-MeSO-treated groups versus vehicle-treated
groups (Fig. 6c). AKT, also known as protein kinase
B (PKB; is a serine/threonine-specific protein kinase)
plays a key role in controlling survival and apoptosis.
In our experiments, p-AKT (is the activated form of AKT)
showed a dramatic up-regulation in the penumbra of the
DETC-MeSO-treated group in comparison to the vehicletreated group (Fig. 7h), whereas AKT expression showed no
changes when DETC-MeSO was used (data not shown).
The Endoplasmic Reticulum PERK Pathway Inhibited
by DETC-MeSO
PERK, ATF6, and IRE1 are the three major ER stress-induced
signaling pathways. As we show in our result in the MCAO
stroke model (both in DETC-MeSO and vehicle-treated
groups), GRP78 increased in the core and the penumbra.
Therefore, we tested all three signaling pathways involved in
the protection. Treatment with DETC-MeSO had no effect on
the level of cleaved ATF6 in both the core and the penumbra of
the infarct of MCAO rats (data not shown). Then we tested the
effect of DETC-MeSO on the PERK pathway in the brain of
rats subjected to MCAO occlusion. p-PERK, p-eIF2α, and
ATF4 are highly expressed after MCAO and increased significantly by comparison to the sham-operated group. After treatment with DETC-MeSO, the levels of p-PERK, p-eIF2α, and
ATF4 in the core and the penumbra of the DETC-MeSOtreated group dramatically declined in comparison to the
vehicle-treated group (Fig. 7a–c), indicating that DETCMeSO inhibits the PERK pathway. To determine whether
DETC-MeSO can affect the IRE1 pathway, we tested the
expression of p-IRE1 (activated form of IRE-1). The results
showed that phosphorylated IRE1 is highly expressed in the
core and the penumbra of the infarct in the MCAO rat brain in
comparison to the sham-operated group, but DETC-MeSO had
no effects on the expression of p-IRE1 in the core and the
penumbra of the infarct of MCAO rats (data not shown).
Activated IRE-1 binds TNF receptor-associated factor 2
(TRAF2), activating apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
(ASK1) and downstream kinases that activate p38MAPK and

662

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Fig. 5

Effect of DETC-MeSO on expression of apoptotic markers in
MCAO stroke model. a Bax (23 kDa) and Bcl-2 (26 kDa) expression in
the core and penumbra of MCAO brain were analyzed by western blot.
The graph shows the ratio of Bcl-2 to Bax in the core and penumbra of
MCAO brain in DETC-MeSO-treated group and vehicle-treated group.
b–e Effect of DETC-MeSO on cytoplasmic and mitochondrial BCL-2
and released Cyt-c (12 kDa). b, c These graphs show the up-regulation of
cytoplasmic and mitochondrial anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 in the core and
penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated group in comparison to vehicletreated group. d, e These graphs show the release of Cyt-c from
mitochondria into the cytoplasm. Our data showed that in the DETCMeSO-treated group, accumulation of Cyt-c in mitochondrial fraction
increased in comparison to vehicle-treated group; in contrast, in
cytoplasmic fraction it was decreased. f, g The graph shows the downregulation of the proapoptotic proteins Bak (28 kDa) in the penumbra and
BAD (19 kDa) in the core and penumbra of MCAO brain in DETCMeSO-treated group versus vehicle-treated group. h Cleaved caspase-3
(17/19 kDa) expression in the core and penumbra of MCAO brain
analyzed by western blot showing a dramatic decrease in DETCMeSO-treated group in comparison to vehicle-treated group. DM
DETC-MeSO (5.6 mg/kg, 1 h before reperfusion for 4 days) was
injected 1 h before reperfusion subcutaneously and injection continued
for 4 days. Sham-operated core and penumbra samples served as baseline
for left hemisphere samples (not shown). GAPDH 37 kDa, ATPB 52 kDa
(n=5, *significant with vehicle-treated group, p<0.05)

JNK. Use of DETC-MeSO showed no changes in the expression of ASK1 in the DETC-MeSO-treated group by comparison to the vehicle-treated group. ASK1 can activate both the
ASK1-JNK-BIM and ASK1-p38MAPK-CHOP pathways. Although our data showed no changes in the expression of
p38MAPK in the core and the penumbra of the DETCMeSO-treated group, a significant decrease was, however, seen
in the expression level of JNK in the penumbra of the DETCMeSO-treated group by comparison to the vehicle-treated
group. The intrinsic ribonuclease activity of IRE-1 also results
in production of XBP-1, a transcription factor that induces
expression of genes involved in restoring protein folding or
degrading unfolded proteins. Interestingly, although no changes
were seen in p-IRE-1after administering DETC-MeSO, XBP-1
was significantly decreased in both the core and the penumbra
of the treated group (Fig. 7d).
Fig. 6 Effect of DETC-MeSO on expression of UPR (GRP78) and
chaperons (HSP 27) protein in MCAO stroke model. a, b GRP78
expression in the core and penumbra of MCAO brain analyzed by
western blot. In the graph A (mitochondrial protein fractionation) and
graph B (nuclear protein fractionation), GRP78 (78 kDa) expression
markedly increased in the core and the penumbra of mitochondrial and
in the penumbra of nuclear fraction between DETC-MeSO and vehicletreated group. c This graph shows that using DETC-MeSO could increase
the expression of HSP27 (27 kDa) in both the core and the penumbra of
DETC-MeSO-treated group versus vehicle-treated group. d This
micrograph shows how to sample from TTC incubated slice for western
blot. DM DETC-MeSO (5.6 mg/kg, 1 h before reperfusion for 4 days)
was injected 1 h before reperfusion subcutaneously and injection
continued for 4 days. Sham-operated core and penumbra samples
served as baseline for left hemisphere samples (not shown). GAPDH
37 kDa, ATPB 52 kDa, β-actin 42 kDa (n=5, *significant with vehicletreated group, p<0.05)

663

664

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Fig. 7

Effect of DETC-MeSO on expression of ER stress pathways and
p-AKT. a–c p-Perk (125 kDa), p-eIF2α (38 kDa), and ATF4 (38 kDa)
expression analyzed by western blot in the core and the penumbra of
MCAO. DETC-MeSO significantly decreased the levels of P-PERK, peIF2α, and ATF4 in the core and the penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated
group in comparison to the vehicle-treated group, indicating that DETCMeSO inhibits the PERK pathway. d–f XBP-1 (29 kDa),
CHOP/GADD153 (30 kDa), and BIM (19 kDa) expression analyzed by
western blot in the core and the penumbra of MCAO. DETC-MeSO
significantly decreased the levels of XBP-1, CHOP/GADD153, and
BIM in the core and the penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated group in
comparison to the vehicle-treated group, indicating that DETC-MeSO
inhibits the IRE-1 pathway through the JNK-BIM and XBP-1-CHOP. g
GADD34 (73 kDa) expression analyzed by western blot in the core and
the penumbra of MCAO. DETC-MeSO significantly decreased the levels
of GADD34 expression in the penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated group
in comparison to the vehicle-treated group. h This figure shows p-AKT
(60 kDa) up-regulation in the penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated group in
comparison to vehicle-treated group. DM DETC-MeSO (5.6 mg/kg, 1 h
before reperfusion for 4 days) was injected 1 h before reperfusion
subcutaneously and injection continued for 4 days. Sham-operated core
and penumbra samples served as baseline for left hemisphere samples
(not shown). GAPDH 37 kDa, β-actin 42 kDa (n=5, *significant with
vehicle-treated group, p<0.05)

665

Our data showed that GFAP was increased significantly in
the core and the penumbra of MCAO rats by comparison to
sham-operated group (Fig. 8a). Using DETC-MeSO significantly decreased GFAP expression in the penumbra of DETCMeSO-treated group in comparison to the vehicle-treated
group. This could also be further confirmed by analyzing
GABAergic and dopaminergic cells. As we see in Fig. 8b,
loss of GAD65 (GABA synthetic enzyme)-positive cells in
the DETC-MeSO-treated group is significantly less than in the
vehicle-treated group, indicating that DETC-MeSO can protect GABAergic cells from cell death. The extracellular concentrations of DA in the rat striatum before, during, and after
occlusion are reported in Fig. 9a. The figure shows the time

The Effect of DETC-MeSO on Apoptosis Induced by ER
Stress
ATF4, XBP1, and ATF6 all converge on the promoter of the
gene encoding the protein CHOP, which regulates transcription of the mRNAs encoding BIM and BCL-2. p38MAPK
plays an important role in stimulating CHOP activity. JNK
activates BIM, but inhibits BCL-2. We measured the expression of CHOP by western blot analysis in the core and the
penumbra of MCAO stroke model. As shown in Fig. 7e, f, the
expression of CHOP and BIM was up-regulated in both the
core and the penumbra of the MCAO model by comparison to
the sham-operated group. Western blot analyses showed that
DETC-MeSO can significantly decrease the levels of CHOP
and BIM both in the core and the penumbra of the DETCMeSO-treated group. The growth arrest and DNA damageinducible protein GADD34 is a member of the protein family
whose expression is up-regulated by growth arrest and by
DNA damage. GADD34 is directly activated by CHOP. We
showed that DETC-MeSO can significantly reduce the expression of GADD34 in the penumbra of DETC-MeSOtreated group, demonstrating that DETC-MeSO has the ability
to inhibit the apoptosis induced by ER stress in MCAO stroke
model (Fig. 7g).
DETC-MeSO Can Attenuate GFAP, GAD65 Expression,
and Dopamine Outflow in MCAO
Resting glia are activated following MCAO, generating a
well-characterized and stereotypic cellular response known
as gliosis [14]. To evaluate the effect of DETC-MeSO on
gliosis after MCAO, we analyzed GFAP by western blot.

Fig. 8 Protective effect of DETC-MeSO on glia, GABA neurons. a
Expression of GFAP (55 kDa), a marker of glia, in the core and penumbra
of MCAO brain analyzed by western blot. DETC-MeSO significantly
decreased GFAP expression in the penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated
group in comparison to vehicle-treated one. b Expression of GAD65
(65 kDa), a marker of GABA neurons, in the core and penumbra of
MCAO brain analyzed by western blot. Loss of GAD65-positive cells in
DETC-MeSO-treated group is significantly lower than vehicle-treated
group, indicating that DETC-MeSO can protect GABAergic cells from
cell death. DM DETC-MeSO (5.6 mg/kg, 1 h before reperfusion for
4 days) was injected 1 h before reperfusion subcutaneously and injection
continued for 4 days. Sham-operated core and penumbra samples served
as baseline for left hemisphere samples (not shown). GAPDH 37 kDa (n=
5, *significant with vehicle-treated group, p<0.05)

666

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

Fig. 9 Protective effect of DETC-MeSO on dopamine neurons in
MCAO stroke model. a, b Neuroprotective effect of DETC-MeSO on
striatal dopamine (DA) neurons as measured by high potassium-induced
DA release. In rats with MCAO but no DETC-MeSO treatment, infusion
of high potassium caused only a small increase in striatal DA (b). In
contrast, the increase in striatal DA was significantly greater in rats

pretreated with DETC-MeSO indicating a neuroprotective function of
DETC-MeSO on DA neurons. c DA sampling for analysis using HPLC.
Sampling was done four times in each step, baseline, MCAO, and
reperfusion (n=9, *p<0.05, **p<0.01 significant with the vehicle-treated
group)

course, during a 6-h collection period of DA outflow in the
MCAO hemisphere of DETC-MeSO-treated and vehicletreated groups. In the sham-operated rats, the extracellular
levels of DA remained stable over the 6-h collection period.
During the 2 h before MCAO (baseline), DA release was
stable and considered as the base line for the rest of the
experiment. Two-hour MCAO led to a significant increase in
DA in the MCAO group versus sham-operated group. DA
reached a maximum increase during the first hour after
MCAO and continued up to 30 min after reperfusion in both
DETC-MeSO-treated and vehicle-treated groups. The

maximum increase was about 10,000-fold at 30 min after
occlusion in both DETC-MeSO and vehicle-treated groups
and then began to decrease but remained at a sustained level
until 180 min. After 90 min of MCAO, a significant increase
was seen between the DETC-MeSO-treated and vehicletreated group, indicating that DETC-MeSO can sustain DA
release 90 min after MCAO presumably due to neuroprotective function of DETC-MeSO resulting in less neuronal death
of DA neurons. Figure 9b shows the mean percent outflow of
DA 4 days after MCAO in a 6-h collection period. During 2 h
before infusion of high potassium, DA outflow was stable and

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

considered as a base line of the rest of the experiment. Our
result showed that in vehicle-treated rats, infusion of high
potassium caused only a small increase in striatal DA, while
the increase in striatal DA was significantly greater in rats
pretreated with DETC-MeSO. These results strongly indicate
that DETC-MeSO could protect DA neurons from ischemiainduced neuronal injury and hence could response to neuronal
stimulation such as stimulation with high concentration of
potassium ion.

Discussion
It is generally believed that excitotoxicity caused by excessive
release of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate plays an
important role in ischemia/reperfusion-induced neuronal
death [2]. Despite extensive research to develop medicines
for stroke based on the known mechanisms either as glutamate
receptor antagonists, Ca2+ channel blockers, enzyme inhibitors, inhibitors of apoptotic pathways, or ROS scavengers,
etc., these efforts have been disappointing [15]. In the present
study, the neuroprotective effects of DETC-MeSO in an
in vitro model of hypoxia/reoxygenated primary neuronal
culture and in vivo model of MCAO stroke in rat were
examined. First, we examined the neuroprotective effect of
DETC-MeSO on the cell viability of primary neuronal culture
under hypoxia/reoxygenation condition. DETC-MeSO
showed a significant increase in cell viability following hypoxic insult in primary neuronal culture. These data led us to
continue our experiment on in vivo model of MCAO stroke in
rat. In our in vivo study, surgery results showed a low mortality rate after 4 and 8 days following 2-h MCAO than previous
reports [16, 17]. Meanwhile, in our study, 18.4 % of the rats
showed body temperature more than 39 °C after 24 h. This
happens due to hypothalamic damage after 2-h MCAO as Li
et al [8] reported previously, and these rats were excluded
from our experiment. On the other hand, our data presented
neuroprotective evidence that DETC-MeSO could protect
against excitotoxicity damage by preserving mitochondrial
and ER function in the core and the penumbra. DETCMeSO is an active metabolite of disulfiram, which has an
antagonistic effect on brain glutamate receptors [2]. Disulfiram has been used in the treatment of alcoholism for decades,
and it has been demonstrated that it exerts its anti-alcohol
effect only after bio-activation to the active metabolite
DETC-MeSO [18]. As shown earlier, DETC-MeSO is a potent and selective carbamoylating agent for sulfhydryl groups
in glutamate receptors [2]. The drug partially blocks glutamate
binding to synaptic membrane preparation from the brain and
also prevents seizures in mice induced by glutamate analogs
and hyperbaric oxygen [1]. It was shown that the inhibition of
glutamate receptor binding by DETC-MeSO reached a plateau at maximum inhibition of 55 % at 100 μM, and no further

667

increase of inhibition was observed even at 1,000 μM suggesting that DETC-MeSO is a partial glutamate receptor antagonist and is likely to have little adverse effect even at high
dose. In in vivo experiment, the maximum plasma concentration of DETC-MeSO was reached within 0.5 h, with half-life
of 2 h after administration [3]. Due to the advantage of
partially blocking the glutamate receptors, it can reduce neuronal injury following glutamate over excitation and yet maintain normal glutamate neurotransmission. These data led us to
select administration of DETC-MeSO 1 h before reperfusion
with the dose of 5.6 mg/kg to see its neuroprotective effect on
ischemic stroke. Our post-MCAO/reperfusion treatment
group (24 h post-reperfusion) was done to mimic clinical
treatment following the stroke. Our experiment demonstrated
that DETC-MeSO can markedly reduce the volume of the
lesion and improve the neuroscore in MCAO when it was
administered either prior to or post-MCAO/reperfusion. Although animals that received DETC-MeSO 1 h before reperfusion showed significantly less neurological deficits at 4, 5,
and 7 days after reperfusion compared to animals that received
DETC-MeSO 24 h after reperfusion, the latter group still
shows significant improvement in brain function and structure
over the untreated group suggesting that DETC-MeSO is still
a promising agent for therapeutic intervention for stroke patients. Our data confirm a correlation between neuroscore test
and infarct volume as reported previously [9, 19]. TTC and the
neuroscore test showed greater improvement in group A
which had received DETC-MeSO 1 h before reperfusion for
4 days, and for this reason, we have further investigated
various signal transduction pathways associated with cell
injury and death using this specific group. The glutamate
excitatory effects are mediated through two kinds of glutamate
receptors, ionotropic and metabotropic receptors [20]. Glutamate ionotropic receptors are ligand-gated cation channels
permeable to Ca2+. Although virtually all members of the
glutamate receptor family are believed to be involved in
mediating excitotoxicity, NMDA glutamate receptors are believed to be the key mediators of death during excitotoxic
injury [20]. During ischemia and through glutamate
excitotoxicity, Ca2+ influx through NMDA receptors promotes cell death more efficiently than through other types of
Ca2+ channels [20]. αII-spectrin is the major structural component of the membrane cytoskeleton, and it is particularly
abundant in axons and presynaptic terminals [21]. It is important to note that αII-spectrin is a major substrate for both mcalpain and caspase-3 cysteine proteases, and the major
calpain and caspase-3 cleavage sites of αII-spectrin have been
well documented [21, 22]. Calpain and caspase-3 proteases
cleave αII-spectrin into proteolytic fragments in traumatic
brain injury [21] and in a rodent model of transient forebrain
ischemia [23]. Our laboratory showed no changes in mcalpain expression after MCAO, and therefore, we tested
cleavage of its substrate αII-spectrin to evaluate the extent

668

of activation of m-calpain from glutamate excitotoxicity and
Ca2+ influx. Our data showed that levels of the 150/145-kDa
bands in the MCAO vehicle-treated group were markedly
increased (compared to the non-ischemic group). It demonstrates that after MCAO, it is likely that excessive Ca2+ enters
the neurons due to overexcitation of NMDA receptors by
glutamate. This massive increase of intracellular Ca2+ can
activate m-calpain, followed by cleavage of αII-spectrin into
the 150/145-kDa bands. In contrast, in the DETC-MeSOtreated group levels of the 150/145-kDa bands were significantly lower than in the vehicle-treated group in the both core
and the penumbra indicating that DETC-MeSO can bind to
the NMDA receptors and prevent over-activation of these
receptors and Ca2+ influx from excess glutamate. Cleavage
of αII-spectrin to 150/145 kDa was shown in necrotic and
apoptotic cell death in vitro [24, 25]. Our results showed that
DETC-MeSO can prevent both necrotic and apoptotic cell
death in the core and the penumbra, respectively. Activated
caspase-3 cleaves αII-spectrin to proteolytic fragments of
120-kDa band. Our data showed that the 120-kDa band was
detected in sham-operated rats due to basal processing of αIIspectrin by caspase-3. This has been reported previously by
other investigators [23]. MCAO injury resulted in a significant
increase in the 120-kDa band above the levels of the shamoperated group, while the level of the 120-kDa band in the
penumbra, but not the core of DETC-MeSO-treated group
significantly decreased in comparison to vehicle-treated
group. This shows that DETC-MeSO can decrease caspase-3
activation in the penumbra of the DETC-MeSO-treated group
which is also confirmed by our investigation on apoptotic
markers. It is believed that brain ischemia followed by glutamate excitotoxicity leads to intracellular calcium overload and
initiates a series of intracellular events, such as the release of
apoptotic proteins leading to apoptotic cell death [26]. As we
showed that DETC-MeSO can regulate intracellular calcium
homeostasis through preventing Ca2+ influx, we continued
testing mitochondrial function by measuring different proand anti-apoptotic markers. Our results demonstrated that
DETC-MeSO can down-regulate the proapoptotic proteins
Bak in the penumbra and Bax and BAD in both core and
penumbra in the whole cell lysate. On the other hand, measurement of the anti-apoptotic protein BCL-2 showed an
increased ratio of BCL-2/Bax in the core and the penumbra
of DETC-MeSO-treated versus vehicle-treated groups.
DETC-MeSO may block caspase-3 by regulating the release
of mitochondrial cytochrome-c. We showed that 4 days after
MCAO, DETC-MeSO could decrease Bax protein expression, while Bcl-2 protein expression increased. A high ratio
of Bcl-2 to Bax can prevent release cytochrome-c from mitochondria which results in decreased caspase-3 activity. These
data were confirmed by testing BCL-2 in the cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial cell fractionation protein analysis where BCL-2
was up-regulated in both core and penumbra of mitochondrial

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

and cytoplasmic fractions in the DETC-MeSO-treated group.
This result confirms our αII-spectrin experiment which
showed that after DETC-MeSO treatment, the 120-kDa band
in the penumbra markedly decreased. So far we showed that
during cerebral ischemia, DETC-MeSO may exert its neuroprotective function through both extracellular mechanisms—
by inhibiting calcium influx and intracellular mechanisms—
by protecting the mitochondrion through preventing mitochondrial dysfunction resulting from cytoplasmic calcium
overload.
In normal cells, HSPs assist in the folding of newly synthesized proteins. HSPs are also involved in the assembly and
maintenance of multi-protein complexes, intra-organellar protein trafficking, and degradation of misfolded polypeptides.
Up-regulation of HSP27 and HSP70 mRNA and protein after
several insults has been detected in neuronal cultures and
brain tissue extracted from animals exposed to stress [27]. In
vitro evidence of HSP-transfected neurons supports the protective role of HSP27 and HSP70 [28]. Experiments in in vivo
models of epilepsy and stroke indicate that transgenically
overexpressed or virally delivered HSPs are not always able
to reduce lesion size, but are able to enhance cell survival [28].
Since HSP27 and HSP70 are the main inducible HSPs in the
central nervous system [29], we investigated the effect of
DETC-MeSO on the model of MCAO on these two HSPs
by western blotting. HSP27 (the major inducible member of
the HSP70 family) and HSP70 showed elevated expression in
the core and the penumbra of vehicle-treated groups in comparison to sham-operated group. Using DETC-MeSO could
increase the expression of HSP27 in both the core and the
penumbra of DETC-MeSO-treated versus vehicle-treated
group, while HSP70 did not change in the core and the
penumbra. Previously, R.A. Badin et al. reported that HSP27
can cause a significant reduction in stroke lesion size [28], and
our data confirm this report. It was reported although that
HSP27 is naturally expressed in glial cells and not in neurons;
however, additionally to the HSP27-expressing astrocytes,
HSP27-positive neurons have also been detected [30]. Glial
cells appear to be crucial for structural and metabolic support
of neurons, maintaining synapse homeostasis and regulating
the rate of neuronal repair [29, 30]. Thus, their ability to
secrete HSP27 on stress might be a crucial mechanism for
protecting neurons. Our finding that DETC-MeSO did not
change HSP70 expression, while we saw a significant decrease in infarct size, adds strength to the proposition that
enhanced HSP70 may reflect different protective activities as
a chaperone. In this particular situation, increasing HSP27
expression might be more dramatic due to its links with
cytoskeletal stability and its ability to bind proteins in an
ATP independent fashion in conjunction with its antiapoptotic functions. HSP27 has been shown to protect cells
in vitro by interfering with both caspase-dependent and
caspase-independent apoptotic pathways. Several

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

experiments show that this protein is able to block caspase-3
activation after ischemia [29, 30]. Interestingly, replacing
HSP27 in rat neurons with a caspase-blocking agent does
not prevent cytotoxicity, suggesting that, in addition to
caspase-3 blockage, HSP27 must exert chaperone functions
that prevent necrosis and caspase-independent events [31].
Other groups have shown that HSP27 overexpression can
sequester cytochrome-c after release from the mitochondria
and prevent its binding to the apoptosome [32]. Some experiments have linked cytoskeletal stability to mitochondria and
apoptosis. They suggests that HSP27 acts further upstream
and prevents cytochrome-c release via bid relocalization,
which is in turn associated with F-actin filaments modulated
by this chaperone [33]. It has also been shown that phosphorylated and unphosphorylated HSP27 binds actin and tubulin
filaments and can promote axonal growth and regeneration
after injury [33]. The high expression levels of HSPs both in
the core and the penumbra suggested that these proteins could
either be transported to or secreted in lesion areas. These data
are consistent with that obtained from virally delivered HSPs
in experimental stroke [28]. Protein kinase B (Akt) is a kinase
known to inhibit apoptosis. A number of studies have indicated that activated Akt (p-AKT) promotes neuroprotection during cerebral ischemia [34]. We documented that DETC-MeSO
activates Akt, thereby eliciting neuroprotection in MCAO
after 4 days of injections. Use of DETC-MeSO caused a
markedly increased level of p-AKT expression in the penumbra of the DETC-MeSO-treated group. The cellular decision
to undergo apoptosis is determined by the integration of
multiple survival and death signals. The Akt serine/threonine
kinases are critical mediators of cell survival in response to
Ca2+ influx [35]. A number of pro-apoptotic proteins have
been identified as direct Akt substrates, including glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3), caspase-9, p53, Forkhead, and
BAD which are suppressed upon phosphorylation by Akt. pAKT also has been shown to induce some anti-apoptotic
markers, such as BCL-2 and mTOR [36]. Our data on
proapoptotic markers BAD and αII-spectrin (Ca2+ influx
substrate) and the anti-apoptotic marker BCL-2 support the
role of p-AKT up-regulation in protecting cells in the penumbra of the DETC-MeSO-treated group.
Various conditions such as alterations in calcium homeostasis, glucose deprivation, and hypoxia lead to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in the ER, resulting in ER stress.
Initially in response to stressful stimuli, the ER will elicit the
UPR which is a self-protective signal transduction pathway
[37]. Prolonged ER stress leads to cell death and is associated
with the pathogenesis of some neurodegenerative disorders
that feature misfolded proteins including Alzheimer's disease,
Parkinson's disease, and ALS [38]. GRP78 is traditionally
recognized as a major ER chaperone, and it is located in the
ER lumen but is also detected as a transmembrane protein as
well as found outside the ER. In the mitochondrion, GRP78

669

regulates mitochondrial energy balance during ER stress and
nuclear GRP78 cross-links to DNA and suppresses DNA
damage-induced apoptosis [39]. As we reported previously,
although GRP78 showed a significant increase in MCAO
4 days after reperfusion, we detected no changes in GRP78
expression after treatment with DETC-MeSO in the whole
cell lysate. However, in the mitochondrial fraction of the core
and also in the nuclear fraction of the penumbra, DETCMeSO increased the expression of GRP78 by comparison to
the vehicle-treated group. These data are supported by our
results indicating a significant decrease in mitochondrial apoptosis markers following DETC-MeSO administration. In
studies on ER stress after cerebral ischemia and reperfusion,
it has been reported that GRP78 mRNA was increased at 6–
24 h after a 30-min ischemia and reperfusion in both the cortex
and striatum, and GRP78 protein was increased at 5–23 h,
then decreased at 47 h, after a 1-h ischemia and reperfusion
affecting the MCA territory [40]. Indeed, this may be one of
the reasons why 4 days after reperfusion GRP78 protein levels
are not highly detectable. GRP78 has a higher affinity for
unfolded proteins, and therefore, following ER stress and
accumulation of unfolded proteins, GRP78 dissociate from
each sensor (ATF6, PERK, and IRE-1 inside the ER lumen)
and proceed to induce the UPR. In this paper, we aimed to
identify which particular ER stress-induced pathways are
predominantly affected by DETC-MeSO treatment in the
brain of MCAO model.
Following dissociation of GRP78, PERK is activated and
then phosphorylates a subunit of eIF2a [41] which inhibits
general cap-dependent translation thus reducing further accumulation of proteins within the ER lumen [42]. PERK−/−
mouse embryonic fibroblasts lack this translational block
and as a result are hypersensitive to ER stress [42]. This
translational block is not absolute, and it does not apply to
certain proteins such as ATF4. Following its translation, ATF4
translocates to the nucleus where it drives transcription of ER
genes and gene products (including GRP78) involved in amino acid biosynthesis, redox reactions, and protein secretion as
well as pro-apoptotic mechanisms including synthesis of the
transcription factor CHOP [41]. Since p-eIF2a and ATF4 are
two down-stream proteins in the PERK pathway of ER stress,
it is appropriate to measure expression levels of these two
proteins in order to determine the extent of the PERK pathway
response in the presence or in the absence of DETC-MeSO
treatment. We found that in the MCAO model of stroke, there
was a marked increase in p-PERK, p-eIF2α, and ATF4 expression, indicating that the PERK pathway is activated in
MCAO models. Our data showed that the PERK pathway is
clearly inhibited in the core and the penumbra following use
of DETC-MeSO in MCAO.
Upon sensing of ER stress and dissociation of GRP78,
ATF6 translocates to the Golgi apparatus. In the Golgi, it is
cleaved by 2 proteases, site-1 protease (S1P) and site-2

670

protease (S2P) [43]. The ratio of cleaved ATF6 to full-length
ATF6 demonstrates that DETC-MeSO did not alter ATF6
cleavage in both the core and the penumbra of MCAO stroke
model.
IRE1 through binding to GRP78 is held in an inactivated
state, and upon dissociation of GRP78, IRE1 is activated by
dimerization and autophosphorylation. Following its activation, IRE1 enables translation and generation of XBP1 [44].
XBP1s activate the transcription of various proteins involved
in the maintenance of ER homeostasis such as ER chaperones
GRP78, ER associated degradation (ERAD), as well as transcription factors such as CHOP and XBP1 [45]. IRE1 has
been identified as one of the first arms switched on during ER
stress and first to be shut down upon prolonged stress [46].
Furthermore, overexpression of a mutant IRE1 leads to an
enhancement of cell survival upon induction of ER stress
further underscoring the pro-survival functions of IRE1 [46].
Activated IRE-1 binds TRAF2, ASK1, and downstream kinases that activate p38MAPK and JNK. ASK1 can activate
both ASK1-JNK-BIM and ASK1-p38MAPK-CHOP pathways. JNK phosphorylates Bcl-2 and BH3-only protein
(Bim), initiating mitochondria-dependent apoptosis. The
levels of p-IRE1 in both the core and the penumbra of MCAO
stroke model were measured to test whether DETC-MeSO has
an effect on the IRE1 pathway. The results indicate that the
elevation of JNK is strongly suppressed by DETC-MeSO
treatment in penumbra. In addition, XBP-1 showed a significant decrease in both the core and the penumbra of DETCMeSO-treated group. However, there were no significant alterations of p-IRE-1, ASK1, and p38MAPK protein levels in
DETC-MeSO-treated groups both in the core and the penumbra. IRE1-mediated activation of JNK provides a means by
which the Bcl-2 family member activity can be regulated.
JNK-mediated phosphorylation of Bcl-2 has been reported
to decrease their anti-apoptotic ability while phosphorylation
of Bid and Bim by JNK has been demonstrated to increase
their pro-apoptotic ability [47]. Therefore, IRE1-mediated
JNK activation may represent a mechanism through which
IRE1 can manipulate relative levels of pro- and anti-apoptotic
BCL-2 family members. CHOP, a pro-apoptotic transcription
factor, is a convergence for all three arms of the UPR, with
binding sites for ATF6, ATF4, and XBP1s present within its
promoter, and CHOP mediates ER stress-induced cell death
through the regulation of Bcl-2 family members. Upregulation of Bim has been reported to occur in a CHOPdependent manner induced by JNK. CHOP-mediated downregulation of Bcl-2 has also been reported as a means by
which CHOP can tip the balance in favor of pro-apoptotic
Bcl-2 proteins and cell death. Phosphorylation by JNK releases Bim from the complex and allows the initiation of the
Bax-dependent apoptotic cascade [48]. Together, these results
suggest that the ER stress signals to the mitochondria via the
regulation of Bcl-2 proteins by both CHOP and JNK. Our data

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

showed that CHOP and BIM that were up-regulated in the
core and the penumbra of the MCAO model both show
significantly decreased expression in the core and the penumbra of the DETC-MeSO-treated group. The growth arrest and
DNA damage-inducible protein GADD34 is a member of the
protein family whose expression is up-regulated by growth
arrest and DNA damage. GADD34 is directly activated by
CHOP. We demonstrated that DETC-MeSO can significantly
reduce the expression of GADD34 in the penumbra of the
DETC-MeSO-treated group and hence that DETC-MeSO has
the ability to inhibit the apoptosis induced by ER stress in the
MCAO stroke model. These findings provide evidence that
activation of the PERK and some stage in the IRE-1 pathway
can be inhibited by DETC-MeSO, and through these two
pathways, PERK may inhibit ER-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, the results indicating suppression of both CHOP and
BIM by DETC-MeSO treatment provide substantial evidence
that DETC-MeSO can contribute to an effective inhibition of
ER stress induced by MCAO.
All forms of CNS insults such as infection, trauma, ischemia, and neurodegenerative disease trigger neuronal and glial
changes that can rapidly cause irreversible cell damage leading to reactive astrogliosis [14, 49]. The up-regulation of
GFAP by astrocytes is a spontaneous response to CNS injuries, which largely contributes to reactive gliosis and glial scar
formation after stroke. Recent studies have provided compelling evidence that reactive gliosis can exert both beneficial and
harmful effects on tissue repair [50]. On one hand, those
reactive astrocytes would form physical barrier that isolates
the lesion site from normal brain tissue and help the restoring
of blood–brain barrier. However, the physical barrier and the
extracellular microenvironment which reactive astrocytes help
to maintain tend to inhibit neurite outgrowth and neural regeneration [50]. We showed by western blot analysis of GFAP
that 4 days after MCAO, GFAP markedly increased in both
the core and the penumbra in comparison to sham-operated
group, which is consistent with previous findings of Wang
et al. report [51]. Our results demonstrated that DETC-MeSO
could reduce gliosis in the penumbra and not the core in the
animal model of MCAO 4 days after reperfusion. Since most
pro-survival markers such as BCL-2, HSP27, p-AKT, and
GRP78 showed a significant increase in the penumbra following DETC-MeSO administration, GFAP down-regulation can
be due to fewer damaged neurons and thus fewer neuronal
interactions with astrocytes. It has been reported that HSP27 is
expressed in the cytoplasm at a high level in astrocytes
(>99 %), at a low level in neurons (7 %), at a minimally
detectable level in microglia, and at an undetectable level in
oligodendrocytes under unstressed conditions. Our data
showed that although we have a significant decrease of gliosis
in the penumbra, HSP27 increased significantly following
DETC-MeSO. These data are consistent with Satoh and Kim
which indicated that after a stressful condition, the level of

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672

HSP27 expression was not altered in astrocytes but was elevated significantly in neurons (11–21 %) and microglia (4–
7 %) [52].
Investigation of other neuronal populations such as
GABAergic neurons by measuring level of GAD65 protein
expression and neurotransmitter release of dopaminergic neurons by microdialysis showed that DETC-MeSO can decrease
the loss of these cell populations after MCAO. The extracellular concentrations of DA in the rat striatum before, during,
and after occlusion (2 h either one, totally 6 h) were measured
in both DETC-MeSO-treated (5.6 mg/kg, for 4 days) and
vehicle-treated groups. During 2 h before MCAO (baseline),
DA release was stable, but 2-h MCAO led to a significant
increase in DA outflow. Then DA began to decrease but after
90 min of MCAO, a significant decrease was seen between
DETC-MeSO-treated and vehicle-treated group, indicating
that DETC-MeSO can deplete DA release 90 min after
MCAO. One hour after the reperfusion, DA outflow decreased almost to the baseline level. After 4 days, DA outflow
in a 6-h collection period was measured again. This time we
planned to infuse high potassium artificial CSF as described in
“Materials and Methods” through the microdialysis probes to
excite neurons and induce neurotransmitter release. During
the 2 h before infusion of high potassium, DA outflow was
stable and considered as baseline. Our results showed that in
vehicle-treated rats, infusion of high potassium caused only a
small increase in striatal DA, while the increase in striatal DA
was significantly greater in rats pretreated with DETC-MeSO.
These data support our other observations indicating that
DETC-MeSO can protect neurons following MCAO.
In summary, DETC-MeSO can exert protective effects on
CNS neurons in the MCAO model through suppression of ER
stress. Moreover, the effect of DETC-MeSO treatment on the
three ER stress-induced signaling pathways showed that
DETC-MeSO significantly inhibited apoptosis by activation
of the PERK, but not the ATF6 pathway. However, details of
the relevant signaling pathways remain to be elucidated.
DETC-MeSO can up-regulate Akt phosphorylation to prevent
ischemia-induced apoptosis and to attenuate ER stress. Administration of DETC-MeSO showed that an increase in
CHOP and Bax was prevented in both the core and the
penumbra of MCAO stroke model, indicating that
DETC-MeSO can decrease apoptosis both in mitochondrial Ca2+-induced apoptosis (up-regulation of BCL-2/
Bax and down-regulation of caspase-3) and ER-induced
apoptosis (down-regulation of BIM, BAD, and CHOP).
These data support the hypothesis that DETC-MeSO, a
partial antagonist of the NMDA receptor, can decrease
infarction by decreasing ER stress in the rat MCAO
stroke model.
Acknowledgments This research was supported in part by grant
09KW-11, Department of Health, State of Florida.

671

References
1. Nagendra SN, Faiman MD, Davis K, Wu JY, Newby X, Schloss JV
(1997) Carbamoylation of brain glutamate receptors by a disulfiram
metabolite. J Biol Chem 272:24247–24251
2. Ningaraj NS, Chen W, Schloss JV, Faiman MD, Wu J-Y (2001) SMethyl-N, N-diethylthiocarbamate sulfoxide elicits neuroprotective
effect against N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated neurotoxicity.
J Biomed Sci 8:104–113
3. Hart BW, Faiman MD (1994) In vivo pharmacodynamic studies of
the disulfiram metabolite S-methyl N, N-diethylthiolcarbamate sulfoxide: inhibition of liver aldehyde dehydrogenase. Alcohol Clin Exp
Res 18:340–345
4. Broughton BRS, Reutens DC, Sobey CG (2009) Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia. Stroke 40:e331–e339
5. Ma Y, Hendershot LM (2004) ER chaperone functions during normal
and stress conditions. J Chem Neuroanat 28:51–65
6. DeGracia DJ, Montie HL (2004) Cerebral ischemia and the unfolded
protein response. J Neurochem 91:1–8
7. Gharibani PM, Modi J, Pan C, Menzie J, Ma Z, Chen P-C et al (2013)
The mechanism of taurine protection against endoplasmic reticulum
stress in an animal stroke model of cerebral artery occlusion and
stroke-related conditions in primary neuronal cell culture. Adv Exp
Med Biol 776:241–258
8. Li F, Omae T, Fisher M, Dietrich WD, Kuluz JW (1999) Spontaneous
hyperthermia and its mechanism in the intraluminal suture middle
cerebral artery occlusion model of rats. Editorial comment. Stroke 30:
2464–2471
9. Menzies SA, Hoff JT, Betz AL (1992) Middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats: a neurological and pathological evaluation of a reproducible model. Neurosurgery 31:100–106
10. Kramer M, Dang J, Baertling F, Denecke B, Clarner T, Kirsch C et al
(2010) TTC staining of damaged brain areas after MCA occlusion in
the rat does not constrict quantitative gene and protein analyses. J
Neurosci Methods 187:84–89
11. Mohammad-Gharibani P, Tiraihi T, Mesbah-Namin SA, Jalil
Arabkheradmand HK (2012) Induction of bone marrow stromal cells
into GABAergic neuronal phenotype using creatine as inducer.
Restor Neurol Neurosci 30:511–525
12. Wu J, Matsuda T (1973) Purification and characterization of glutamate decarboxylase from mouse brain. J Biol Chem 248:3029–3034
13. Solaroglu I, Tsubokawa T, Cahill J, Zhang JH (2006) Anti-apoptotic
effect of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor after focal cerebral
ischemia in the rat. Neuroscience 143:965–974
14. Li Y, Chen J, Zhang CL, Wang L, Lu D, Katakowski M et al (2005)
Gliosis and brain remodeling after treatment of stroke in rats with
marrow stromal cells. Glia 49:407–417
15. Savitz SI, Fisher M (2007) Future of neuroprotection for acute stroke:
in the aftermath of the SAINT trials. Ann Neurol 61:396–402
16. Schmid-Elsaesser R, Zausinger S, Hungerhuber E, Baethmann A,
Reulen HJ (1998) A critical reevaluation of the intraluminal thread
model of focal cerebral ischemia: evidence of inadvertent premature
reperfusion and subarachnoid hemorrhage in rats by laser-Doppler
flowmetry. Stroke 29:2162–2170
17. Gerriets T, Stolz E, Walberer M, Müller C, Rottger C, Kluge A et al
(2004) Complications and pitfalls in rat stroke models for middle
cerebral artery occlusion: a comparison between the suture and the
macrosphere model using magnetic resonance angiography. Stroke
35:2372–2377
18. Madan A, Parkinson A, Faiman MD (1995) Identification of the
human and rat P450 enzymes responsible for the sulfoxidation of
S-methyl N, N-diethylthiolcarbamate (DETC-ME). The terminal step
in the bioactivation of disulfiram. Drug Metab Dispos 23:1153–1162
19. Schäbitz WR, Hoffmann TT, Heiland S, Kollmar R, Bardutzky J,
Sommer C et al (2001) Delayed neuroprotective effect of insulin-like

672

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

Mol Neurobiol (2014) 50:655–672
growth factor-I after experimental transient focal cerebral ischemia
monitored with MRI. Stroke 32:1226–1233
Waxman EA, Lynch DR (2005) N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptor subtypes: multiple roles in excitotoxicity and neurological disease.
Neuroscientist 11:37–49
Pike BR, Flint J, Dutta S, Johnson E, Wang KK, Hayes RL (2001)
Accumulation of non-erythroid alpha II-spectrin and calpain-cleaved
alpha II-spectrin breakdown products in cerebrospinal fluid after
traumatic brain injury in rats. J Neurochem 78:1297–1306
Wang KK, Posmantur R, Nath R, McGinnis K, Whitton M, Talanian
RV et al (1998) Simultaneous degradation of alphaII- and betaIIspectrin by caspase 3 (CPP32) in apoptotic cells. J Biol Chem 273:
22490–22497
Zhang C, Siman R, Xu YA, Mills AM, Frederick JR, Neumar RW
(2002) Comparison of calpain and caspase activities in the adult rat
brain after transient forebrain ischemia. Neurobiol Dis 10:289–305
Pike BR, Zhao X, Newcomb JK, Wang KK, Posmantur RM, Hayes
RL (1998) Temporal relationships between de novo protein synthesis, calpain and caspase 3-like protease activation, and DNA fragmentation during apoptosis in septo-hippocampal cultures. J
Neurosci Res 52:505–520
Zhao X, Pike BR, Newcomb JK, Wang KK, Posmantur RM, Hayes
RL (1999) Maitotoxin induces calpain but not caspase-3 activation
and necrotic cell death in primary septo-hippocampal cultures.
Neurochem Res 24:371–382
Nakka VP, Gusain A, Mehta SL, Raghubir R (2008) Molecular
mechanisms of apoptosis in cerebral ischemia: multiple neuroprotective opportunities. Mol Neurobiol 37:7–38
Feder ME, Hofmann GE (1999) Heat-shock proteins, molecular
chaperones, and the stress response: evolutionary and ecological
physiology. Annu Rev Physiol 61:243–282
Badin RA, Lythgoe MF, van der Weerd L, Thomas DL, Gadian DG,
Latchman DS (2006) Neuroprotective effects of virally delivered
HSPs in experimental stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 26:371–381
Yenari MA (2002) Heat shock proteins and neuroprotection. Adv in
Exp Med and Biol 513:281–299
Zourlidou A, Payne Smith MD, Latchman DS (2004) HSP27 but not
HSP70 has a potent protective effect against alpha-synuclein-induced
cell death in mammalian neuronal cells. J Neurochem 88:1439–1448
Whitlock NA, Lindsey K, Agarwal N, Crosson CE, Ma J-X (2005)
Heat shock protein 27 delays Ca2+-induced cell death in a caspasedependent and -independent manner in rat retinal ganglion cells.
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 46:1085–1091
Bruey JM, Ducasse C, Bonniaud P, Ravagnan L, Susin SA, DiazLatoud C et al (2000) Hsp27 negatively regulates cell death by
interacting with cytochrome c. Nat Cell Biol 2:645–652
Costigan M, Mannion RJ, Kendall G, Lewis SE, Campagna JA,
Coggeshall RE et al (1998) Heat shock protein 27: developmental
regulation and expression after peripheral nerve injury. J Neurosci 18:
5891–5900
Kilic E, Kilic U, Soliz J, Bassetti CL, Gassmann M, Hermann DM
(2005) Brain-derived erythropoietin protects from focal cerebral ischemia by dual activation of ERK-1/-2 and Akt pathways. FASEB J
19:2026–2028
Dudek H, Datta SR, Franke TF, Birnbaum MJ, Yao R, Cooper GM
et al (1997) Regulation of neuronal survival by the serine-threonine
protein kinase Akt. Science 275:661–665

36. Pap M, Cooper GM (1998) Role of glycogen synthase kinase-3 in the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt cell survival pathway. J Biol Chem
273:19929–19932
37. Reddy RK, Mao C, Baumeister P, Austin RC, Kaufman RJ, Lee AS
(2003) Endoplasmic reticulum chaperone protein GRP78 protects
cells from apoptosis induced by topoisomerase inhibitors: role of
ATP binding site in suppression of caspase-7 activation. J Biol
Chem 278:20915–20924
38. Mattson MP, LaFerla FM, Chan SL, Leissring MA, Shepel PN,
Geiger JD (2000) Calcium signaling in the ER: its role in neuronal
plasticity and neurodegenerative disorders. Trends Neurosci 23:222–
229
39. Ni M, Zhang Y, Lee AS (2011) Beyond the endoplasmic reticulum:
atypical GRP78 in cell viability, signalling and therapeutic targeting.
J Biochem 434:181–188
40. Shibata M, Hattori H, Sasaki T, Gotoh J, Hamada J, Fukuuchi Y
(2003) Activation of caspase-12 by endoplasmic reticulum stress
induced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice.
Neuroscience 118:491–499
41. Kumar R, Azam S, Sullivan JM, Owen C, Cavener DR, Zhang P et al
(2001) Brain ischemia and reperfusion activates the eukaryotic initiation factor 2alpha kinase, PERK. J Neurochem 77:1418–1421
42. Harding HP, Zhang Y, Ron D (1999) Protein translation and folding
are coupled by an endoplasmic-reticulum-resident kinase. Nature
397:271–274
43. Chen X, Shen J, Prywes R (2002) The luminal domain of ATF6
senses endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and causes translocation of
ATF6 from the ER to the Golgi. J Biol Chem 277:13045–13052
44. Yoshida H, Matsui T, Yamamoto A, Okada T, Mori K (2001) XBP1
mRNA is induced by ATF6 and spliced by IRE1 in response to ER
stress to produce a highly active transcription factor. Cell 107:881–891
45. Lee A-H, Iwakoshi NN, Glimcher LH (2003) XBP-1 regulates a
subset of endoplasmic reticulum resident chaperone genes in the
unfolded protein response. Mol Cell Biol 23:7448–7459
46. Lin JH, Li H, Yasumura D, Cohen HR, Zhang C, Panning B et al
(2007) IRE1 signaling affects cell fate during the unfolded protein
response. Science 318:944–949
47. Maundrell K, Antonsson B, Magnenat E, Camps M, Muda M,
Chabert C et al (1997) Bcl-2 undergoes phosphorylation by c-Jun
N-terminal kinase/stress-activated protein kinases in the presence of
the constitutively active GTP-binding protein Rac1. J Biol Chem
272:25238–25242
48. Lai E, Teodoro T, Volchuk A (2007) Endoplasmic reticulum stress:
signaling the unfolded protein response. Physiology (Bethesda) 22:
193–201
49. Mohammad-Gharibani P, Tiraihi T, Delshad A, Arabkheradmand J,
Taheri T (2013) Improvement of contusive spinal cord injury in rats
by co-transplantation of gamma-aminobutyric acid-ergic cells and
bone marrow stromal cells. Cytother 15:1073–1085
50. Sofroniew MV (2009) Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis
and glial scar formation. Trends Neurosci 32:638–647
51. Wang C-C, Chio C-C, Chang C-H, Kuo J-R, Chang C-P (2010)
Beneficial effect of agmatine on brain apoptosis, astrogliosis, and
edema after rat transient cerebral ischemia. BMC Pharmacol 10:11
52. Satoh JI, Kim SU (1995) Differential expression of heat shock
protein HSP27 in human neurons and glial cells in culture. J
Neurosci Res 41:805–818

