201 Y. Katayama et al. (eds.), Brain Edema XV, Acta Neurochirurgica Supplement, Vol. 118,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1434-6_37, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2013
  Abstract   Increased intracranial pressure (ICP) following 
acute brain injury requires the accumulation of additional 
water in the intracranial vault. One source of such water is 
the vasculature, although the mechanisms associated with 
control of blood–brain barrier permeability are unclear. We 
have recently shown that acute brain injury, such as neurotrauma
and stroke, results in perivascular accumulation 
of the neuropeptide, substance P. This accumulation is 
associated with increased blood–brain barrier permeability 
and formation of vasogenic edema. Administration of a 
substance P antagonist targeting the tachykinin NK1 receptor
profoundly reduced the increased blood–brain barrier 
permeability and edema formation, and in small animal 
models of acute brain injury, improved functional outcome. 
In a large, ovine model of experimental traumatic brain 
injury, trauma resulted in a signi ficant increase in ICP. 
Administration of an NK1 antagonist caused a profound 
reduction in post- traumatic ICP, with levels returning to 
normal within 4 h of drug administration. Substance P NK1 
antagonists offer a novel therapeutic approach to the treatment
of acute brain injury.  
  Keywords    Neurotrauma   •   Neurokinins   •   Tachykinins   •   Neuro-
 genic  in flammation   •   Rat   •   Sheep      
   Introduction 
 Worldwide, traumatic brain injury is considered the biggest 
killer of individuals under 45 years of age, with most neurotrauma
occurring as a result of motor vehicle accidents. 
Survivors can be left with permanent neurological de ficits 
caused by a secondary injury cascade that is initiated at the 
time of the traumatic event, and continues for a number of 
days to weeks thereafter. While a number of different secondary
injury factors have been identi fied  [  1  ] ,  edema  has 
been recognized as the one factor that is responsible for up to 
as much as half of all the associated mortality and morbidity 
 [  2, 3  ] . In large part, this is because edema is the major contributor
to raised intracranial pressure (ICP), which can have 
deleterious consequences on brain perfusion and oxygenation
, and for this reason, has become one of the primary 
endpoints for clinical management of TBI patients. Indeed, a 
number of clinical studies have con firmed that raised ICP is 
associated with worse outcome  [  4, 5  ] .  Despite  this  realization
, little progress has been made over the last 50 years with 
respect to understanding the mechanisms associated with 
edema formation, and how to effectively intervene in its 
development. In this review, we highlight recent  findings 
describing the potentially critical role of the neuropeptide, 
substance P, in the pathogenesis of edema formation and the 
development of increased ICP following acute brain injury.  
   Neurogenic  In flammation 
 Studies of peripheral tissues have established that the stimulation
of neuronal, sensory C- fibers results in a process known 
as neurogenic in flammation, encompassing vasodilation, protein
extravasation, and tissue swelling  [  6  ] .  This  in flammatory 
reaction is mediated by the release of neuropeptides, and 
while several have been implicated, it is generally accepted 
that substance P (SP) increases microvascular permeability, 
      Substance P Antagonists as a Novel Intervention for Brain Edema 
and  Raised  Intracranial  Pressure         
     Levon    Gabrielian,        Stephen    C.    Helps,        Emma    Thornton,        Renée    J.    Turner,        Anna    V.    Leonard,  and           Robert    Vink          
    L.    Gabrielian  ,      S.  C.    Helps  ,      E.    Thornton  ,      R.  J.    Turner,   
and      A.  V.    Leonard  
     Adelaide  Centre  for  Neuroscience  Research , 
 School of Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide ,
  Adelaide ,   SA ,   Australia  
      R.    Vink   (*)
     Adelaide  Centre  for  Neuroscience  Research , 
 Discipline of Anatomy and Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, 
University of Adelaide ,
  Adelaide ,   SA ,   Australia  
   School of Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide ,
  Adelaide ,   SA    5005 ,   Australia    
e-mail:   robert.vink@adelaide.edu.au   
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
202 L. Gabrielian et al.
leading to edema formation, whilst calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (CGRP) is an extremely potent vasodilator  [  7  ]  .  
Substance P also results in leukocyte activation and mast cell 
degranulation   [  8  ] , thus supporting an additional role in both 
innate and speci fic immune responses. While sensory nerve 
 fibers that contain both CGRP and SP surround essentially all 
blood vessels, cerebral blood vessels, in particular, appear to 
receive a dense supply of these nerve  fibers. 
 Following experimental TBI, there is a generalized 
increase in brain SP immunoreactivity, which is particularly
apparent around the vasculature  [  9  ] ,  and  within  pyramidal
neurones. Maximum immunoreactivity was present 
after 5 h and  persisted for 24 h before gradually declining. 
Nonetheless, 3 days after TBI, mRNA for SP was still elevated 
 [  10  ] . Increased SP immunoreactivity has also been detected 
following experimental stroke  [  11  ] , and has been recently 
described in human post-mortem tissue following TBI  [  12  ]  .  
In the human tissue, perivascular SP immunoreactivity was 
often co-localized with positive APP immunoreactivity, suggesting
that mechanical disruption of perivascular neurones 
might be associated with neuropeptide release. The increase 
in serum SP detected in the  first 30 min after experimental 
TBI supports this view  [  9  ] , although serum SP levels declined 
rapidly thereafter, presumably due to rapid proteolysis by 
nonspeci fic serum proteases. Notably, inhibition of brain SP 
breakdown using the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
, captopril, increased SP immunoreactivity  [  13  ]  .  
   The Blood–Brain Barrier and Edema 
 Increased perivascular SP immunoreactivity after TBI 
was associated with increased extravasation of Evans blue 
as assessed by confocal microscopy  [  9  ] ,  suggesting  that 
SP release as part of neurogenic in flammation might be 
linked to increased blood–brain barrier (BBB) permeability.
This was con firmed by studies demonstrating that preinjury
depletion of sensory neuropeptides using capsaicin, 
which would prevent neurogenic in flammation, resulted 
in a profound attenuation of BBB disruption after experimental
TBI  [  14  ] . Subsequent studies have shown that 
post-injury  administration of a SP NK1 receptor  antagonist, 
n-acetyl-tryptophan (NAT), attenuated BBB permeability 
after both TBI  [  9  ]   and  stroke   [  11  ] . Indeed, the ability of 
NAT to attenuate BBB dysfunction after TBI was used to 
establish a dose-response relationship and identify the 
optimal dose for administration  [  9  ]  .  
 Disruption of the BBB was associated with the development
of edema, which again was signi ficantly attenuated by 
pre-injury depletion of sensory neuropeptides using capsaicin
  [  14  ] , or by administration of an NK1 receptor antagonist 
 [  9  ]  administered at 30 min after the traumatic event (Fig.  1 ). 
Given the presence of the disrupted BBB, edema at the 5-h 
time point was assumed to be vasogenic in nature, which was 
con firmed using diffusion-weighted MRI  [  9, 14  ] . Nonetheless, 
early administration of the NK1 antagonist also signi ficantly 
attenuated subsequent edema formation, which by 24 h has 
been shown to be predominantly cytotoxic in nature  [  3, 5  ] . 
This is consistent with the view that vasogenic edema is permissive
for the development of cytotoxic edema  [  5  ] .  
 Attenuation of increased BBB permeability and edema 
formation after TBI with administration of the NK1 antagonist
was associated with signi ficant improvements in both 
motor and cognitive outcome in rats  [  9  ] .  In  contrast,  inhibition
of SP breakdown using captopril exacerbated both the 
histological damage and functional de ficits after TBI  [  13  ] . 
The improvements in neurological outcome with administration
of NK1 antagonists could be observed even when the 
compounds were administered up to 4 h after onset of ischemic
stroke  [  15  ] , and up to 12 h after TBI  [  16  ] .  This  improvement
in functional outcome was shown to be a class effect of 
the NK1 receptor antagonists rather than a drug-speci fic 
effect   [  16  ] , thus con firming that the observed changes were 
dependent on activation of the SP NK1 receptor. A similar 
improvement in functional outcome to that observed with the 
NK1 antagonists was noted with pre-injury depletion of the 
sensory neuropeptides using capsaicin  [  14  ] ,  supporting 
the  view that neurogenic in flammation plays a central role in 
the pathophysiology of TBI, and, more speci fically, that 
attenuation of the induced BBB disruption and edema formation
is associated with improvements in functional outcome
after acute brain injury.  
81
80
79
78
77
Sham
% Brain water
Vehicle
***
Capsaicin NK1
  Fig.  1     Brain water content 5 h after traumatic brain injury in rats (mean 
± SEM;  n  = 6/group). Injury results in an increase in brain water content 
that is signi ficantly attenuated ( p  < 0.001) by neuropeptide depletion 
prior to injury (capsaicin pre-treatment) or by treatment with an NK1 
receptor antagonist (2.5 mg/kg i.v. n-acetyl-tryptophan [NAT]) at 
30 min after injury. *** p  < 0.001  compared  with  sham       
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1205945705)
203 Substance P Antagonists as a Novel Intervention for Brain Edema and Raised Intracranial Pressure
   Effects  on  ICP 
 Given that SP was integrally involved in edema formation
, we subsequently set out to examine the effects of 
the NK1 antagonists on ICP following TBI. While previous
studies of SP in BBB permeability, edema formation, 
and functional outcome were conducted in rats, we have 
recently shown that rat models of either diffuse or focal 
TBI produce inconsistent increases in ICP depending on 
the presence or absence of mass lesions and/or hypoxia 
 [  17  ] . Thus, an interventional study examining the effects 
of NK1 antagonists on ICP was unlikely to be successful 
in the rat models. Accordingly, we chose to use the ovine, 
captive-bolt model of injury, which produces more consistent
changes in ICP that are temporally similar to those 
observed in human TBI  [  18  ]  .  
 The model uses a humane stunner to accelerate the 
head of a sheep to induce an impact-acceleration type of 
injury. Brie fly, castrated male Merino sheep (45–55 kg) are 
 anesthetized and placed into a prone sphinx position, their 
body restrained to the table, but leaving the neck and head 
mobile relative to the body. A captive-bolt stunner armed 
with a number 17 red charge (model KML; Karl Schermer, 
Ettlingen, Germany) is then used to induce an impact injury 
at the midpoint between the left supraorbital process and the 
left external auditory meatus  [  18  ] . After injury, a calibrated 
Codman Microsensor ICP transducer was placed through a 
2.5-mm burr-hole made at a point 15 mm lateral to the sagittal
midline on the ipsilateral side, just in front of the coronal 
suture. After being inserted into the parenchyma to a depth 
of 1.5 cm, the probe was attached to a Codman ICP Express 
monitoring system (Codman and Shurtleff, Raynham, MA, 
USA), which was linked to an AD Instruments PowerLab ®
system where the data were post-processed. The burr-hole 
was sealed using bone wax to prevent CSF leakage and the 
sheep monitored for 4 h. Sham animals were surgically prepared
and ICP monitoring initiated in the absence of any 
induced brain injury. 
 Figure   2  summarizes the ICP 4 h after injury. In sham animals
, ICP was typically to the order of 10 mmHg. After 
injury, there was a marked increase in ICP that by 4 h, was 
above 30 mmHg. While early increases in ICP (<30 min) 
may be associated with reactive vasodilatation, the gradual 
increase in ICP over the ensuing hours is thought to re flect 
vasogenic edema formation  [  19  ] . The appearance of albumin 
immunostaining in the sheep brain parenchyma after injury 
con firms that BBB disruption had occurred at these early 
time points  [  19  ] , thus supporting the likely presence of 
vasogenic edema. In contrast to vehicle-treated animals, 
administration of the NK1 antagonist 30 min after injury 
resulted in an immediate reduction in ICP, achieving levels 
that were not signi ficantly different from sham animals at the 
4-h time point.   
   Conclusion 
 The series of experiments summarized herein have shown 
that increased perivascular SP immunoreactivity after TBI is 
associated with opening of the BBB and facilitation of 
vasogenic edema formation. Inhibiting the neurogenic 
in flammation initiated by the SP release, using either capsaicin
to deplete sensory neuropeptides prior to injury or an 
NK1 receptor antagonist administered after injury, attenuates
BBB permeability and edema formation and results in a 
signi ficant improvement in functional outcome. In a large 
animal model of TBI, administration of the NK1 antagonist 
30 min after injury caused a profound reduction in ICP such 
that it had returned to normal levels within 4 h of drug administration.
While the mechanisms associated with the edema 
resolution and lowering of ICP are unknown, the reduction 
in brain water content induced by the NK1 antagonist suggests
that water is actively leaving the brain tissue. Whether 
this effect is mediated through aquaporin channels located 
on perivascular, astrocytic end foot processes is unknown 
and requires further investigation. Substance P NK1 receptor 
antagonists represent a novel, mechanistic-based approach to 
managing increased ICP after acute brain injury.      
  Acknowledgment   Supported, in part, by the National Health and 
Medical Research Council (Australia) and the Neurosurgical Research 
Foundation. 
40
***
30
20
10
0
Sham
Intracranial pressure (mm Hg)
Vehicle NK1
  Fig.  2     Intracranial pressure in sheep 4 h after traumatic brain injury 
(mean ± SEM;  n  = 6/group). Injury results in an increase in ICP that is 
signi ficantly  attenuated  ( p  < 0.001) by administration of an  NK1   receptor
antagonist (2.5 mg/kg iv NAT) 30 min after injury. *** p  < 0.001 
compared  with  sham       
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
204 L. Gabrielian et al.
  Con flict  of  Interest  We  declare  that  we  have  no  con flict     of  interest   .  
References
     1.    Vink R, Nimmo AJ (2009) Multifunctional drugs for head injury. 
Neurotherapeutics 6:28–42  
    2.    Feickert HJ, Drommer S, Heyer R (1999) Severe head injury in 
children: impact of risk factors on outcome. J Trauma 47:33–38  
    3.    Marmarou A (2003) Pathophysiology of traumatic brain edema: 
current concepts. Acta Neurochir Suppl 86:7–10  
     4.    American Association of Neurological Surgeons (2000) The joint 
section on neurotrauma and critical care: initial management. 
J Neurotrauma 17:463–469  
    5.    Marmarou A (2007) A review of progress in understanding the 
pathophysiology and treatment of brain edema. Neurosurg Focus 
22:E1  
     6.    Brain SD, Williams TJ (1989) Interactions between the tachykinins 
and calcitonin gene-related peptide lead to the modulation of 
oedema formation and blood  flow in rat skin. Br J Pharmacol 
97:77–82  
     7.     Baluk  P  (1997)  Neurogenic  in flammation  in  skin  and  airways. 
J Investig Dermatol Symp Proc 2:76–81  
     8.    Bost KL (2004) Tachykinin-mediated modulation of the immune 
response. Front Biosci 9:3331–3332  
    9.    Donkin JJ, Nimmo AJ, Cernak I, Blumbergs PC, Vink R (2009) 
Substance P is associated with the development of brain edema and 
functional de ficits after traumatic brain injury. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab 29:1388–1398  
    10.    Cook NL, Vink R, Donkin JJ, van den Heuvel C (2009) Validation 
of reference genes for normalization of real-time quantitative 
RT-PCR data in traumatic brain injury. J Neurosci Res 87:34–41  
    11.    Turner RJ, Blumbergs PC, Sims NR, Helps SC, Rodgers KM, Vink 
R (2006) Increased substance P immunoreactivity and edema formation
following reversible ischemic stroke. Acta Neurochir Suppl 
96:263–266  
    12.    Zacest AC, Vink R, Manavis J, Sarvestani GT, Blumbergs PC 
(2010) Substance P immunoreactivity increases following human 
traumatic brain injury. Acta Neurochir Suppl 106:211–216  
    13.     Harford-Wright  E,  Thornton  E,  Vink  R  (2010)  Angiotensinconverting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors exacerbate histological damage
and motor de ficits after experimental traumatic brain injury. 
Neurosci Lett 481:26–29  
    14.    Nimmo AJ, Cernak I, Heath DL, Hu X, Bennett CJ, Vink R (2004) 
Neurogenic in flammation is associated with development of edema 
and functional de ficits following traumatic brain injury in rats. 
Neuropeptides 38:40–47  
    15.    Turner RJ, Helps SC, Thornton E, Vink R (2011) A substance 
P antagonist improves outcome when administered 4 h after onset 
of ischemic stroke. Brain Res 1393:84–90  
    16.    Donkin JJ, Cernak I, Blumberg PC, Vink R (2011) A substance 
P antagonist reduces axonal injury and improves neurologic outcome
when administered up to 12 hours after traumatic brain injury. 
J Neurotrauma 28:218–224  
    17.    Gabrielian L, Willshire LW, Helps SC, van den Heuvel C, Mathias 
JL, Vink R (2011) Intracranial pressure changes following traumatic
brain injury in rats: lack of signi ficant change in the absence 
of mass lesions or hypoxia. J Neurotrauma 28:2103–2111  
    18.    Vink R, Bhatia KD, Reilly PL (2008) The relationship between 
intracranial pressure and brain oxygenation following traumatic 
brain injury in sheep. Acta Neurochir Suppl 102:189–192  
    19.    Byard RW, Bhatia KD, Reilly PL, Vink R (2009) How rapidly does 
cerebral swelling follow trauma? Observations using an animal 
model and possible implications in infancy. Leg Med (Tokyo) 
11(Suppl  1):S128–S131      
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1273729851)
