Research
Perfusion computed tomography thresholds defining ischemic penumbra and
infarct core: studies in a rat stroke model
D. D. McLeod1*, M. W. Parsons2, R. Hood1, B. Hiles1, J. Allen1, S. K. McCann1, L. Murtha1,
M. B. Calford1, C. R. Levi2, and N. J. Spratt1,2
Background Perfusion computed tomography is becoming
more widely used as a clinical imaging tool to predict potentially salvageable tissue (ischemic penumbra) after ischemic
stroke and guide reperfusion therapies.
Aims The study aims to determine whether there are important changes in perfusion computed tomography thresholds
defining ischemic penumbra and infarct core over time following stroke.
Methods Permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion was
performed in adult outbred Wistar rats (n = 6) and serial perfusion computed tomography scans were taken every 30 mins
for 2 h. To define infarction thresholds at 1 h and 2 h poststroke, separate groups of rats underwent 1 h (n = 6) and 2 h
(n = 6) of middle cerebral artery occlusion followed by reperfusion. Infarct volumes were defined by histology at 24 h.
Co-registration with perfusion computed tomography maps
(cerebral blood flow, cerebral blood volume, and mean transit
time) permitted pixel-based analysis of thresholds defining
infarction, using receiver operating characteristic curves.
Results Relative cerebral blood flow was the perfusion computed tomography parameter that most accurately predicted
penumbra (area under the curve = 0·698) and also infarct
core (area under the curve = 0·750). A relative cerebral blood
flow threshold of < 75% of mean contralateral cerebral blood
flow most accurately predicted penumbral tissue at 0·5 h (area
under the curve = 0·660), 1 h (area under the curve = 0·659),
1·5 h (area under the curve = 0·636), and 2 h (area under the
curve = 0·664) after stroke onset. A relative cerebral blood
flow threshold of < 55% of mean contralateral most accurately
predicted infarct core at 1 h (area under the curve = 0·765) and
at 2 h (area under the curve = 0·689) after middle cerebral
artery occlusion.
Conclusions The data provide perfusion computed tomography defined relative cerebral blood flow thresholds for infarct
core and ischemic penumbra within the first two hours after
experimental stroke in rats. These thresholds were shown to
be stable to define the volume of infarct core and penumbra
within this time window.
Key words: infarct core, ischemic penumbra, perfusion computed
tomography

Correspondence: Damian McLeod*, School of Biomedical Sciences &
Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan,
NSW 2308, Australia.
E-mail: damian.mcleod@newcastle.edu.au
1
Discipline of Human Physiology, School of Biomedical Sciences &
Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, and Hunter Medical Research Institute,
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia
2
Department of Neurology, John Hunter Hospital, Hunter Region M.C.,
New South Wales, Australia
Received: 7 December 2012; Accepted: 29 April 2013; Published online 21
October 2013
Conflicts of interest: None declared.
DOI: 10.1111/ijs.12147
© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

Introduction
Perfusion computed tomography (CTP) imaging of stroke
patients is used to determine the volume of tissue at risk of infarction that may be salvageable by early reperfusion (ischemic penumbra). CTP thresholds defining ischemic penumbra and infarct
core have most recently been established by co-registration of
acute CTP maps with follow-up magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) diffusion-weighted lesion volume (DWI) at 24 h to define
ischemic penumbra (patients without reperfusion), and infarct
core (patients with major reperfusion) (1). CTP would offer
several possible advantages over current methods to define perfusion following experimental stroke. In particular, it is performed in vivo, yet provides whole brain coverage, and the
potential for quantification of flow, unlike the case with methods
such as laser Doppler flowmetry and MR perfusion. Moreover,
experimental studies provide an opportunity to test the time
dependency of CTP parameters, as repeated scanning is feasible
and ethically justifiable. This permits studies of the evolution of
penumbra and the accuracy over time of thresholds used to define
it – both key questions in stroke research. The aims of the current
study were: (1) to determine the most accurate CTP parameters
for prediction of ischemic penumbra and infarct core within twohours of stroke onset in Wistar rats; (2) using these parameters, to
determine the most accurate thresholds for ischemic penumbra at
0·5, 1, 1·5 and 2 h; and infarct core at one and two-hours following stroke.

Methods
Summary of experimental plan
CTP imaging was performed on rats at serial time-points before
and after intraluminal thread occlusion of the middle cerebral
artery (MCA). Three different occlusion durations (1 h, 2 h, and
permanent MCA occlusion) were chosen to determine CTP
thresholds for ischemic penumbra and infarct core at multiple
time-points in the acute phase after stroke. CTP maps were
co-registered with 24 h histopathology, and pixel-based receiver
operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to determine the most accurate thresholds to predict penumbra and
infarct core.
Surgical procedures
All surgical and experimental protocols were in accordance with
the Australian Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals
for Scientific Purposes and were approved by the University of
Newcastle Animal Care and Ethics Committee. Male outbred
Wistar rats underwent MCA occlusion (MCAo) using the
silicone-tipped intraluminal thread occlusion method (2).
Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

553

Research
Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane (5% induction, 1·5–
2·5% maintenance) and a 50:50 mix of nitrous oxide and oxygen
via facemask. Animals were subject to either permanent MCAo
(n = 6) or 1 h or 2 h temporary MCAo (n = 6 each), with reperfusion achieved by gentle withdrawal of the occluding thread.
Details of thread insertion for MCAo on the CT scanning table
have been previously reported (3). All animals had a jugular
venous catheter inserted for injection of radio-opaque contrast
during imaging.
Temperature was monitored with a rectal probe thermometer
and maintained at 37 °C with a homeothermic heat mat during
surgery and imaging. Heart rate, SpO2, and respiratory rate were
monitored throughout surgical anesthesia.
CT Imaging procedures
After surgical preparation, the animals were placed in a standardized prone position on a custom-built CT-compatible board with
anesthetic nosepiece attached, and positioned on the CT scanner
table. Jugular venous catheters were connected to an automatic
injector (Stellant, Medrad, Warrendale, PA, USA), and preloaded
with contrast (Ultravist, 300 mg/ml; Bayer, Schering Pharma AG,
Leverkusen, Germany). The concentration of isoflurane was kept
at 1·0–1·5% with 50:50 nitrous oxide : oxygen throughout the CT
imaging protocol.
All imaging was performed with a Siemens 64 slice CT scanner
(Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with a 512 × 512 matrix; 50 mm
field-of-view and 12 2·4 mm slices were obtained per scan. The
development and optimization of the scanning procedure has
been previously described (3). Briefly, for each CTP scan, the flow
rate of contrast was 0·5 ml/s with a total injection volume of 2 ml.
Scanning parameters were: 100 kVp, 218 mAs, and 0·5 s rotation
speed. Sixty images at an interval of 0·5 s were acquired over 30 s
for each of the 12 slices while the CT scanner table remained
stationary.
A baseline head CTP scan was taken of all animals prior to
MCAo, immediately following MCAo, at 30 min intervals postMCAo until reperfusion, immediately after reperfusion, and at
30 min post-reperfusion. Animals in the permanent MCAo group
had their final scans at 2 h post-MCAo.
Image processing
Postprocessing of perfusion data was performed using MIStar
imaging software (Apollo Medical Imaging Technology,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia), as previously described (3). In
brief, the software automatically detected the arterial input function (AIF) and venous output function from the internal carotid
and sagittal sinus, respectively, and corrected any partial volume
averaging by scaling the peak of the AIF to the peak height of the
venous time attenuation curve. These were checked manually. The
software then used singular value decomposition with delay correction (1) to deconvolve the corrected AIF with individual time
attenuation curves (residue function) from each voxel, and produced perfusion maps for cerebral blood flow (CBF), cerebral
blood volume (CBV), and mean transit time (MTT), which were
calculated by the equation: MTT = CBV/CBF. Delay time (DT)
maps were also generated in the study, as per McLeod et al. (3);
however, the parameter was not used in the current study because

554

Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

D. D. McLeod et al.
our preliminary studies indicated that DT was not a reliable
measure due to the rapid cerebral circulation time in the rat.
Histology
At 24 h following MCA occlusion, all rats were euthanized and
perfused transcardially with saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde before histological processing, hemotoxylin-eosin staining
(3). Sections were scanned at 20× objective on a digital slide
scanner (Aperio Technologies Inc., Vista, CA, USA), regions of
infarction were traced on the Aperio Imagescope software, and
infarct volumes were quantified as previously described (3).
Co-registration of histology with CTP maps
From the 12 CTP map slices processed at each scan time-point,
three 2·4 mm CTP slices covered the MCA territory. The middle
slice, located closest to bregma, was used for subsequent analyses,
as it had the smallest volume of major blood vessels on perfusion
maps. Details of the co-registration process have been reported
previously (3); an example is shown in Fig. 1. The size of the
infarct on the coronal bregma slice was measured as the number
of pixels within the co-registered histological infarct core (Fig. 1).
The potential for repeated contrast injections to influence perfusion variables was also quantified. Background radio-intensity
values (Δ HU) were measured from the pre-stroke CTP scan
(prior to 1st contrast injection) in the 2 h MCAo-reperfusion
group, and again just prior to the final scan (i.e. 30 min after the
last of eight contrast doses in three hours).
Statistics
Infarct volume quantification
Infarct volumes (mean ± SEM) for the permanent MCAo group,
and 1 h and 2 h MCAo-reperfusion groups were calculated. Oneway analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to test the
effect of MCAo duration on infarct volume (Graphpad Prism 5,
GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Post hoc two-tailed
multiple comparisons tests (Bonferroni) were performed if occlusion duration had a significant effect at a level of P < 0·05.
Quantifying the effect of repeated doses of contrast on
background radio-density
The mean Δ HU of regions-of-interest (ROIs) encompassing the
ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres (coronal bregma CT
slice) was quantified from baseline images (prior to contrast
injection) at the pre-stroke scan time-point, and at the final scan
time-point (30 min following reperfusion) in the 2 h MCAoreperfusion group. Two-way ANOVA was performed to test the
effect of time and hemisphere on background radio-density units
(Δ HU). Post hoc Bonferroni tests were performed if time or
hemisphere had a significant effect (P < 0·05).
ROC curve analysis
ROC curve analysis was used to test the predictive performance of
perfusion CT in relation to the co-registered histological infarct
core at 24 h. The tracing of histological infarct core was considered to be the ‘true’ lesion, and the pixels in which the histological
lesion and perfusion CT lesion overlapped were considered to be
‘true positive’. Pixels not within the histology or perfusion CT
lesion were considered to be ‘true negative’. Pixels within the
© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

Research

D. D. McLeod et al.

Fig. 1 CTP maps from a rat two hours post-MCAo: (a) cerebral blood volume, CBV; (b) cerebral blood flow, CBF; (c) mean transit time, MTT; (d) penumbra
map. Penumbra map shows co-registered histological infarct (infarct ROI, red outline) and contralateral (left) and ipsilateral (right) hemisphere ROIs (white
outlines). Pixels with CBF < 75% of contralateral mean CBF are shown in green. Note: large blood vessels of the sagittal sinus, internal carotids, and
anterior cerebral artery were excluded from the analysis. At each threshold tested, the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) Analysis involves identification
of true positive pixels – green pixels within the red – outlined infarct ROI; true negative – the gray pixels outside the infarct ROI but within the ipsilateral
ROI (right hemisphere); false positive – green pixels outside infarct ROI and within ipsilateral ROI; false negative – gray pixels within the infarct ROI.
CTP, perfusion computed tomography; MCAo, middle cerebral artery occlusion; ROI, region of interest.

Table 1 Range and increments of relative CTP thresholds tested
CTP parameter

Range (%)

Increments (%)

CBF
CBV
MTT

0–100
0–100
100–200

5
5
5

CTP, perfusion computed tomography; CBF, cerebral blood flow;
CBV, cerebral blood volume; MTT, mean transit time.

perfusion CT lesion but not within the histology infarct lesion
were assigned as ‘false positive’, and pixels within the histology
lesion but not within the perfusion CT lesion were assigned as
‘false negative’ (Fig. 1).
To prevent a large true negative value biasing the true negative
to false positive ratio when calculating specificity, only hemispheric (ischemic side) brain pixels were analyzed, rather than
both hemispheres. As previously reported (1), without this correction, the false negative values would have a much greater influence upon the area under the curve (AUC) than the false positives,
producing results that could substantially overestimate the true
lesion volume.
Sensitivity [true positive/(true positive + false negative)] and
specificity [true negative/(true negative + false positive)] were
calculated for each perfusion map (CBF, CBV, and MTT) at each
threshold increment tested (Table 1). The true positivity rate
(sensitivity) was plotted against the false positive rate (1 – specificity) to generate ROC curves at each threshold increment. The
AUC and 95% confidence intervals were then calculated for each
threshold increment.
© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

CTP thresholds (i.e. percentage of mean contralateral hemisphere CBF, CBV, and MTT) have not been previously determined in an animal model of ischemic stroke. Previous animal
experiments have generally used absolute CBF thresholds, and
have demonstrated that penumbra and infarct core change over
the first few hours from stroke onset as the infarct core expands
into the penumbra (4,5). However, a recent study in human ischemic stroke using CTP (1) showed that relative thresholds were
more accurate than absolute thresholds in defining the volume of
the ischemic penumbra and infarct core. Therefore, relative perfusion thresholds were tested in the current study.
Histologically defined infarction at 24 h was used to define the
extent of critically hypoperfused tissue (incorporating penumbra
and core) in animals without reperfusion, and infarct core in
animals with reperfusion. To calculate the most accurate CTP
parameter for predicting the penumbra threshold, data from all
scan time-points in permanent MCAo animals were pooled and
an ROC curve analysis was performed to determine the AUCs for
CBF, CBV, and MTT. The CTP parameter with the highest AUC
was then used to define the most accurate penumbra threshold for
that parameter at each scan time-point.
The infarct core was defined as infarcted tissue on 24 h histology
in temporary MCAo animals (i.e. tissue not salvaged by reperfusion). Co-registered CTP data from the 1 h scan time-point, just
prior to reperfusion (1 h MCAo-reperfusion group), were used to
define CTP infarction thresholds at one hour after stroke. Data at
the 2 h scan time-point (2 h MCAo-reperfusion group) were used
to define infarction thresholds at two hours post-stroke onset. To
calculate the most accurate overall CTP parameter for predicting
infarct core within two hours of stroke onset, specificity and
Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

555

Research
sensitivity data from both MCAo-reperfusion groups were pooled
and an ROC curve analysis was performed to determine the AUCs
for CBF, CBV, and MTT. The CTP parameter with the highest AUC
was then used to define the most accurate infarction thresholds at
each time-point.
Lesion size validation
To internally validate the ROC results, a lesion size analysis was
performed to compare the perfusion CT threshold-derived lesion
sizes to the relevant co-registered 24 h histology infarct size, in the
permanent and reperfusion MCAo groups. Penumbra thresholds
were applied to co-registered CTP maps at each scan time-point
in the permanent MCAo group. The 1 h infarction threshold was
applied to both the 0.5 and 1 h CTP scans (1 h MCAo-reperfusion
group); the two hour infarction threshold was applied to the 0·5,
1, 1·5, and 2 h scan points (2 h MCAo-reperfusion group). The
one hour and two hour thresholds for infarct core were also
applied to the permanent MCAo group. One-way repeated measures ANOVA (RM ANOVA) was performed on each of the data
sets to test the effect of time on lesion size. Post hoc two-tailed
multiple comparison tests were performed if time had a significant effect at a level of P < 0·05.

Results
Infarct volumes determined via histopathology
Infarct volumes (mean ± SEM) for the 1 h, 2 h MCAoreperfusion, and permanent MCAo groups were 18·5 ± 9·07 mm3,
24·4 ± 8·78 mm3, and 113·9 ± 20·21 mm3, respectively. One-way
ANOVA showed a significant effect of MCAo duration on infarct
volume (P = 0·004). Post-hoc Bonferroni tests did not show a
significant difference in infarct volumes between the 1 h and 2 h
MCAo-reperfusion groups (P > 0·05). There was a significant difference in infarct volumes between the 1 h MCAo-reperfusion
group and the permanent MCAo group (P < 0·001), and a significant difference between the 2 h MCAo-reperfusion and permanent MCAo group (P < 0·01).
Background radio-density quantification
There was no significant change in precontrast radio-density
between baseline and final scans in the 2 h MCAo-reperfusion
group (n = 6). The Δ HU (mean ± SEM) of the contralateral
hemisphere ROI in the pre-stroke control scan, and the final scan,
were 102 ± 1·9 and 102 ± 2·2, respectively. Ipsilateral baseline Δ
HU values at control, and prior to the final scan, were 104 ± 1·6
and 104 ± 2·9, respectively.
Confirming MCA occlusion on CTP maps
Control CTP scans (prior to MCAo) from all animals showed no
evidence of a perfusion lesion in any animal. Successful vessel
occlusion was confirmed by evidence of a perfusion lesion on
CTP maps processed from the scan performed immediately after
MCAo. Absence of a perfusion lesion on any of the CTP maps was
taken to indicate inadequate vessel occlusion (n = 3), in which
case the occluding thread was gently advanced, and another CTP
scan was performed. Perfusion lesions were seen on CTP maps
at all subsequent scan times during vessel occlusion, indicating
no cases of inadvertent MCA reperfusion. The lesion location

556

Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

D. D. McLeod et al.
(cranial to caudal distribution) varied within the MCA territory
between animals. In animals that were reperfused, the 30-min
post-reperfusion CTP maps showed that two out of the six rats in
the 1 h MCAo-reperfusion group had a minimal perfusion lesion
on CTP maps (four of six had no visible lesion); six of six rats in
the 2 h MCAo-reperfusion group had a minimal perfusion lesion.
Defining the most accurate CTP parameter for
penumbra and infarct core prediction
Pooled ROC curve analysis data from the permanent MCAo
group indicated that relative CBF (rCBF) was the CTP parameter
that most accurately predicted the ischemic penumbra (including
core) within two hours of stroke onset (Fig. 2a). Pooled data from
the 1 h and 2 h MCAo-reperfusion groups indicated that rCBF
was also the most accurate parameter for prediction of infarct
core within two hours of stroke onset (Fig. 2b).
Defining the most accurate rCBF thresholds for
penumbra and infarct core over time
The same rCBF threshold (< 75% of mean contralateral hemisphere CBF) most accurately predicted the outer border of penumbra (including core) at each different scan time-point in the
permanent MCAo group (Table 2). This indicates that there is
little change in rCBF thresholds predicting ischemic penumbra
within two hours of stroke onset.
Infarct core was most accurately predicted by the CBF threshold of < 55% of mean contralateral CBF at both the one hour (1 h
MCAo-reperfusion group) and two hour (2 h MCAo-reperfusion
group) time-points (Table 3).
Applying CBF thresholds to CBF maps for
lesion size validation
At each scan time-point following MCAo, CTP-predicted lesion
sizes were calculated after applying the penumbra threshold
(CBF < 75% of mean contralateral hemisphere) to the permanent
MCAo group CBF maps at the 0·5, 1, 1·5, and 2 h scan time-points
and compared with the co-registered 24 h infarct size. One-way

Table 2 Most accurate relative penumbral thresholds that predicted
the stroke lesion at each scan time-point after MCAo
Time (hours
post-MCAo)

CBF threshold
(% of contralateral)

AUC

95% CIs

0·5

CBF < 75%
CBV < 75%
MTT < 135%
CBF < 75%
CBV < 70%
MTT < 120%
CBF < 75%
CBV < 75%
MTT < 135%
CBF < 75%
CBV < 75%
MTT < 140%

0·66
0·56
0·58
0·66
0·63
0·60
0·64
0·59
0·59
0·66
0·62
0·57

0·765;
0·696;
0·692;
0·762;
0·752;
0·706;
0·760;
0·716;
0·694;
0·791;
0·743;
0·700;

1·0

1·5

2·0

0·555
0·422
0·464
0·551
0·511
0·493
0·512
0·462
0·475
0·537
0·505
0·443

AUC, area under the curve; CBF, cerebral blood flow; CBV, cerebral
blood volume; CI, confidence interval; MCAo, middle cerebral artery
occlusion; MTT, mean transit time.

© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

Research

D. D. McLeod et al.

Fig. 2 ROC curves for penumbra and infarct core. (a) The tissue that progressed to infarction in permanent MCAo animals (penumbra) was best predicted
by rCBF (AUC = 0·698), followed by rCBV (AUC = 0·618), then rMTT (AUC = 0·568). Penumbra ROC curve analysis includes data from all scan time-points
from permanent MCAo group (n = 6). (b) The CTP parameter that most accurately predicted infarct core at 24 h in animals with MCA reperfusion was
rCBF (AUC = 0·796), followed by rCBV (AUC = 0·750), then rMTT (AUC = 0·569). Infarct core ROC curve analysis includes data from the 1 h (n = 6) and
2 h (n = 6) MCAo-reperfusion groups. AUC, area under the curve; MCA, middle cerebral artery; MCAo, middle cerebral artery occlusion;
rCBF, regional cerebral blood flow; rCBV, regional cerebral blood volume; rMTT, regional mean transit time.
Table 3 Most accurate relative CTP thresholds for infarct core prediction at one hour and two hours after MCAo
Time (hours
post-MCAo)

CBF threshold
(% of contralateral)

AUC

95% CIs

1

CBF < 55%
CBV < 75%
MTT < 130%
CBF < 55%
CBV < 70%
MTT < 145%

0·77
0·69
0·60
0·69
0·71
0·55

0·888;
0·822;
0·741;
0·759;
0·779;
0·640;

2

0·641
0·548
0·453
0·619
0·649
0·459

AUC, area under the curve; CBF, cerebral blood flow; CBV, cerebral
blood volume; CI, confidence interval; CTP, perfusion computed
tomography; MCAo, middle cerebral artery occlusion; MTT, mean
transit time.

RM ANOVA did not show any significant effect of time on lesion
size (P = 0·37) (Fig. 3a).
CTP-predicted infarct core lesion sizes were calculated after
applying the CBF threshold (CBF < 55% of contralateral hemisphere) to the 1 h MCAo-reperfusion group CBF maps at the 0·5
and 1 h scan time-points. Mean lesion sizes were plotted against
the co-registered infarct size at 24 h (Fig. 3b). One-way RM
ANOVA did not show any significant effect of time on infarct core
lesion size (P = 0·09). Similarly, when the infarction threshold was
applied to the 2 h MCAo-reperfusion group, CBF maps at the 0·5,
1, 1·5, and 2 h time-points, one-way RM ANOVA did not show a
significant effect of time on infarct core lesion size (P = 0·08)
(Fig. 3c).
When both the penumbra threshold (CBF < 75% of contralateral) and infarction threshold (CBF < 55% of contralateral) were
applied to the permanent MCAo group CBF maps at each scan
time-point, the lesion size histograms were plotted overlying each
other to show the separate ‘Penumbra’ size and ‘Core’ size at each
time-point (Fig. 4). One-way RM ANOVA showed that time had
© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

no effect on ‘Penumbra’ size (P = 0·53). The data indicate that the
predicted penumbra becomes incorporated into the infarct core
at 24 h (Fig. 4).

Discussion
This is the first rodent stroke study to use CTP thresholds and
histological infarct outcomes to define the ischemic penumbra
and infarct core at serial time-points after stroke. The CTP
parameter that most accurately predicted the penumbra and
infarct core within two hours of stroke onset was rCBF. The rCBF
thresholds of < 75% and < 55% most accurately predicted the
penumbra and infarct core, respectively, at each imaging timepoint up to two hours after stroke. The rCBF penumbra and core
thresholds were stable during the acute phase following stroke in
this model.
The stability of the rCBF penumbra threshold over time is
consistent with the literature. For example, MRI perfusion
imaging methods have demonstrated that the penumbra threshold defining the CBF lesion volume does not change significantly
within the first three hours after permanent MCAo in rats (6).
The stability of the infarction threshold is not surprising, given
that there was no significant difference in infarct volumes
between the 1 h and 2 h MCAo-reperfusion groups. By applying
the rCBF penumbra and core thresholds to the permanent MCAo
group, however, we confirmed in our model the well-established
finding that the penumbra becomes incorporated into the infarct
core after ischemic stroke (4,5).
The current findings provide new information that may be
used to investigate potential acute treatment strategies following
ischemic stroke. Serial CTP scanning in the rat stroke model
allows investigation of whole brain hemodynamics over time,
an advantage over other methods of perfusion monitoring
that only allow monitoring of a small cortical region. An additional strength of this study was the use of pixel-based analysis,
Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

557

Research

D. D. McLeod et al.

Fig. 4 CTP-predicted penumbra and infarct core lesion size plotted at
each scan time-point in permanent MCAo animals (n = 6), calculated by
applying the penumbra threshold (CBF < 75% of mean contralateral) and
infarction threshold (CBF < 55% of mean contralateral) to CBF maps at
each scan time-point. Data are mean + SEM. The permanent MCAo group
infarct size at 24 h is plotted as ‘Permanent MCAo infarct’; the 2 h
MCAo-reperfusion group infarct size at 24 h is plotted as ‘2 h MCAoreperfusion infarct’. Overlapping histograms at each scan time-point allow
visualization of the ‘Penumbra’ and ‘Core’ size at each scan time-point.
The predicted penumbra becomes incorporated into the infarct core at
24 h (white bar). The difference between the ‘permanent MCAo infarct’
and the ‘2 h MCAo-reperfusion infarct’ indicates the amount of tissue
that was predicted to be salvaged if reperfusion occurred immediately
after the 2 h scan time-point. The resulting infarct from the 2 h MCAo
animals is included for comparison (separate cohort, n = 6). CBF, cerebral
blood flow; CTP, perfusion computed tomography; MCAo, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Fig. 3 Calculated penumbra and infarct core sizes over time. (a) Lesion
sizes calculated using the most accurate penumbra threshold (CBF < 75%
of mean contralateral) at different time-points (hollow columns), compared with that from the co-registered histology (dark column).
(b and c) Lesion sizes for infarct core calculated using the CBF < 55% of
mean contralateral threshold applied to the 1 h (b) and 2 h (c) MCAoreperfusion animals (n = 6 in each group), and compared with the
co-registered 24 h histology (dark columns). Data are mean + SEM. CBF,
cerebral blood flow;MCAo, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

permitting analysis of subjects with highly variable lesion sizes,
and also closely mimicking clinical studies. The use of a rat model
limited spatial resolution somewhat; however, this was partially
compensated for by the ability to use a much smaller field of view,
and achieve whole brain coverage.

558

Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

Persistent perfusion lesions were seen following withdrawal of
the occluding thread in several animals. The cause of the observed
perfusion lesions for up to 30 min following reperfusion is most
likely due to small vessel nonreperfusion (also known as ‘noreflow’) due to swelling of endothelial cells with subsequent formation of microthrombi within vessels of the infarct core (7–9).
The rCBF thresholds of < 75% and < 55% most accurately
predicted the penumbra and infarct core in rats, whereas the best
rCBF thresholds were < 50% and < 40%, respectively, using
similar methodology in humans (1). There are several possible
explanations for these differences, for example, circulation time
is significantly faster in the rat, and by necessity the studies
were done under light anesthesia. Thresholds obtained in the
present study were also somewhat higher than those obtained
in previous rodent stroke studies using techniques such as CBF
autoradiography (10).
Inadequate clearance of radio-opaque contrast was largely
excluded as a cause of potential overestimation of rCBF thresholds, as no change was seen in radio-density even after multiple
doses of radiocontrast. This indicates that 30 min between CTP
© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

Research

D. D. McLeod et al.
scan time-points is adequate for renal clearance of intravenous
radio-opaque contrast in rats.
There were some limitations to this study. As mentioned, the
use of one hour and two hour temporary MCAo durations may
have been suboptimal for determining the effect of time on the
infarction threshold because infarct volumes in both duration
groups were small and not significantly different. The small
infarcts are consistent with previous reports of small and variable
infarct volumes following MCAo in outbred Wistar rats from
some suppliers (11,12). An important potential source of inaccuracy is the co-registration of histology and CTP maps. This was
done based on stereotaxic coordinates from a rat atlas. Although
the brain hemispheres and infarcted tissue are accurately demarcated from high-resolution scanned images, there is inevitable
brain shrinkage that occurs due to histological fixation and processing. As a result, any differences in the coronal sectioning in
any of the x, y, or z planes between the histology section and CTP
map may result in co-registration errors. Unfortunately, there is
currently no perfect method for co-registration of histological
sections with in vivo imaging sets. Co-registration errors combined with small sample sizes in each experimental group are
mostly likely responsible for the absence of a distinct threshold on
the ROC curves and suboptimal AUCs. Given the issues of
co-registration and resolution, segmentation for separate analysis
of gray and white matter compartments was not attempted.
However, the well-known differences in baseline perfusion and
infarction thresholds between gray and white matter are likely to
be of less importance in this experimental study than in human
imaging, because white matter comprises only 14% of the rat
brain (versus 50% in humans) (13). Blood pressure and intracranial pressure were not monitored during CTP imaging, and thus
changes in cerebral perfusion pressure during imaging cannot be
ruled out as a source of error that may have led to an overestimation of rCBF penumbra and infarction thresholds.
The current study provides the first evidence of the impact of
time on CTP-defined penumbra and infarction thresholds in a rat
ischemic stroke model. Our data show the stability of relative CBF
thresholds predicting penumbra and infarct core within the first
two hours from stroke. The data suggest that a single set of relative
CTP thresholds may be used to define penumbra and infarct core
within two hours of ischemic stroke onset in rats.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank radiographers Marc Heaton, David
Buxton, and Stephen Beautement (Hunter Health Imaging, John

© 2013 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2013 World Stroke Organization

Hunter Hospital); Qing Yang (Apollo Medical Imaging Technology, Melbourne Australia); Debbie Pepperall; Sunyoung Chung;
and the University of Newcastle Faculty of Health Workshop team
for their technical expertise throughout the study. This study was
supported by grants from the Australian National Health &
Medical Research Council (NHMRC stroke program grant
454417), The National Stroke Foundation, and the Hunter
Medical Research Institute.

References
1 Bivard A, Spratt N, Levi C, Parsons M. Perfusion computer tomography: imaging and clinical validation in acute ischaemic stroke. Brain
2011; 134(Pt 11):3408–16.
2 Spratt NJ, Fernandez J, Chen M et al. Modification of the method of
thread manufacture improves stroke induction rate and reduces mortality after thread-occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in young or
aged rats. J Neurosci Methods 2006; 155:285–90.
3 McLeod DD, Parsons MW, Levi CR et al. Establishing a rodent stroke
perfusion computed tomography model. International journal of
stroke: official journal of the International Stroke. Society 2011;
6:284–9.
4 Astrup J, Siesjo BK, Symon L. Thresholds in cerebral ischemia: the
ischemic penumbra. Stroke 1981; 12:723–5.
5 Hossmann KA. Viability thresholds and the penumbra of focal ischemia. Ann Neurol 1994; 36:557–65.
6 Henninger N, Fisher M. Stimulating circle of Willis nerve fibers preserves the diffusion-perfusion mismatch in experimental stroke.
Stroke 2007; 38:2779–86.
7 Ames A, 3rd, Wright RL, Kowada M, Thurston JM, Majno G. Cerebral
ischemia. II. The no-reflow phenomenon. Am J Pathol 1968; 52:437–
53.
8 Liu S, Connor J, Peterson S, Shuttleworth CW, Liu KJ. Direct
visualization of trapped erythrocytes in rat brain after focal
ischemia and reperfusion. J Cerebral Blood Flow Metab 2002; 22:1222–
30.
9 Mori E, del Zoppo GJ, Chambers JD, Copeland BR, Arfors KE. Inhibition of polymorphonuclear leukocyte adherence suppresses
no-reflow after focal cerebral ischemia in baboons. Stroke 1992;
23:712–8.
10 Touzani O, Baron JC. Duration and thresholds of the ischemic penumbra in different species; in Donnan GA, Baron JC, Davis SM, Sharp
FR (eds). The Ischemic Penumbra. New York, Informa Healthcare
USA, Inc., 2007:37–58.
11 Oliff HS, Weber E, Eilon G, Marek P. The role of strain/vendor
differences on the outcome of focal ischemia induced by intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat. Brain Res 1995;
675:20–6.
12 Ma J, Zhao L, Nowak TS, Jr. Selective, reversible occlusion of the
middle cerebral artery in rats by an intraluminal approach optimized
filament design and methodology. J Neurosci Methods 2006; 156:76–
83.
13 Zhang K, Sejnowski TJ. A universal scaling law between gray matter
and white matter of cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2000;
97:5621–6.

Vol 10, June 2015, 553–559

559

