The Journal of Neuroscience, March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2881

Neurobiology of Disease

Microglial Cells Prevent Hemorrhage in Neonatal Focal
Arterial Stroke
David Fernández-López,1 Joel Faustino,1 Alexander L. Klibanov,2 Nikita Derugin,1 Elodie Blanchard,1
Franziska Simon,3 X Stephen L. Leib,3 and Zinaida S. Vexler1
1

Department of Neurology, University of California–San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158, 2Department of Medicine, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, and 3Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, 3001 Bern, Switzerland

Perinatal stroke leads to significant morbidity and long-term neurological and cognitive deficits. The pathophysiological mechanisms of
brain damage depend on brain maturation at the time of stroke. To understand whether microglial cells limit injury after neonatal stroke
by preserving neurovascular integrity, we subjected postnatal day 7 (P7) rats depleted of microglial cells, rats with inhibited microglial
TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling, and corresponding controls, to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO). Microglial depletion by
intracerebral injection of liposome-encapsulated clodronate at P5 significantly reduced vessel coverage and triggered hemorrhages in
injured regions 24 h after tMCAO. Lack of microglia did not alter expression or intracellular redistribution of several tight junction
proteins, did not affect degradation of collagen IV induced by the tMCAO, but altered cell types producing TGF␤1 and the phosphorylation and intracellular distribution of SMAD2/3. Selective inhibition of TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling in microglia via intracerebral liposomeencapsulated SB-431542 delivery triggered hemorrhages after tMCAO, demonstrating that TGF␤1/TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling in microglia
protects from hemorrhages. Consistent with observations in neonatal rats, depletion of microglia before tMCAO in P9 Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹/
Ccr2 RFP/⫹ mice exacerbated injury and induced hemorrhages at 24 h. The effects were independent of infiltration of Ccr2 RFP/⫹ monocytes into injured regions. Cumulatively, in two species, we show that microglial cells protect neonatal brain from hemorrhage after acute
ischemic stroke.
Key words: blood– brain barrier; extracellular matrix; inflammation; middle cerebral artery occlusion; postnatal; TGF␤1

Significance Statement
The pathophysiological mechanisms of brain damage depend on brain maturation at the time of stroke. We assessed whether
microglial cells preserve neurovascular integrity after neonatal stroke. In neonatal rats, microglial depletion or pharmacological
inhibition of TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling in microglia triggered hemorrhages in injured regions. The effect was not associated with
additional changes in expression or intracellular redistribution of several tight junction proteins or collagen IV degradation
induced by stroke. Consistent with observations in neonatal rats, microglial depletion in neonatal mice exacerbated stroke injury
and induced hemorrhages. The effects were independent of infiltration of monocytes into injured regions. Thus, microglia protect
neonatal brain from ischemia-induced hemorrhages, and this effect is consistent across two species.

Introduction
The incidence of perinatal stroke is similar to that in the elderly
(Lynch and Nelson, 2001; Kirton and Deveber, 2013). Perinatal

Received Jan. 9, 2015; revised Jan. 10, 2016; accepted Jan. 13, 2016.
Author contributions: Z.S.V. designed research; D.F.-L., J.F., A.L.K., N.D., E.B., and F.S. performed research; D.F.L., J.F., E.B., F.S., S.L.L., and Z.S.V. analyzed data; D.F.-L. and Z.S.V. wrote the paper.
The work was supported by RO1 NS55915 to Z.S.V., RO1 NS44025 to Z.S.V., RO1 NS76726 to Z.S.V. and A.L.K., R21
NS080015 to Z.S.V., Ramón Areces Foundation, Madrid, Spain to D.F.-L., Swiss National Science Foundation
310030_162583 to S.L.L., and The American Heart Association POST10980003 to D.F.-L. The authors thank Patrick
Rugo for technical help.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Zinaida S. Vexler, University California–San Francisco, Department of
Neurology, 675 Nelson Rising Lane, San Francisco, CA 94158-0663. E-mail: Zena.Vexler@ucsf.edu.

stroke leads to significant morbidity and long-term neurological
deficits. It has become clear that brain immaturity at the time of
injury plays a key role in the pattern of brain damage in humans,
but the underlying mechanisms of the differing pathophysiology
of perinatal and adult stroke are far from being understood
(Fernández-López et al., 2014). Recent studies showed that hemorrhagic transformation of infarction is the leading mechanism
of hemorrhagic stroke in term and late preterm neonates
(Armstrong-Wells et al., 2009; Bruno et al., 2014), but the underlying mechanisms are poorly defined.

DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0140-15.2016
Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/362881-13$15.00/0

2882 • J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893

Vascular degeneration and malfunction are important contributors to stroke. In adults, ischemia-reperfusion disrupts both
structural morphology of the blood– brain barrier (BBB) and
finely tuned interactions between endothelial cells, vascular basal
lamina, pericytes, and astrocytes, allowing neurotoxic plasma
components into the brain. Depending on initial stroke severity
(i.e., length and extent of perfusion deficits), disruption of the
BBB can be rapid and biphasic (Yang and Rosenberg, 2011) or
gradual and delayed (Knowland et al., 2014), with disruption of
both the transcellular and paracellular permeability mechanisms.
Lengthy periods of perfusion deficits followed by reperfusion
lead to hemorrhagic transformation (Jickling et al., 2014). These
pathophysiological events, which are closely associated with the
increased recruitment and infiltration of circulating leukocytes,
trigger local inflammation in the brain and contribute to further
BBB breakdown and endothelial cell degeneration (Denes et al.,
2010). Endothelial cells exposed to locally produced cytokines
become reactive and actively facilitate the recruitment of circulating leukocytes through upregulation of adhesion molecules at
the luminal vessel side. Adherent and infiltrated leukocytes release neurotoxic inflammatory mediators and reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and activate glial cells, further damaging vascular
integrity (Iadecola and Anrather, 2011). Stroke-induced neuroinflammatory processes, including microglial responses, also differ between neonatal brain and adult brain, and strategies aimed
to prevent or reduce inflammatory damage in adults may be ineffective or deleterious in newborns (Fernández-López et al.,
2014).
Until recently, disruption of the BBB in a postischemic neonatal brain was assumed, with little evidence for or against such a
notion. We identified major differences in functional BBB responsiveness to ischemia-reperfusion between neonates and
adults by showing that leakage of large intravascular tracers in the
neonatal rat brain is significantly lower than in the adult brain
24 h after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO)
and that several factors, including distinct mechanisms of endothelial cell activation, structure of the extracellular matrix
(ECM), and neutrophil-endothelial interactions, account, at least
in part, for the differences in BBB functional integrity observed
between the two ages (Fernández-López et al., 2012).
Activated microglial cells have been traditionally considered injurious in the postischemic brain due to production of
inflammatory mediators, ROS, and other toxic molecules
(Wang et al., 2007). However, more recent data suggest that
microglia may have a dual role after stroke, injurious (Monje
et al., 2003) or beneficial (Lalancette-Hébert et al., 2007). Microglial phenotypes are heterogeneous, and the origins of resident microglia and infiltrated monocytes are distinct
(Ginhoux et al., 2010), producing separate effects in stroke.
Data are also emerging that microglial phenotypes during fetal
and postnatal brain development differ from those in the adult
and that microglial cells have unique roles in the postnatal
brain (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Butovsky et al., 2014).
We previously showed that depletion of microglia enhances
neuroinflammation and exacerbates injury in neonatal rats subjected to tMCAO (Faustino et al., 2011). In this study, we asked
whether microglial cells have direct effects on neurovascular integrity after neonatal stroke. We demonstrate that microglial depletion adversely affects vascular density and increases vascular
permeability and the incidence of intracerebral hemorrhages in
acutely injured regions, and that inhibition of TGF␤1 signaling
selectively in microglia recapitulates hemorrhage induction in a
neonatal rat tMCAO model. We then demonstrate that the effects

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

are not species-specific and that microglia also protect the neonatal postischemic mouse brain from hemorrhages.

Materials and Methods
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of the University of California–San Francisco.
Depletion of microglial cells was accomplished by intracerebral administration of liposomes with encapsulated clodronate (dichloromethylene bis-phosphonate, Clod-lip) to P5 rats of either sex, as we previously
reported (Faustino et al., 2011). Liposomes containing PBS (PBS-lip)
served as vehicle. Density of microglial cells was determined in injured
and in matching contralateral regions in all untreated, PBS-lip-treated,
and Clod-treated rats. Microglial depletion in Clod-lip-treated rats was
defined as at least 85% reduction in microglial density in injured regions
compared with the corresponding injured regions of untreated rats 24 h
after tMCAO. Clod-lip-treated rats with ⬎15% microglial density were
excluded from the study (Faustino et al., 2011).
Transient 3 h MCAO was induced in unsexed P7 rats as we previously
described (Derugin et al., 2005).
Transient 3 h MCAO was induced in unsexed P9-P10 Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹/
Ccr2 RFP/⫹ mice using the surgical procedure we previously described
(Woo et al., 2012). The Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹/Ccr2 RFP/⫹ mouse line was established by Dr. Charo at the Gladstone Institute at the University of California–San Francisco (Saederup et al., 2010); founders for the colony
were kindly provided to us by Dr. Katerina Akassoglou at the Gladstone
Institutes at the University of California–San Francisco.
Histological analysis was performed in perfusion-fixed, postfixed, and
cryoprotected flash-frozen brains that were sectioned on a cryostat (12␮m-thick serial sections, 500 ␮m apart). Brain injury was determined in
six coronal Nissl-stained sections.
Immunofluorescence image acquisition and 3D data analysis of fluorescence data were performed in rats in adjacent brain sections incubated
in blocking solution (10% normal goat serum, 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS
1⫻, 1 h, room temperature) overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies
[rabbit anti-Iba1 1:500, Wako; rabbit anti-collagen IV, 1:1000, Abcam;
mouse anti-rat RECA-1 1:200, ABD Serotec; activated caspase-3 (AC3),
1:500, Cell Signaling Technology; mouse anti-rat GFAP 1:500, BD Biosciences; rabbit anti-rat TGF␤1, 1:500, Torrey Pines; NeuN, 1:100, Millipore Bioscience Research Reagents], followed by appropriate secondary
antibodies, isolectin-B4 (IB4, 1:100, Invitrogen) and DAPI. Confocallike Z-stacks (25⫻ oil objective, 10 ␮m thick, 1 ␮m Z step) were acquired
using a Zeiss microscope equipped with the confocal-like Optigrid devise
and Volocity software (Improvision) (Fernández-López et al., 2012).
Vascular density was quantified in six fields per view (FOV) per region
per brain using automated threshold protocols for object detection.
Mean and sum of vessel volume, length, and number were calculated in a
standard size voxel. Density of microglia/macrophages was calculated by
subtracting RECA-1 ⫹ object volume (vessels) from IB4 ⫹ object volume
(vessels ⫹ microglia/macrophages). The number of cells that express
activated caspase-3 colocalizing with RECA-1 ⫹ vessels was quantified
manually. The number of string vessels (RECA-1 ⫺/Col-IV ⫹ vessels) was
obtained by subtraction of RECA-1 ⫹ objects from Col-IV ⫹ objects. Volume data were expressed as the percentage of total sampled volume.
Similar staining protocols, image acquisition, and analysis were used in
the mouse brain. The numbers of GFP ⫹ microglia and RFP ⫹ monocytes
were calculated. The number of infiltrated monocytes not touching
Glut1 ⫹ vessels was determined.
Intracerebral hemorrhages in the rat brain parenchyma were visualized by FITC immunofluorescence or in DAB/H2O2-stained sections
counterstained with Nissl. The total number of hemorrhages was quantified in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres in 4 serial sections
per brain (500 ␮m apart), covering the rostrocaudal extent of the infarct.
Intravascular red blood cells were excluded from analysis. Area covered
by FITC-positive hemorrhages was measured using Volocity software,
the total number of hemorrhages and the number of larger size hemorrhages, with surface area larger than ⬎10,000 ␮m 2, were counted, and
the data were presented as total sum of hemorrhages. The size of DABpositive hemorrhages was determined as the length of the longest axis in
4 serial sections per rat brain (500 ␮m apart) and 6 serial sections per

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

mouse brain. The total number of hemorrhages, the number of parenchyma hemorrhages, and the number of hemorrhages ⬎50 ␮m in rats
and ⬎25 ␮m were determined using a Nikon microscope.
BBB permeability to intravenous fluorescent tracers was determined
in rat pups using TRITC-conjugated 70 kDa dextran injected into the
jugular vein 23 h after reperfusion followed by transcardial perfusion 1 h
later (Fernández-López et al., 2012) and using same procedure following
intrajugular injection of Alexa-647-conjugated albumin in mouse pups.
In situ detection of superoxide production was determined using cellpermeable dye hydroethidine (DHE, 5 mg/kg, i.p.) administered 3 h
before death, followed by perfusion-fixation, as we previously described
(Faustino et al., 2011).
Whole-brain lysates were prepared from injured and matching contralateral regions by homogenization in 1⫻ lysis buffer (Cell Signaling
Technology) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche).
Injury was confirmed by the presence of spectrin cleavage (anti-spectrin,
1:2000) on same Western blot. Protein expression was determined using
rat anti-collagen IV␣-1 (1:1000, Sato), rabbit anti-claudin-5 (1:500, Invitrogen), mouse anti-occludin (1:500, Invitrogen), rabbit antiSMAD2/3 (1:500, Millipore), rabbit anti-pSMAD2 (1:500, Millipore),
and mouse anti-spectrin (1:2000, Millipore) diluted in blocking buffer
(5% milk in 0.2% Tween 20/TBS, 4°C overnight). Results were normalized to expression of actin (mouse anti-actin, 1:5000, Sigma-Aldrich).
Subcellular fractions, including cytosolic, membranous, nuclear, and
cytoskeletal fractions, were extracted from brain tissue using ProteoExtract Subcellular Proteome Extraction Kit (Calbiochem) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Protein was concentrated by incubation in
4 volumes of ice-cold acetone at ⫺20°C for 1 h followed by centrifugation
at 14,000 ⫻ g for 10 min and resuspension in a smaller volume of rehydration lysis buffer containing 3 M urea, 1 mM DTT, 5% CHAPS, and 5%
SDS. The identity of each fraction was confirmed by Western blot
using anti-MKK3 (cytosolic fraction [CF], Cell Signaling Technology), anti-N-cadherin (membrane/organelle fraction [MF], Epitomics), anti-histone H1 (nuclear fraction, 1:1000, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), and vimentin (actin cytoskeletal fraction [ACF], Cell
Signaling Technology). Protein concentration was normalized to actin in individual subcellular fractions.
MMP-9 and MMP-2 gel zymography was performed in whole-brain
lysates from injured and matching contralateral regions using 1% gelatin
SDS-PAGE zymography and Type A gelatin from porcine skin (Sigma).
The presence of injury was confirmed on Western blot by calpain- and
caspase-3-spectin cleavage, as previously described (Faustino et al.,
2011). Equal volumes of brain homogenates were diluted in 4⫻ sample
buffer (0.125 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8; 4% sucrose; 10% SDS, 0.003% bromophenol blue), and proteins were separated electrophoretically under
nonreducing conditions. Human neutrophil MMP-9 (Calbiochem) was
used as positive control. SDS was removed using Triton X-100, and gels
were incubated overnight at 37°C in zymography buffer (10 mM CaCl2,
50 mM Tris, 50 mM NaCl pH 7.65). Gels were then stained with a solution
containing Coomassie Blue R250, 30% methanol, and 10% acetic acid.
Densitometric quantification of the lysis regions (⬃92 kDa for proMMP-9) was performed using Scion Image and data normalized per
amount of protein in each sample. Recombinant MMP-9 and MMP-2
were included to each gel as a standard.
Recombinant human TGF␤1 (rhTGF␤1) was reconstituted in 10 mM
citric acid, pH 3.0, diluted in PBS/0.1% BSA, and administered (0.5
mg/kg/injection; intrajugular) twice, 6 h and 90 min before death at 24 h
after reperfusion.
SB-431542 was entrapped into the liposomes by a variant of a proliposome method by mixing SB-431542 in propylene glycol (5 mg/ml)
with concentrated solution of DOPC, cholesterol, and DiI in ethanol;
adding 1:3 mass of 0.2 M (NH4)2SO4 in water to generate the proliposome
gel; gel was rapidly diluted into excess saline to form liposomes. Unincorporated SB-431542 was removed by centrifugal wash. Spectrophotometrically, SB-431542 entrapment rate was ⬃50%; ⬃0.062 or 0.25 ␮g/g
rat was delivered intracortical.
Statistical analysis. Data are presented as mean ⫾ SD or as medians.
Normal data were analyzed by ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test for
multiple groups or paired t test for comparisons between two groups.

J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2883

Discrete or not normal data were analyzed using the Kruskal–Wallis or
the Mann–Whitney tests.

Results
Depletion of microglial cells does not induce vascular
permeability in uninjured regions but adversely affects vessel
coverage and increases vascular permeability in injured
regions of P7 rats subjected to tMCAO
Considering that the route of peripheral administration of Clodlip, intravenous or intraperitoneal, was shown to deplete different subpopulations of cells of the monocyte lineage in the blood
and in peripheral organs (Polfliet et al., 2001; van Rooijen and
Hendrikx, 2010), to preferentially target microglial cells, we administered Clod-lip into brain parenchyma. We previously
showed that depletion of microglial cells by intracortical Clod-lip
injection before tMCAO in P7 rats enhances neuroinflammation
and exacerbates acute injury (Faustino et al., 2011). In this study,
we asked whether microglial depletion, defined as ⬍15% density
of remaining microglial cells in injured regions compared with
density in injured regions of untreated rats 24 h after tMCAO,
affects vascular integrity in acutely injured regions. Consistent
with our previous report (Faustino et al., 2011), compared with
PBS-lip-treated rats (Fig. 1 A, B), Clod-lip depleted Iba1 ⫹/
CD68 ⫹ microglial cells in the penumbra (Fig. 1C) and the core
(Fig. 1D). As expected, based on less active lysosomal component
in ramified microglial cells, microglial depletion was more modest in contralateral regions than in injured hemisphere (data not
shown). Quantification of microglial depletion is shown in Figure 1E. Microglial depletion significantly exacerbated injury at
72 h (Fig. 1F ).
Compared with untreated (data not shown) or PBS-liptreated rats (Fig. 1G), volumetric RECA-1 vessel coverage was
significantly reduced in injured cortex of Clod-lip-treated rats
(Fig. 1H ) 24 h after tMCAO, including the cumulative vessel
volume in injured cortex (Fig. 1I ) and caudate (Fig. 1J ). The
overall vessel density was significantly affected by microglial depletion in the injured caudate but not in matching contralateral
regions (Fig. 1K ). Vessel loss was more extensive in rats with
more effective depletion of microglia in both the cortex and caudate (data not shown). By 72 h after tMCAO, vessel volume and
length remained significantly lower in the injured cortex of Clodlip compared with vehicle-treated rats (data not shown), whereas
vessel coverage was similar in contralateral regions in both
groups. Numbers of peripheral monocytes were significantly decreased following 24 h of tMCAO but were similarly affected in
Clod-lip-treated, vehicle-treated, and untreated rats (Fig. 1L).
Essentially no leakage of fluorescently labeled 70 kDa dextran
was observed in the cortex or the caudate of untreated neonatal
rats (data not shown), or in the vehicle group throughout the
injured caudate (Fig. 1M ) and cortex (Fig. 1N ) 24 h after tMCAO, consistent with our previous report (Fernández-López et
al., 2012). The leakage was limited despite increased vascular degeneration in the ischemic core during that time, likely because of
inadequate perfusion of degenerating vessels within the injury
regions. However, depletion of microglia led to increased extravascular leakage of 70 kDa dextran in the injured caudate (Fig.
1O) and cortex (Fig. 1P). Leakages were absent in the contralateral hemisphere in all groups.
Microglial depletion induces hemorrhages after acute tMCAO
Microglial depletion significantly increased the incidence of intracerebral hemorrhages 24 h after reperfusion, as was evident
from the presence of extravascular clusters of red blood cells (Fig.

2884 • J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

2 A, B). Hemorrhages of various size were
apparent in several injured parenchyma
regions, including cortex (Fig. 2A), caudate (Fig. 2B), and thalamus (data not
shown). Occasional hemorrhages were
also seen in the meninges and at the choroid plexus. The number of hemorrhages
regardless of size (Fig. 2C) and the number of relatively large hemorrhages (surface area ⬎10,000 ␮m 2; Fig. 2D) was
significantly increased in Clod-lip-treated
rats, but vascular permeability to 70 kDa
dextran was seen in both hemorrhagic and
nonhemorrhagic vessels, and hemorrhages were seen in nonleaky vessels (Fig.
3), suggesting that the mechanisms of
BBB permeability and hemorrhages are
distinct at least in part. Clod-lip treatment
did not increase the incidence of hemorrhages in contralateral regions (Fig. 2C,D)
or in otherwise unperturbed rats, ruling
out direct effects of Clod-lip on cerebrovascular integrity. The presence of hemorrhages continued through 72 h after
stroke (data not shown).
Microglial depletion exacerbates
endothelial cell death 24 h after tMCAO
We then asked whether the decreased
vascular coverage in rats with depleted
microglia results from enhanced endothelial cell death or from diminished
levels of growth factors that support
cerebral vasculature and promote angiogenesis. tMCAO induced caspase-3dependent endothelial cell death, as was
evident from the increased number
of endothelial cells expressing cleaved
caspase-3 (RECA-1 ⫹/AC3 ⫹cells; Fig.
4

Figure 1. Depletion of microglia compromises vascular integrity 24 h after tMCAO in P7 rats. A–D, Representative images of
Iba1 ⫹/CD68 ⫹ microglial cells in vehicle-treated (PBS-lip; A, B) and Clod-lip-treated (Clod-lip; C, D) rats. Images are captured in

the penumbra regions (A, C) and in the ischemic core regions
(B, D). There is marked reduction in the number of microglial
cells in both regions of Clod-lip-treated rat pups. E, Quantification of the total microglial cell volume in uninjured contralateral regions (Contra) and in injured cortex (cx) and
caudate (cd), showing depleted microglial cell population in
animals treated with Clod-lip. F, Injury volume 72 h after
tMCAO is significantly larger in rat pups with depleted microglial cells. Shown are data for individual animals. G, H, Representative 3D projections from z-stacks of RECA-1 ⫹ vessels in
cortex and caudate of vehicle-treated treated rats (G) and
Clod-lip-treated rats (H). I, J, Relationship between density of
microglia (IB4 ⫹/RECA ⫺ cells) and vascular density (RECA1 ⫹) in injured cortex (I) and caudate (J). K, Vessel volume
density is significantly reduced in injured cortex and caudate of
Clod-lip-treated rats. L, Number of peripheral monocytes is
significantly reduced by tMCAO, but the extent of reduction is
similar in nontreated (NT), PBS-lip, and Clod-lip groups.
Shown are data for individual animals. M–P, Representative
images showing vascular permeability to 70 kDa TRITCdextran in injured regions of rats injected PBS-lip (M; caudate;
N; cortex) and Clod-lip (O; caudate; P; cortex). Significance
levels as indicated.

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

Figure 2. The incidence of intracerebral hemorrhages is increased 24 h after tMCAO in rats with depleted microglial cells.
A, B, Representative images of DAB-positive red blood cells showing the presence of intracerebral hemorrhages in the
injured cortex (A) and caudate (B) of Clod-lip-treated rats. The sections were costained with Nissl. C, D, Quantification of
the number of hemorrhages in six fluorescently labeled coronal sections. C, The total number of intracerebral hemorrhages.
D, The number of large hemorrhages (⬎10,000 ␮m 2). Shown are data for individual rats. Significance levels as indicated.

J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2885

group than in nontreated or PBS-liptreated groups (Fig. 3I; p ⫽ 0.031).
The protein levels of VEGF, a growth
factor important for vascular signaling,
permeability, and angiogenesis (Greenberg and Jin, 2013), were similar in contralateral cortex regardless of treatment,
and VEGF expression was significantly
and similarly increased in the injured cortex in both groups (Fig. 3 D, E). The protein levels of Ang1 and its receptor Tie2,
key regulators of vascular stabilization
and maturation (Hansen et al., 2008),
were also similarly affected by injury in
vehicle- and Clod-lip-treated rats (Fig.
3F–H ), suggesting that enhanced endothelial death and reduced vascular coverage are unlikely because of insufficient
VEGF support or halted angiogenesis at
this early injury stage.

Vascular permeability changes induced
by microglial depletion are not due to
collagen IV degradation by MMP-9
Considering that in the adult hemorrhagic transformation after stroke occurs,
in part, due to activation of several proteases (Gidday et al., 2005; Rosell et al.,
2008), we tested the effects of microglial
depletion on activation of a major inducible Col-IV degrading protease, MMP-9.
As evident from gel zymography, the
amount of active MMP-9 was significantly increased in injured tissue of untreated and PBS-lip-treated neonatal rats
(Fig. 4 A, C) but was below detectable levels in contralateral tissue 24 h after reperfusion. Depletion of microglia largely
abolished expression of active MMP-9
(Fig. 4 A, C). At 72 h after reperfusion, levFigure 3. Depletion of microglia worsens endothelial cell apoptosis but does not affect protein expression of proangio- els of active MMP-9 remained elevated in
genic mediators 24 h after tMCAO. A, B, Representative images showing colocalization of the apoptosis marker activated injured regions of ⬃50% of untreated and
caspase-3 (AC3) and the endothelial marker RECA-1 in injured regions of rats treated with PBS-lip (A) or Clod-lip (B). C, vehicle-treated rats but were below deQuantification of the number of apoptotic endothelial cells normalized for vascular density in the injured cortex and tectable levels in all Clod-lip-treated rats
caudate. D, F, Representative Western blots showing protein expression of proangiogenic mediators VEGF (D) and the (Fig. 4 B, D). These results suggest that acTie2/Ang2 system (F). E, G, H, Densitometric quantification of protein expression of VEGF (F), Tie2 (G), and Ang2 (H). Data tivated microglia are an important source
were normalized for actin expression. n.s., Not significant. I, Quantification of the number endothelial cells positive for DHE of MMP-9 in the postischemic neonatal
per FOV in the ischemic core and ischemic penumbra at 24 h after tMCAO.
brain.
Markedly reduced MMP-9 resultant
from microglial depletion after tMCAO
3 A, C). The number of RECA-1 ⫹/AC3 ⫹ cells (arrowheads)
did not affect the pattern of degradation of the most abundant
was further significantly increased in injured regions of ClodCol-IV isoform in brain vascular basement membrane, Col-IV␣1
(Fig. 4E–I ). Compared with contralateral regions, protein exlip-treated rats (Fig. 3B vs Fig. 3A; Fig. 3C). Clod-lip did not
induce caspase-3-dependent endothelial cell death in conpression of the integrant Col-IVa1 isoform (230 kDa band) was
tralateral regions or in uninjured animals.
decreased, in parallel to accumulation of the lower molecular
Considering that oxidative injury can both activate endotheweight Col-IVa1 fragment (55 kDa band) (Fig. 4G–I ). Immunofluorescence analysis showed that Col-IV coverage of hemorlial cells and contribute to endothelial death, we determined surhagic vessels of Clod-lip-treated rats (Fig. 4F ) was unaltered
peroxide accumulation in the vessels using DHE, a dye that gives
compared with nonhemorrhagic vessels in rats with depleted or
fluorescence products during its oxidation by superoxide, as we
unmanipulated microglia (Fig. 4E). Expression of active MMP-2,
previously reported (Faustino et al., 2011). The numbers of
DHE ⫹ cells in IB4 ⫹ vessels were not significantly different in the
a constitutive matrix metalloprotease that also degrades Col-IV,
penumbra of untreated, PBS-lip-treated, and Clod-lip-treated
was unchanged by microglial depletion at 24 or 72 h (data not
rats and were significantly lower in the ischemic core in Clod-lip
shown). Thus, reduction of MMP-9 caused by microglial deple-

2886 • J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

tion may be overshadowed by the presence of MMP-2 and other Col-IV
degrading proteases produced by other
sources.
String vessels, or acellular portions of
vessels comprised of degraded Col-IV
sheaths without the underlying endothelium, were present throughout the injured
regions of both groups 72 h after neonatal
stroke (Fig. 4J, arrows pointing to missing
endothelium), but the number of string
vessels (Col-IV ⫹/RECA-1 ⫺) was significantly higher in rats with depleted
microglia (Fig. 4L). Vessels undergoing
conversion to string vessels (e.g., partial
loss of vascular endothelium) were evident in association with local hemorrhages (Fig. 4K ). Cumulatively, these data
suggest that degenerative alterations of
the brain endothelium, rather than
Col-IV degradation, account for the increased vascular permeability and hemorrhagic transformation in rats with
depleted microglia.
The effects of microglial depletion on
the expression and subcellular
distribution of endothelial tight
junction proteins
Disorganization and consequent diminished tightness of the tight junction (TJ)
proteins contributes to BBB leakiness after stroke (Knowland et al., 2014). Our
comparative study of BBB integrity following acute tMCAO in neonatal and
adult rats showed that expression of occludin, ZO-1, and claudin-5 is better
preserved in neonates, consistent with
the better preserved BBB integrity
(Fernández-López et al., 2012). Here we
asked whether microglial depletion affects expression and intracellular distribution of two transmembrane TJ Figure 4. Intracerebral hemorrhages induced by microglial depletion are not associated with increased Col-IV degradation. A,
proteins, occludin and claudin-5.
B, Representative gel zymograms showing MMP-9 activity at 24 h (A) and 72 h (B) after tMCAO. C, D, Quantification of MMP-9
Claudin-5 expression determined in activity 24 h (C) and 72 h (D) after tMCAO. Activity is shown as units pg MMP-9/100 ␮g protein. The presence of active MMP-9 is
⫹
whole tissue lysates was unaffected at 24 significantly lower/absent in Clod-lip-treated rats. E, F, Col-IV coverage of RECA-1 vessels in PBS-lip-treated rats (E; two indior 72 h after tMCAO in rats with unper- vidual vessels and Clod-lip-treated rats (F; two individual vessels) 24 h after reperfusion. Asterisks indicate hemorrhages. Col-IV
turbed or depleted microglia (Fig. 5A, to- coverage is similar in hemorrhagic (F) and nonhemorrhagic (E) vessels. G–I, Representative examples of Col-IV ␣1 expression on
Western blots. High molecular weight band (230 kDa) corresponds to an integrant Col-IV ␣1 monomer, and a lower molecular
tal, B; data for 72 h not shown). In
weight band (55 kDa) corresponds to one of degradation fragments of collagen-IV ␣1. C, Contralateral hemisphere; I, ipsilateral
contrast, occludin expression determined hemisphere. Densitometric analysis of expression of an integrant Col-IV monomer (H; 230 kDa) and of a 55 kDa degradation
in whole tissue lysates was reduced at 24 h fragment (I) shows Col-IV degradation in injured regions, with no significant differences in the patterns of expression or degrada(Fig. 5C, total, D) and restored to normal tion after microglial depletion. The data are normalized to a common control sample used in all gels. J, Representative images of
levels at 72 h after tMCAO in vehicle- string vessels (RECA-1 ⫺/Col-IV ⫹) 72 h after tMCAO. K, Representative image of hemorrhage (asterisk) associated with a degentreated rats (data not shown). However, erating vessel (RECA-1). L, Quantification of the number of string vessels (RECA-1 ⫺/Col-IV ⫹) 72 h after tMCAO. There is increased
diminished occludin expression was sus- endothelial degradation in rats with depleted microglia. Green represents RECA-1. Red represents Col-IV. Significance levels as
tained (Fig. 5C, total, D) in rats with de- indicated. n.s., Not significant.
pleted microglia, with no restoration of
responding to integrant TJ (Fig. 5, ACF) and increased in the
protein levels at 72 h (data not shown). Cellular subfractionation
cytosolic
and/or membrane fractions (Fig. 5, CF, MF), indiexperiments performed to investigate whether lack of microglial
cating that these proteins are removed from the TJ, consistent
cells affects occludin and claudin-5 distribution within the cells
with that previously described in the adult (Liu et al., 2012).
showed that tMCAO induces redistribution of both occludin and
However, the patterns of subcellular redistribution were simclaudin-5 in different cell compartments. The presence of both
ilar in vehicle- and Clod-lip-treated rats (Fig. 5), indicating a
proteins was reduced in the cytoskeletal-associated fraction cor-

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2887

injured regions of Clod-lip-treated rats (Fig.
6B,D,F). The loss of SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in relation to the loss of SMAD2/3
expression was not assessed, as Western
blot-based measurements do not allow addressing whether reduced SMAD phosphorylation occurs in cells with reduced
SMAD2/3 expression. SMAD2/3 phosphorylation was significantly reduced in the
nuclear fraction from injured cortex in the
absence of microglial cells (Fig. 6 D, F ),
fraction identified as histone H1-enriched
fraction (Fig. 6E). Therefore, microglial
depletion diminishes TGF␤1/ALK-5 signaling to the nucleus in the acutely
injured neonatal brain. Immunofluorescence that we used to identify cell types
expressing pSMAD2/3 showed that
NeuN ⫹ neurons abundantly express pSMAD2/3 in contralateral regions (Contra;
Fig. 6G) and in uninjured regions within
ipsilateral hemisphere (Ipsi; Fig. 6G), but
SMAD2/3 phosphorylation is lost in neurons with shrunken or disintegrated nuclei (Ipsi; Fig. 6G). In contrast, SMAD2/3
Figure 5. Depletion of microglia does not significantly affect subcellular redistribution of tight junction proteins induced by phosphorylation is increased in activated
neonatal stroke in 24 h after tMCAO. A, C, Representative Western blots showing the presence of the TJ proteins claudin-5 (A) and microglial cells (Fig. 6G,H ). IB4 ⫹ vessels
occludin (C) in whole tissue lysates and in subcellular fractions (cytosolic CF, membrane MF, and cytoskeletal ACF). B, D, Densito- express pSMAD2/3 in injured (Fig. 6H )
metric quantification showing the effect of tMCAO and microglial depletion on the expression of claudin-5 (B) and occludin (D) in
and uninjured (Fig. 6G,H ) regions.
whole tissue lysates and in individual subcellular fractions. Expression of both proteins was examined in the same samples and was
To test whether hemorrhage induction
normalized to actin in individual subcellular fractions. Data are expressed as the ratio of ipsilateral/contralateral regions.
associated with the absence of microglial
TGF␤1 signaling can be reversed by
similar extent of alteration of integrant TJs in both groups, at
TGF␤1 supplementation, we intravenously administered
least at 24 h after stroke.
rhTGF␤1 to Clod-lip-treated rats at 18 and 22 h after reperfusion
(human and rat TGF␤1 have a 99% homology in the amino acid
Microglial deletion affects TGF␤1/ALK5 signaling 24 h
sequence) and confirmed that the plasma levels of TGF␤1 at the
after tMCAO
time of death at 24 h were several-fold higher in rhTGF␤1-treated
TGF␤1 plays multiple roles in healthy and diseased brain, including
rats than in nontreated rats (Fig. 6I, inset). Injury volume in rats
muting neuroinflammation, stabilization of the vascular niche, and
with depleted microglia was not affected at 24 h after reperfusion
preventing from hemorrhagic transformation after stroke (Munger
by the systemic rhTGF␤1 administration: 53 ⫾ 6% of ipsilateral
and Sheppard, 2011; Gliem et al., 2012). We asked whether TGF␤1
hemisphere in rats treated with Clod-lip and rhTGF␤1 (n ⫽ 11)
signaling is disturbed in acutely injured neonatal brain deprived of
compared with 58.1 ⫾ 3% in Clod-lip-treated rats (n ⫽ 4). The
microglia. In adult focal stroke, multiple brain cell types constitunumber of intraparenchymal hemorrhages regardless of size was
tively express TGF␤1 and upregulate TGF␤1 (Pál et al., 2012; Cekaunaffected by the increased circulating levels of rhTGF␤1 (Fig.
naviciute et al., 2014; Pál et al., 2014) and downstream signaling (Pál
6I ). There were also no differences in the distribution of hemoret al., 2014). Similar to that in adult stroke, in neonates subjected to
rhages of different size (data not shown). These data indicate that
tMCAO, neurons ubiquitously express TGF␤1 in uninjured brain
increased circulating TGF␤1 levels do not substitute for the
regions (Fig. 6), but TGF␤1 is no longer detectable in neurons within
TGF␤1 signaling derived from activated microglia after acute
injured regions. Vascular expression of TGF␤1 was seen in both
neonatal stroke.
uninjured and injured regions but, in contrast to adults, where astrocytes upregulate TGF␤1 during acute and subchronic injury
Selective inhibition of TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling in activated
(Doyle et al., 2010; Cekanaviciute et al., 2014; Pál et al., 2014), levels
microglial cells induces hemorrhagic transformation after
of TGF␤1 expression were below detectable in reactive astrocytes in
neonatal arterial stroke
our study. TGF␤1 expression was upregulated in activated microglia
To directly test whether microglial TGF␤ signaling protects neoin injured cortex and caudate (Fig. 6A). Accordingly, in rats with
natal brain from ischemia-induced hemorrhages, we delivered a
depleted microglia, the vast majority of TGF␤1-expressing cells were
specific TGFbr2/ALK5 inhibitor, SB-431542, into microglial cells
endothelial cells. We tested whether microglial depletion affects
via intracortical injection of liposome-encapsulated SB-431542
SMAD2/3 protein expression, SMAD2/3 phosphorylation, and
before tMCAO. We fluorescently labeled SB-431542-lip with DiI
TGF␤1/ALK5-induced pSMAD2/3-mediated downstream signalto trace liposomes in the brain and confirmed that DiI ⫹/SBing in injured regions. tMCAO significantly reduced SMAD2/3 ex431542 ⫹ liposomes accumulate almost exclusively in activated
pression in injured regions, but the magnitude of reduction was
IB4 ⫹ microglia (Fig. 7B, arrowheads) or Iba1 ⫹ microglia (Fig.
unaffected by microglial depletion (Fig. 6B,C). SMAD2/3 phos7C, yellow arrows), rather than in other brain cell types. Consisphorylation was significantly reduced in whole tissue lysates from
tent with our previous observations (Faustino et al., 2011), only a

2888 • J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

Figure 6. Replenishment of peripheral TGF␤1 does not attenuate hemorrhage occurrence at 24 h after tMCAO in rat pups with depleted microglia. A, Representative images showing expression
of TGF␤1 in IB4 ⫹ brain vessels and microglia/macrophages in the injured cortex. B, Western blots showing protein expression of SMAD2/3 (top) and pSMAD2/3 (middle) in the same total tissue
lysates at 24 h after tMCAO. The data are normalized to actin (bottom) in individual samples. C, tMCAO significantly and similarly reduces SMAD2/3 expression in injured regions of PBS-lip-treated
and Clod-lip-treated rats. A common tissue sample was used in multiple Western blots to allow data analysis. D, Western blots showing SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in total lysates and in cytosolic and
nuclear fractions. E, Purity of the subcellular fractions is assessed by the presence of specific cytosolic (MKK3) and nuclear (histone H1) proteins. F, Densitometric quantification of pSMAD2/3 protein
in total lysates and in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions. Shown are pSMAD2/3 values in individual Clod-lip rats expressed relative to averaged pSMAD2/3 value in PBS-lip rats in the same individual
blots. G, Cell-type specific patterns of SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in contralateral (left) and ipsilateral (right) regions. Note SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in NeuN ⫹ neurons (red) in uninjured regions
and in the penumbra but not in the ischemic core. pSMAD2/3 is expressed in IB4 ⫹ vessels in both uninjured and injured regions. H, High-magnification image of pSMAD2/3 in a IB4 ⫹ vessel and in
both IB4 ⫹ and IB4 ⫺ cells in the vicinity of a vessel. I, Quantification of the total number of intraparenchymal hemorrhages in rats treated with Clod-lip, with or without intravenous administration
of rhTGF␤1. G, Inset, Plasma levels of TGF␤1 measured by Bioplex ELISA at 24 h after tMCAO in untreated rats and in rats injected rhTGF␤1 intravenously 18 h after tMCAO.

few small-size DiI ⫹-lip were observed in IB4 ⫺ or Iba1 ⫺ cells, as
shown in Figure 7A, C (thin arrows). No DiI ⫹-lip were observed
in morphologically intact pSMAD ⫹ neurons (Fig. 7A, on the left
from injured region) and in neurons with morphologically integrant (Fig. 7C, asterisk) or apoptotic nuclei (Fig. 7C, thin white
arrows). SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in neurons outside of injured region was unaffected (Fig. 7A, arrows), but SMAD2/3
phosphorylation was reduced or lost in activated microglia containing DiI ⫹/SB-431542 ⫹ liposomes (Fig. 7B, arrowheads).
Treatment did not affect injury volume (data not shown), but led
to significantly increased number of intraparenchymal hemorrhages in injured regions at 24 h (Fig. 7D). Meningeal hemorrhages were also observed. No increase in hemorrhage number
was observed in contralateral hemisphere. Thus, TGFbr2/ALK5
inhibition in otherwise functional microglial cells induces hem-

orrhages after neonatal stroke, further demonstrating a key role
of microglial TGF␤ signaling in protecting neonatal brain from
hemorrhages.
We focused on the microglial TGF␤1/TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling, but, considering the complexity of TGF␤1 signaling and
likely cell-type specific differences in its contribution to injury, it
would be important to determine the effects of rhTGF␤1 and/or
SB-431542 administration into the brain on hemorrhages and
injury.
Depletion of microglial cells exacerbates injury and induces
hemorrhages in neonatal mice subjected to tMCAO
To determine whether the phenomenon of microglial protection
from hemorrhages after tMCAO that we observed in injured neonatal rats occurs across different species, and to examine whether

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2889

Figure 7. Selective inhibition of TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling in microglial cells induces hemorrhagic transformation 24 h after tMCAO. A, SMAD2/3 phosphorylation is reduced in IB4 ⫹ microglia that
uptake DiI ⫹/SB-431542-lip delivered intracortically. Essentially all DiI ⫹ cells are IB4 ⫹ microglia, and SMAD2/3 phosphorylation is observed in neurons outside of injury, as indicated by thin white
arrows. B, Magnified image from a region in A (white box). Yellow arrows point to cells with high pSMAD2/3 expression. White arrowheads point at IB4 ⫹/DiI ⫹ cells with low pSMAD2/3 signal. C,
Representative example of DiI ⫹/Iba1 ⫹/DAPI ⫹ immunofluorescence in the penumbra region of DiI ⫹/SB-431542-lip-treated rat. Essentially all DiI ⫹ cells are double-labeled with Iba1 ⫹ (yellow
arrows), whereas DiI ⫹/Iba1 ⫺ cells are infrequent, with low level of label incorporation (arrowheads). There is no DiI ⫹ signal around morphologically integrant nuclei outside of injured region (*,
healthy neurons) or nuclei with apoptotic appearance (thin arrows). D, The number of hemorrhages in injured hemisphere is significantly increased in rats treated with SB-431542-lip compared with
Clod-lip-treated or nontreated rats.

monocytes account for the effects observed after microglial depletion, we examined the effects of intracortical Clod-lip injection before tMCAO in P9-P10 Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹/Ccr2 RFP/⫹ mice,
mice in which microglial cells are Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹ and monocytes
are Ccr2 RFP/⫹. Compared with PBS-lip injection, Clod-lip injection 48 h before tMCAO reduced the number of Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹
resting microglial cells in contralateral hemisphere to 76 ⫾ 21%
in the caudate and 76 ⫾ 17% in the cortex. Compared with
matching contralateral regions of Clod-lip-treated mice, the
number of microglial cells was further significantly reduced in
the ischemic core, in the core in the cortex (Fig. 8D vs Fig. 8B; Fig.
8F ) and in the caudate (data not shown).
Microglial depletion significantly exacerbated injury 24 h after
reperfusion (Fig. 8G). Consistent with observations in rat pups,
depletion significantly increased hemorrhage incidence (Fig.
8 H, I ) and hemorrhages were observed in multiple brain regions,
in the parenchyma, in the meninges, and in the choroid plexus.
Microglial depletion also significantly induced albumin leakages
into injured parenchyma of Clod-lip-treated mice, whereas the
extent of leakage was negligible in PBS-treated mice at 24 h (data
not shown). Unlike in neonatal rat pups, Clod-lip treatment produced smaller but significant increase in hemorrhage number in
the contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 8 H, I ).
Essentially, no Ccr2 RFP/⫹ monocytes were observed in contralateral regions of untreated (data not shown), PBS-lip-treated,
and Clod-lip-treated mice (Fig. 8J ), whereas Ccr2 RFP/⫹ monocytes were observed in injured regions, in the ischemic core, in
the caudate (Fig. 8J ) and in the penumbra (data not shown). The
overall monocyte number varied in individual mice in each
group, but there was not statistically significant difference between the groups. Quantification of the number of infiltrated
monocytes (i.e., Ccr2 RFP/⫹ cells not touching Glut1 ⫹ vessels) was
similar in vehicle- and Clod-lip-treated mice (Fig. 8K ). The number of peripheral monocytes was not significantly different between injured vehicle- and Clod-lip-treated mice (data not
shown), demonstrating that hemorrhage induction was not due
to monocyte depletion or altered monocyte infiltration. Cumulatively, these data in a second species, mice, revealed exacerbation of injury and induction of hemorrhages caused by microglial
depletion, similar to effects in neonatal rats.

Discussion
We report a novel role of microglial cells in the context of neonatal brain ischemia, microglial-dependent protection from
hemorrhages, and BBB disruption. We show that pharmacological depletion of microglia before neonatal stroke significantly
increases injury and the incidence of intraparenchymal hemorrhages in rats and mice. In the rat stroke model, these effects are
not directly mediated by loss or redistribution of intracellular TJ
proteins or by perivascular Col-IV degradation caused by stroke.
We demonstrate that activated microglial cells become a major
source of TGF␤1 in injured neonatal brain, and loss of microgliaderived TGF␤1/ALK5 signaling after acute injury is not overcome by intravenous injection of rhTGF␤1, indicating
insufficiency of peripheral cytokine to rescue microglia-mediated
protection. Pharmacological inhibition of TGF␤1/ALK5 signaling selectively in microglia during acute injury recapitulates the
pattern of hemorrhage induction associated with microglial depletion. Depletion of microglia in P9 Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹/Ccr2 RFP/⫹
mice exacerbates injury after tMCAO and induces acute hemorrhages, but these effects are independent of infiltration of
Ccr2 RFP/⫹ monocytes into injured regions. Together with our
previous findings that microglial depletion enhances neuronal
injury and neuroinflammation, the newly identified direct role of
microglia in protecting neurovascular integrity argues for the
endogenous protective roles of these cells in injured neonatal
brain.
Leakiness of the BBB has been firmly established in adult
stroke models and many contributing mechanisms identified
(Yang and Rosenberg, 2011). We recently reported that albumin
leakage into injured brain regions is markedly lower in P7 rats
after tMCAO than in adult rats after a similar insult and that
neutrophil infiltration into ischemic-reperfused regions is low
following neonatal tMCAO (Fernández-López et al., 2012),
consistent with low infiltration in response to hypoxiaischemia in neonatal rats (Hudome et al., 1997), but in stark
contrast with rapid neutrophil infiltration in adult tMCAO
models (Mori et al., 1992). The markedly different patterns of
tMCAO-induced gene upregulation and downregulation in
endothelial cells between immature and adult brains

2890 • J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

Figure 8. Microglial depletion exacerbates injury and promotes hemorrhages 24 h following neonatal arterial stroke in P9 mice. A–D, Representative images of Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹ microglia and
CCR2 RFP/⫹ monocytes in ischemic core (B, D) and in matching contralateral cortical regions (A, C) of PBS-lip-treated (A, B) and Clod-lip-treated (C, D) mice. Note morphological changes of
Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹ in injured regions. Essentially no RFP/⫹ monocytes are seen in contralateral hemisphere, whereas RFP/⫹ monocytes are observed both in association with vessels and within injured
cortex. E, Quantification of microglial depletion by Clod-lip in the caudate (Cd), the ischemic core, and in the penumbra (Penum). Shown data are percentage of Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹ microglial number in
ipsilateral compared with matching contralateral regions in same individual animals. The number of Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹ cells in contralateral hemisphere of Clod-lip-treated mice is lower than in
contralateral hemisphere of PBS-lip-treated mice (data not shown). F, Representative examples of hemorrhages identified on DAB/Nissl-stained coronal sections. G, Microglial depletion significantly increases injury volume. Shown are data for individual mice. H, I, Microglial depletion significantly increases the total number of hemorrhages in multiple regions of injured hemisphere (H)
and the number of intraparenchyma hemorrhages ⬎25 ␮m in the longest dimension (I). J, K, The total number of CCR2 RFP/⫹ monocytes (J) and the number of infiltrated CCR2 RFP/⫹ monocytes
(K) in individual injured regions are not significantly different between Clod-lip and PBS-lip mice.

(Fernández-López et al., 2012), unsynchronized maturation
of individual cell types, pericytes, and astrocytes, and of individual ECM components (Peppiatt et al., 2006; Zhang and
Barres, 2010), and maturation-dependent vessel coverage by
pericytes and astrocytes (Daneman et al., 2010) can contribute
to differing postischemic BBB function in neonates compared
with adults. Transport of other molecules through postnatal
BBB can depend on injury model and species (Ek et al., 2015).
The endfoot-basal lamina junctional complex is consolidated
after the first postnatal week (Lunde et al., 2015), likely affecting protein interactions at the ECM-vascular-astrocyte interface. Microglia themselves undergo phenotypic changes
during brain development (Butovsky et al., 2014).
Microglia are the main cell type that provides immunosurveillance in the brain and play essential roles in cell– cell communications, trophic support, and phagocytosis of dying cells (Ueno et
al., 2013). Microglia have several direct effects on the vasculature,
enabling embryonic vasculogenesis (Arnold and Betsholtz, 2013)
and guiding vascular anastomosis (Fantin et al., 2010), effects not
mediated by monocytes (Checchin et al., 2006). Microglia patrol
the vasculature in naive adult brain (Davalos et al., 2012) and are
rapid responders to the lesions (Nimmerjahn et al., 2005). Microglial cells play a unique role in postnatal brain by pruning synapses and shaping synaptic circuits (Paolicelli et al., 2011; Bialas

and Stevens, 2013). After stroke activated microglia/macrophages have been thought toxic, along with peripheral leukocytes, by producing inflammatory mediators and adversely
affecting BBB integrity (Iadecola and Anrather, 2011), but it remains questionable whether microglial cells, rather than perivascular microglia and invaded peripheral monocytes, mediate
injury (Lambertsen et al., 2009).
In neonates, we investigated how microglial cells affect several
injurious mechanisms demonstrated in adult stroke (Cunningham et al., 2005). We show that endothelial cell death triggered by
tMCAO is exacerbated by the absence of microglia but that increased endothelial death is unlikely because of enhanced
superoxide production in injured vessels, diminished VEGF expression, or enhanced neuroinflammation. Endothelial cells are
vulnerable to ROS (Rizzo and Leaver, 2010), which are in part
produced by reactive microglia after stroke in adults, but, to a
lesser extent, in reactive microglia in neonates (Woo et al., 2012).
In ischemic-reperfused neonatal brain regions, cytokine and
chemokine increase is profound (Denker et al., 2007), but microglial depletion further increases the levels of inflammatory
mediators, reduces removal of neuronal debris, and worsens parenchymal injury (Faustino et al., 2011). One of the main paths
for albumin leakage in adult stroke is through disrupted TJ
(Krueger et al., 2013), but microglial depletion does not lead to

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke

additional loss or further intracellular redistribution of occludin
and claudin-5 caused by tMCAO.
Col-IV degradation is a hallmark of hemorrhagic transformation
after adult stroke (Asahi et al., 2001; Rosell et al., 2008). Mutations in
the COL4A1 gene cause intracerebral hemorrhage both in newborn
mice and humans (Gould et al., 2005). In humans, a limited number
of genes, including MMP-9 and TGF␤, predict strokes that later
develop hemorrhagic transformation (Jickling et al., 2014). In adult
stroke models, upregulated MMP-2, MMP-9, and MMP-3 mediate
the breakdown of ECM components, contributing to disruption of
the BBB, brain edema, and injury, and predisposing to hemorrhagic
transformation (Asahi et al., 2000). The origin of MMP-9-producing cells is imperative for early versus late hemorrhagic transformation, with MMP-9 primarily produced by neutrophils in acute
stroke, but produced by brain cells at later points in the adult (Gidday et al., 2005; Jickling et al., 2014).
In human newborns, MMP-9 activation predicts HIE outcome (Bednarek et al., 2012). MMP-9 inhibition protects the
neonatal rodent brain from hypoxia-ischemia (Chen et al., 2009).
We show marked increase in activated MMP-9 in injured regions
and microglia as an important source of MMP-9 that leads to
robust degradation of a Col-IV ␣1 subunit. Yet, the magnitude of
Col-IV␣1 degradation is unaffected by the absence of microglia at
24 h, making Col-IV degradation an unlikely cause for increased
permeability or hemorrhages. Lack of phagocytotic microglia
needed to clear hemorrhages (Zhao et al., 2009) likely contributes
to continued presence of hemorrhages over 72 h, but the presence
of residual basal lamina in the absence of endothelial cells (“string
vessels”) also points to endothelial degeneration rather than loss
of vascular sheaths as a primary mechanism of hemorrhages
caused by microglia depletion. It is somewhat counterintuitive
that the magnitude of Col-IV␣1 degradation is unaffected by
microglial depletion when active MMP-9 is diminished and that
hemorrhagic transformation is increased when microglial
MMP-9 is absent. Other proteases, such as fibronectin, perlecan,
and agrin, could contribute to Col-IV degradation and affect
interactions between ECM and endothelial cells and pericytes in
the absence of microglia.
TGF␤1 contributes to neurovascular protection and serves as
a survival factor for brain capillaries and BBB stability (Walshe et
al., 2009). Multiple brain cell types express TGF␤1 in adult brain
and upregulate TGF␤1 after stroke (Pál et al., 2014). Abrogated
TGF␤1 signaling in astrocytes exacerbates subacute injury after
distal MCAO and increases microglial activation and monocyte
infiltration (Cekanaviciute et al., 2014). Deletion of peripheral
monocytes or CCR2 in bone marrow-derived cells produces vessel irregularities, thinning and delayed hemorrhagic transformation in stroke, effects that are reversed by intracerebral TGF1␤1
injection (Gliem et al., 2012). Similar to adults, in neonates, neurons and endothelial cells express TGF␤1 in uninjured regions, but
TGF␤1 is lost in injured neurons, retained in endothelial cells, is not
apparent in astrocytes, but is markedly upregulated in activated microglia in injured regions, mediating TGFbr2/SMAD2/3 signaling in
the latter cells. Our attempt to revert depletion-induced hemorrhage
by increasing peripheral TGF␤1 levels in proximity to injured vessels
did not affect injury size or the number/size of hemorrhages,
whereas inhibited TGF␤1/TGFbr2/ALK5 signaling selectively in microglia reduced SMAD2/3 phosphorylation in these cells and significantly increased the number of intraparenchymal hemorrhages.
Findings that monocytes in adult stroke (Gliem et al., 2012)
and activated microglia in neonatal stroke in our study protect
from postischemic hemorrhages and that TGF␤1 signaling is involved in protection in both situations make it tempting to as-

J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2891

sume that the underlying mechanisms are the same. However, in
adult mice, hemorrhagic transformation following prolonged
perfusion deficits (Jickling et al., 2014) or monocyte depletion
(Gliem et al., 2012) is not apparent for days, whereas in our study
hemorrhages occur early after reperfusion. There are many common features between resident microglia and monocytes, but
microglia are of different origin than monocytes (Ginhoux et al.,
2010) and make a self-renewable population, with a unique gene
signature compared with monocytes and dendritic cells (Butovsky et al., 2014). Monocytes that infiltrate an injured adult
brain do not contribute to the resident microglial pool (Ajami et
al., 2011), whereas microglial phenotypes are heterogeneous,
with stimulus-specific responses in vivo (Petersen and Dailey,
2004; Chhor et al., 2013).
To identify whether monocyte behavior is altered by microglial depletion and ultimately accounts for brain hemorrhages,
we examined monocyte numbers in peripheral blood and in the
brain in P9 Cx3cr1 GFP/⫹/Ccr2 RFP/⫹ mice following tMCAO. We
observed that infiltration of Ccr2 RFP/⫹ monocytes into injured
regions is rather limited and, importantly, is not affected by microglial depletion, suggesting that microglial TGF␤1-dependent
signaling carries neurovascular protection.
In conclusion, we discovered an important role of microglial
cells in protecting neonatal brain from ischemia-induced hemorrhages. Findings that this phenomenon is observed in two species
suggest uniformness of effects and raise a question whether strategies aimed to broadly inhibit microglial function should be used
after acute neonatal stroke. An improved understanding of the
microglial phenotypes and role of individual phenotypes in governing neurovascular integrity in injured immature brain, together with acquired knowledge of whether BBB disruption and
hemorrhagic transformation are governed by distinct mechanisms, would help in identifying new and more selective therapeutic strategies. Development of new tools to deplete the entire
microglial population (Elmore et al., 2014) or individual subpopulation (Lalancette-Hébert et al., 2007) may allow a better understanding of the effects of parenchymal and perivascular microglia
on injured vasculature. Identification of the role of microglial
TGF␤1 as neurovascular protectant may lead to new therapeutic
targets for neonatal stroke, especially when autocrine and paracrine mechanisms of microglial TGF␤1 in the injured brain are
better defined and in relation to TGF␤1 signaling in other cell
types.

References
Ajami B, Bennett JL, Krieger C, McNagny KM, Rossi FM (2011) Infiltrating
monocytes trigger EAE progression, but do not contribute to the resident
microglia pool. Nat Neurosci 14:1142–1149. CrossRef Medline
Armstrong-Wells J, Johnston SC, Wu YW, Sidney S, Fullerton HJ (2009)
Prevalence and predictors of perinatal hemorrhagic stroke: results from
the Kaiser Pediatric Stroke Study. Pediatrics 123:823– 828. CrossRef
Medline
Arnold T, Betsholtz C (2013) The importance of microglia in the development of the vasculature in the central nervous system. Vasc Cell 5:4.
CrossRef Medline
Asahi M, Asahi K, Jung JC, del Zoppo GJ, Fini ME, Lo EH (2000) Role for
matrix metalloproteinase 9 after focal cerebral ischemia: effects of gene
knockout and enzyme inhibition with BB-94. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
20:1681–1689. CrossRef Medline
Asahi M, Wang X, Mori T, Sumii T, Jung JC, Moskowitz MA, Fini ME, Lo EH
(2001) Effects of matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene knock-out on the proteolysis of blood– brain barrier and white matter components after cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci 21:7724 –7732. Medline
Bednarek N, Svedin P, Garnotel R, Favrais G, Loron G, Schwendiman L,
Hagberg H, Morville P, Mallard C, Gressens P (2012) Increased MMP-9
and TIMP-1 in mouse neonatal brain and plasma and in human neonatal

2892 • J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893
plasma after hypoxia-ischemia: a potential marker of neonatal encephalopathy. Pediatr Res 71:63–70. CrossRef Medline
Bialas AR, Stevens B (2013) TGF-beta signaling regulates neuronal C1q expression and developmental synaptic refinement. Nat Neurosci 16:1773–
1782. CrossRef Medline
Bruno CJ, Beslow LA, Witmer CM, Vossough A, Jordan LC, Zelonis S, Licht
DJ, Ichord RN, Smith SE (2014) Haemorrhagic stroke in term and late
preterm neonates. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 99:F48 –F53.
CrossRef Medline
Butovsky O, Jedrychowski MP, Moore CS, Cialic R, Lanser AJ, Gabriely G,
Koeglsperger T, Dake B, Wu PM, Doykan CE, Fanek Z, Liu L, Chen Z,
Rothstein JD, Ransohoff RM, Gygi SP, Antel JP, Weiner HL (2014)
Identification of a unique TGF-beta-dependent molecular and functional
signature in microglia. Nat Neurosci 17:131–143. CrossRef Medline
Cekanaviciute E, Fathali N, Doyle KP, Williams AM, Han J, Buckwalter MS
(2014) Astrocytic transforming growth factor-beta signaling reduces
subacute neuroinflammation after stroke in mice. Glia 62:1227–1240.
CrossRef Medline
Checchin D, Sennlaub F, Levavasseur E, Leduc M, Chemtob S (2006) Potential role of microglia in retinal blood vessel formation. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 47:3595–3602. CrossRef Medline
Chen W, Hartman R, Ayer R, Marcantonio S, Kamper J, Tang J, Zhang JH
(2009) Matrix metalloproteinases inhibition provides neuroprotection
against hypoxia-ischemia in the developing brain. J Neurochem 111:
726 –736. CrossRef Medline
Chhor V, Le Charpentier T, Lebon S, Oré MV, Celador IL, Josserand J, Degos
V, Jacotot E, Hagberg H, Sävman K, Mallard C, Gressens P, Fleiss B
(2013) Characterization of phenotype markers and neuronotoxic potential of polarised primary microglia in vitro. Brain Behav Immun 32:
70 – 85. CrossRef Medline
Cunningham LA, Wetzel M, Rosenberg GA (2005) Multiple roles for MMPs
and TIMPs in cerebral ischemia. Glia 50:329 –339. CrossRef Medline
Daneman R, Zhou L, Kebede AA, Barres BA (2010) Pericytes are required
for blood– brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Nature 468:
562–566. CrossRef Medline
Davalos D, Ryu JK, Merlini M, Baeten KM, Le Moan N, Petersen MA, Deerinck TJ, Smirnoff DS, Bedard C, Hakozaki H, Gonias Murray S, Ling JB,
Lassmann H, Degen JL, Ellisman MH, Akassoglou K (2012) Fibrinogeninduced perivascular microglial clustering is required for the development of axonal damage in neuroinflammation. Nat Commun 3:1227.
CrossRef Medline
Denes A, Thornton P, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM (2010) Inflammation and
brain injury: acute cerebral ischaemia, peripheral and central inflammation. Brain Behav Immun 24:708 –723. CrossRef Medline
Denker SP, Ji S, Lee SY, Dingman A, Derugin N, Wendland WF, Vexler ZS
(2007) Macrophages are comprised of resident brain microglia, not infiltrating peripheral monocytes acutely after neonatal stroke. J Neurochem 100:893–904. CrossRef Medline
Derugin N, Dingman A, Wendland MF, Fox C, Bollen A, Vexler ZS (2005)
Magnetic resonance imaging as a surrogate measure for histological
chronic endpoint in a neonatal rat stroke model. Brain Res 1066:49 –56.
CrossRef Medline
Doyle KP, Cekanaviciute E, Mamer LE, Buckwalter MS (2010) TGFbeta signaling in the brain increases with aging and signals to astrocytes and
innate immune cells in the weeks after stroke. J Neuroinflammation 7:62.
CrossRef Medline
Ek CJ, D’Angelo B, Baburamani AA, Lehner C, Leverin AL, Smith PL, Nilsson
H, Svedin P, Hagberg H, Mallard C (2015) Brain barrier properties and
cerebral blood flow in neonatal mice exposed to cerebral hypoxiaischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 35:818 – 827. CrossRef Medline
Elmore MR, Najafi AR, Koike MA, Dagher NN, Spangenberg EE, Rice RA,
Kitazawa M, Matusow B, Nguyen H, West BL, Green KN (2014)
Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor signaling is necessary for microglia
viability, unmasking a microglia progenitor cell in the adult brain. Neuron 82:380 –397. CrossRef Medline
Fantin A, Vieira JM, Gestri G, Denti L, Schwarz Q, Prykhozhij S, Peri F,
Wilson SW, Ruhrberg C (2010) Tissue macrophages act as cellular
chaperones for vascular anastomosis downstream of VEGF-mediated endothelial tip cell induction. Blood 116:829 – 840. CrossRef Medline
Faustino J, Wang X, Johnson CE, Klibanov A, Derugin N, Wendland MF,
Vexler ZS (2011) Microglial cells contribute to endogenous brain de-

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke
fenses after acute neonatal focal stroke. J Neurosci 31:12992–13001.
CrossRef Medline
Fernández-López D, Faustino J, Daneman R, Zhou L, Lee SY, Derugin N,
Wendland MF, Vexler ZS (2012) Blood– brain barrier permeability is
increased after acute adult stroke but not neonatal stroke. J Neurosci
32:9588 –9600. CrossRef Medline
Fernández-López D, Natarajan N, Ashwal S, Vexler ZS (2014) Mechanisms
of perinatal arterial ischemic stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34:
921–932. CrossRef Medline
Gidday JM, Gasche YG, Copin JC, Shah AR, Perez RS, Shapiro SD, Chan PH,
Park TS (2005) Leukocyte-derived matrix metalloproteinase-9 mediates blood– brain barrier breakdown and is proinflammatory after
transient focal cerebral ischemia. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 289:
H558 –H568. CrossRef Medline
Ginhoux F, Greter M, Leboeuf M, Nandi S, See P, Gokhan S, Mehler MF,
Conway SJ, Ng LG, Stanley ER, Samokhvalov IM, Merad M (2010) Fate
mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia derive from primitive macrophages. Science 330:841– 845. CrossRef Medline
Gliem M, Mausberg AK, Lee JI, Simiantonakis I, van Rooijen N, Hartung HP,
Jander S (2012) Macrophages prevent hemorrhagic infarct transformation in murine stroke models. Ann Neurol 71:743–752. CrossRef Medline
Gould DB, Phalan FC, Breedveld GJ, van Mil SE, Smith RS, Schimenti JC,
Aguglia U, van der Knaap MS, Heutink P, John SW (2005) Mutations in
Col4a1 cause perinatal cerebral hemorrhage and porencephaly. Science
308:1167–1171. CrossRef Medline
Greenberg DA, Jin K (2013) Vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs)
and stroke. Cell Mol Life Sci 70:1753–1761. CrossRef Medline
Hansen TM, Moss AJ, Brindle NP (2008) Vascular endothelial growth factor and angiopoietins in neurovascular regeneration and protection following stroke. Curr Neurovasc Res 5:236 –245. CrossRef Medline
Hudome S, Palmer C, Roberts RL, Mauger D, Housman C, Towfighi J (1997)
The role of neutrophils in the production of hypoxic-ischemic brain injury in the neonatal rat. Pediatr Res 41:607– 616. CrossRef Medline
Iadecola C, Anrather J (2011) The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms
to translation. Nat Med 17:796 – 808. CrossRef Medline
Jickling GC, Liu D, Stamova B, Ander BP, Zhan X, Lu A, Sharp FR (2014)
Hemorrhagic transformation after ischemic stroke in animals and humans. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34:185–199. CrossRef Medline
Kirton A, Deveber G (2013) Life after perinatal stroke. Stroke 44:3265–3271.
CrossRef Medline
Knowland D, Arac A, Sekiguchi KJ, Hsu M, Lutz SE, Perrino J, Steinberg GK,
Barres BA, Nimmerjahn A, Agalliu D (2014) Stepwise recruitment of
transcellular and paracellular pathways underlies blood– brain barrier
breakdown in stroke. Neuron 82:603– 617. CrossRef Medline
Krueger M, Härtig W, Reichenbach A, Bechmann I, Michalski D (2013)
Blood– brain barrier breakdown after embolic stroke in rats occurs without ultrastructural evidence for disrupting tight junctions. PLoS One
8:e56419. CrossRef Medline
Lalancette-Hébert M, Gowing G, Simard A, Weng YC, Kriz J (2007) Selective ablation of proliferating microglial cells exacerbates ischemic injury
in the brain. J Neurosci 27:2596 –2605. CrossRef Medline
Lambertsen KL, Clausen BH, Babcock AA, Gregersen R, Fenger C, Nielsen
HH, Haugaard LS, Wirenfeldt M, Nielsen M, Dagnaes-Hansen F, Bluethmann H, Faergeman NJ, Meldgaard M, Deierborg T, Finsen B (2009)
Microglia protect neurons against ischemia by synthesis of tumor necrosis
factor. J Neurosci 29:1319 –1330. CrossRef Medline
Liu J, Jin X, Liu KJ, Liu W (2012) Matrix metalloproteinase-2-mediated
occludin degradation and caveolin-1-mediated claudin-5 redistribution
contribute to blood– brain barrier damage in early ischemic stroke stage.
J Neurosci 32:3044 –3057. CrossRef Medline
Lunde LK, Camassa LM, Hoddevik EH, Khan FH, Ottersen OP, Boldt HB,
Amiry-Moghaddam M (2015) Postnatal development of the molecular
complex underlying astrocyte polarization. Brain Struct Funct 220:
2087–2101. CrossRef Medline
Lynch JK, Nelson KB (2001) Epidemiology of perinatal stroke. Curr Opin
Pediatr 13:499 –505. CrossRef Medline
Monje ML, Toda H, Palmer TD (2003) Inflammatory blockade restores
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. Science 302:1760 –1765. CrossRef
Medline
Mori E, del Zoppo GJ, Chambers JD, Copeland BR, Arfors KE (1992) Inhibition of polymorphonuclear leukocyte adherence suppresses no-reflow

Fernández-López et al. • Microglia-Mediated Neurovascular Integrity in Neonatal Stroke
after focal cerebral ischemia in baboons. Stroke 23:712–718. CrossRef
Medline
Munger JS, Sheppard D (2011) Cross talk among TGF-beta signaling pathways, integrins, and the extracellular matrix. Cold Spring Harb Perspect
Biol 3:a005017. CrossRef Medline
Nimmerjahn A, Kirchhoff F, Helmchen F (2005) Resting microglial cells are
highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo. Science 308:
1314 –1318. CrossRef Medline
Pál G, Lovas G, Dobolyi A (2014) Induction of transforming growth factor
beta receptors following focal ischemia in the rat brain. PLoS One
9:e106544. CrossRef Medline
Pál G, Vincze C, Renner É, Wappler EA, Nagy Z, Lovas G, Dobolyi A (2012)
Time course, distribution and cell types of induction of transforming
growth factor betas following middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat
brain. PLoS One 7:e46731. CrossRef Medline
Paolicelli RC, Bolasco G, Pagani F, Maggi L, Scianni M, Panzanelli P, Giustetto M, Ferreira TA, Guiducci E, Dumas L, Ragozzino D, Gross CT
(2011) Synaptic pruning by microglia is necessary for normal brain development. Science 333:1456 –1458. CrossRef Medline
Peppiatt CM, Howarth C, Mobbs P, Attwell D (2006) Bidirectional control
of CNS capillary diameter by pericytes. Nature 443:700 –704. CrossRef
Medline
Petersen MA, Dailey ME (2004) Diverse microglial motility behaviors during clearance of dead cells in hippocampal slices. Glia 46:195–206.
CrossRef Medline
Polfliet MM, Goede PH, van Kesteren-Hendrikx EM, van Rooijen N, Dijkstra
CD, van den Berg TK (2001) A method for the selective depletion of
perivascular and meningeal macrophages in the central nervous system.
J Neuroimmunol 116:188 –195. CrossRef Medline
Rizzo MT, Leaver HA (2010) Brain endothelial cell death: modes, signaling
pathways, and relevance to neural development, homeostasis, and disease. Mol Neurobiol 42:52– 63. CrossRef Medline
Rosell A, Cuadrado E, Ortega-Aznar A, Hernández-Guillamon M, Lo EH,

J. Neurosci., March 9, 2016 • 36(10):2881–2893 • 2893
Montaner J (2008) MMP-9-positive neutrophil infiltration is associated
to blood– brain barrier breakdown and basal lamina type IV collagen
degradation during hemorrhagic transformation after human ischemic
stroke. Stroke 39:1121–1126. CrossRef Medline
Saederup N, Cardona AE, Croft K, Mizutani M, Cotleur AC, Tsou CL, Ransohoff RM, Charo IF (2010) Selective chemokine receptor usage by central nervous system myeloid cells in CCR2-red fluorescent protein
knock-in mice. PLoS One 5:e13693. CrossRef Medline
Ueno M, Fujita Y, Tanaka T, Nakamura Y, Kikuta J, Ishii M, Yamashita T
(2013) Layer V cortical neurons require microglial support for survival
during postnatal development. Nat Neurosci 16:543–551. CrossRef
Medline
van Rooijen N, Hendrikx E (2010) Liposomes for specific depletion of macrophages from organs and tissues. Methods Mol Biol 605:189 –203.
CrossRef Medline
Walshe TE, Saint-Geniez M, Maharaj AS, Sekiyama E, Maldonado AE,
D’Amore PA (2009) TGF-beta is required for vascular barrier function,
endothelial survival and homeostasis of the adult microvasculature. PLoS
One 4:e5149. CrossRef Medline
Wang Q, Tang XN, Yenari MA (2007) The inflammatory response in stroke.
J Neuroimmunol 184:53– 68. CrossRef Medline
Woo MS, Wang X, Faustino JV, Derugin N, Wendland MF, Zhou P, Iadecola
C, Vexler ZS (2012) Genetic deletion of CD36 enhances injury after
acute neonatal stroke. Ann Neurol 72:961–970. CrossRef Medline
Yang Y, Rosenberg GA (2011) Blood– brain barrier breakdown in acute and
chronic cerebrovascular disease. Stroke 42:3323–3328. CrossRef Medline
Zhang Y, Barres BA (2010) Astrocyte heterogeneity: an underappreciated topic in neurobiology. Curr Opin Neurobiol 20:588 –594.
CrossRef Medline
Zhao X, Grotta J, Gonzales N, Aronowski J (2009) Hematoma resolution as
a therapeutic target: the role of microglia/macrophages. Stroke 40:S92–
S94. CrossRef Medline

