Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26
DOI 10.1186/s12974-015-0245-4

RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF
NEUROINFLAMMATION

Open Access

Attenuation of acute stroke injury in rat brain by
minocycline promotes blood–brain barrier
remodeling and alternative microglia/
macrophage activation during recovery
Yirong Yang2, Victor M Salayandia1, Jeffrey F Thompson1, Lisa Y Yang1, Eduardo Y Estrada1 and Yi Yang1*

Abstract
Background: Minocycline reduces reperfusion injury by inhibiting matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and microglia
activity after cerebral ischemia. Prior studies of minocycline investigated short-term neuroprotective effects during
subacute stage of stroke; however, the late effects of minocycline against early reperfusion injury on neurovascular
remodeling are less well studied. We have shown that spontaneous angiogenesis vessels in ischemic brain regions
have high blood–brain barrier (BBB) permeability due to lack of major tight junction proteins (TJPs) in endothelial
cells at three weeks. In the present study, we longitudinally investigated neurological outcome, neurovascular
remodeling and microglia/macrophage alternative activation after spontaneous and minocycline-induced stroke
recovery.
Methods: Adult spontaneously hypertensive rats had a 90 minute transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. At the
onset of reperfusion they received a single dose of minocycline (3 mg/kg intravenously) or a vehicle. They were
studied at multiple time points up to four weeks with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), immunohistochemistry
and biochemistry.
Results: Minocycline significantly reduced the infarct size and prevented tissue loss in the ischemic hemispheres
compared to vehicle-treated rats from two to four weeks as measured with MRI. Cerebral blood flow measured with
arterial spin labeling (ASL) showed that minocycline improved perfusion. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI indicated
that minocycline reduced BBB permeability accompanied with higher levels of TJPs measured with Western blot.
Increased MMP-2 and −3 were detected at four weeks. Active microglia/macrophage, surrounding and within the
peri-infarct areas, expressed YM1, a marker of M2 microglia/macrophage activation, at four weeks. These microglia/
macrophage expressed both pro-inflammatory factors tumor necrosis factors-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β)
and anti-inflammatory factors transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and interleukin-10 (IL-10). Treatment with
minocycline significantly reduced levels of TNF-α and IL-1β, and increased levels of TGF-β, IL-10 and YM1.
Conclusions: Early minocycline treatment against reperfusion injury significantly promotes neurovascular
remodeling during stroke recovery by reducing brain tissue loss, enhancing TJP expression in ischemic brains
and facilitating neuroprotective phenotype alternative activation of microglia/macrophages.
Keywords: Minocycline, MRI, stroke recovery, neurovascular remodeling, tight junction proteins, microglia/
macrophage, inflammatory phenotypes

* Correspondence: yyang@salud.unm.edu
1
Department of Neurology, University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, 1 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Yang et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Background
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are induced in the ischemic brain and contribute to cell death and blood–
brain barrier (BBB) disruption at an early stage after
stroke. Recent data indicate that the use of MMP inhibitors might lead to new therapies for acute cerebral
ischemia-induced brain injury. Earlier, we administered
synthetic MMP inhibitors prior to middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) in rats, which demonstrated the
proof-of-principle of improvement, but has limited clinical relevance [1-3]. Minocycline, a tetracycline derivative with MMP and inflammation inhibitory effects, has
been shown to reduce reperfusion injury in animal
models of cerebral ischemia and human stroke [4-9].
The neuroprotective effect of minocycline is associated
with its ability to interfere with MMP activity including
gelatin proteolytic activation (MMP-2 and −9); minocycline reduces brain MMP-9 levels in response to microvessel damage and inflammation during the early stage
after stroke [4,5,7,8,10]. We have demonstrated that
minocycline alone or along with normobaric hyperoxia
at reperfusion onset effectively reduces infarct size and
disruption of BBB at 48 hours after transient focal cerebral ischemia [11]. Our data also show that a profound
reduction in MMP-9 level was observed for minocycline
therapy compared to a vehicle at 48 hours. Recently, we
showed that treatment with synthetic MMP inhibitor
GM6001 prior to MCAO reduces tissue loss and facilitates angiogenesis in ischemic hemispheres during stroke
recovery [3]. Therefore, we hypothesized that early treatment with minocycline which can reduce reperfusion injury could also facilitate recovery with BBB remodeling
after stroke.
Minocycline is also a potent inhibitor for inflammatory
responses [4,12], one of the important early contributors
to brain injury after a stroke. Microglia, the brain’s resident immune cells, are activated in response to injury
and orchestrate the brain’s inflammatory response [13].
Activated microglia have been the target of experimental
and clinical studies focusing on neuroinflammation after
focal cerebral ischemia [14,15]. Recent studies show that
treatment with minocycline after reperfusion for between five and seven days significantly reduced microglial activation, which improved motor function during
stroke recovery [16,17]. Furthermore, microglia can assume different activated phenotypes depending on the
activating stimulus [18,19]. The microglial immunophenotype changes over time from pro-inflammatory to antiinflammatory after ischemic stroke. These two distinct
processes are denoted M1 for the early pro-inflammatory
phase, and M2 for the later anti-inflammatory and repair
phase. There is evidence that, at later times during recovery, microglia in anti-inflammatory phenotypes play a key
role in the promotion of neurovascular remodeling

Page 2 of 15

through the release of growth-related proteins and
cytokines from peripheral and resident immune cells
[13,18-21]. We proposed that the spontaneous microglial
immunophenotype changes after stroke can be influenced
by early minocycline exposure [22,23].
In this study, minocycline was administrated at an
early stage of reperfusion when MMP-2 and −9 induce
BBB opening and inflammation [1,2,6,24]. We used MRI,
histological and biochemical methods to monitor the
time course of neurovascular remodeling in response to
spontaneous and therapy-induced stroke recovery. We
also studied the pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines
expressed by microglia/macrophages to characterize the
functional alternative activation in response to minocycline treatment.

Materials and methods
Middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion

The study was approved by the University of New
Mexico Animal Care Committee (13-101061-HSC) and
conformed to the National Institutes of Health guidelines for use of animals in research. A total of 60 male
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR, 280 to 300 g in
body weight. Harlan, Indianapolis, IN, USA) were subjected to 90 minutes of MCAO with reperfusion for 24
and 48 hours, and one, two, three and four weeks [2].
For the minocycline treatment experiments, groups
studied were minocycline (n = 15) and the vehicle (n =
15), while rats in each group were followed up on for
four weeks of reperfusion. The rat numbers did not reflect the rats which died around 12 to 17 days after reperfusion during the long-term studies (approximately
33% in control group and 11% in treated group) [3]. A
single dose of minocycline (3 mg/kg, Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO, USA) [25] or the vehicle were administered
to rats via the right femoral vein immediately after reperfusion onset. We chose the single dose of minocycline based on our previous studies [2,3,11,26], in which
a single dose of MMP inhibitors prior to MCAO or minocycline at reperfusion onset was administered. Minocycline was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO,
Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and diluted in 25%
solutol (BASF, Florham Park, NJ, USA) to reduce the
concentration of DMSO to less than 10% [11]. Control
rats had the same dose of the solutol with DMSO, which
are referred to in the present report as ‘vehicle treated’.
Magnetic resonance imaging

Multimodal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the
rat, including relaxation time imaging, diffusion imaging,
perfusion imaging and dynamic permeability imaging,
was temporally conducted after 48 hours, and one, two
and four weeks of reperfusion. The rat was placed in a
dedicated holder, and positioned in the isocenter of a

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

4.7-Tesla MRI scanner (Bruker Biospin), which was
equipped with a 40-cm bore, a 660 mT/m (rise time
within 120 μs) gradient and shim systems (Bruker Biospin
MRI, Billerica, MA, USA). To obtain good signal-to-noise
ratio, a small bore linear RF coil (inner diameter = 72 mm)
and a single tuned surface coil (RAPID Biomedical,
Rimpar, Germany) were employed for signal excitation
and detection, respectively [3,27,28]. During MRI, the
rats were anaesthetized with 2.5% isoflurane (Phonenix,
Clipper Distributing Company, St. Joseph, MO, USA)
by mechanical ventilation. Respiration and heart rate were
monitored during MRI measurements, and body temperature was maintained at 37.0 ± 0.5°C.
T2-weighted images were acquired with a fast spinecho sequence (rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement (RARE)) (Repetition Time (TR)/Echo Time
(TE) = 5,000 ms/56 ms, Field of View (FOV) = 4 cm ×
4 cm, slice thickness = 1 mm, inter-slice distance =
1.1 mm, number of slices = 12, matrix = 256 × 256, number of average = 3). Infarct area and peri-infarct area
were manually delineated from T2 images. The delineated areas were used as the reference for all the other
parametric images. The same slice location was prescribed for all the subsequent MRI protocols.
Multi-slice, multi-shot, diffusion-weighted echo-planar
imaging (EPI) (TR/TE = 3,800 ms/38 ms; b-values = 600
and 1,900 s/mm2 in 30 directions; FOV = 4 cm × 4 cm,
slice thickness = 1 mm, matrix = 256 × 256) was performed to assess tissue architecture. Quantitative apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps were calculated on
a voxel-wise basis, with a linear least-squares fit on the
logarithm of the signal intensity versus the b-value for
each diffusion direction. Based on the ADC maps, the
eigenvalues of the diffusion tensor, ADC and fractional
anisotropy (FA) maps were generated using ParaVision
5.1 (Bruker Biospin MRI, Bellerica, MA, USA).
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) was measured using the
arterial spin labeling (ASL) method. The sequence: flowsensitive alternating inversion recovery rapid acquisition
with relaxation enhancement (FAIR-RARE) was used
to implement ASL with parameters: TE/TR = 46 ms/
16,000 ms, FOV = 4 cm × 4 cm, slice thickness = 1 mm,
number of slices = 1, matrix = 128 × 128. The perfusion
map was calculated using the ASL_Perfusion_Processing
macro in ParaVision 5.1 (Bruker Biospin MRI). The
principle is as follows: inversion recovery data from the
imaging slice are acquired after selective inversion of the
slice, and after inversion of the slice including the surrounding tissue, containing the supplying arteries. The
difference of the inverse of the apparent T1 images then
yields a measure of the CBF.
To non-invasively evaluate BBB permeability, we applied dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE)-MRI and
graphical analysis of the resultant image data [29]. The

Page 3 of 15

contrast agent Gd-DTPA (Magnevist, Bayer Healthcare
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Wayne, NJ) at dose of 0.1 mM/kg
was injected into the femoral vein. DCE-MRI was performed using a transverse fast T1 mapping that consisted of obtaining pre-contrast (three sequences) and
post-contrast (16 sequences) images up to 45 minutes
after the contrast injection. The details of pulse sequence T1_EPI for T1 mapping are: FOV = 4 cm × 4 cm,
slice thickness = 1.5 mm, slice gap = 0, matrix size =
128 × 128, TR/TE =10,000 ms/8.3 ms, number of segments = 4, number of average = 1, total scan time = 2 m
40 s 0 ms. The T1 map was reconstructed with the
t1epia fitting function in the Bruker ParaVision Image
Sequence Analysis (ISA) tool. Previous research [30]
have demonstrated that the blood-to-tissue transfer or
influx constant, Ki, could be obtained by graphical analysis of a timed series of tissue and arterial concentrations of contrast agent. Since the contrast agent
concentration is proportional to changes of 1/T1(Δ(1/T1
(t))), the map of Ki was constructed from repeated estimates of Δ(1/T1(t)). An in-house computer program in
MATLAB (Mathworks, Massachusetts, USA), which implemented the above principle, was used to generate the
Ki map.
Immunohistochemistry

A total of 10 μm sections from rat brains fixed with 2%
paraformaldehyde, 0.1 M sodium periodate and 0.075 M
lysine in 100 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.3 (PLP) were
used for immunohistochemical analysis. Primary antibodies and dilutions used in immunohistochemistry (IHC)
were: ionized calcium biding adapter molecule 1 (Iba-1)
(1:400, Wako Chemicals USA, Inc. Richmond, VA,
USA), tumor necrosis factors-α (TNF-α) (1:300,
Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), interleukin-1β (IL-1β)
(1:500, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), interleukin-10
(IL-10) (1:1,000 , Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA),
transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) (1:200 , Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA), chitinase-like 3 (YM1) (1:100,
StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada), integrin
alpha M (OX-42, or CD 11b) (1:100, Accurate Chemical &
Scientific Corporation, Westbury, NY, USA), rat endothelial cell antigen-1 (RECA-1) (1:300, Abcam, Cambridge,
MA, USA), and beta-type platelet-derived growth factor
receptor (PDGFR-β) (1:100, Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA).
For immunofluorescence, brain sections were treated
with acetone and blocked with 5% normal serum. Primary antibodies were incubated for 48 hours at 4°C. Sections were incubated for 90 minutes at 25°C with
secondary antibodies conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) or Cy-3 (Jackson Immuno-Research,
West Grove, PA, USA). 4′-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) was used

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

to label cell nuclei. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) negative controls were incubated without the primary antibody or with normal (non-immune) immunoglobulin Gs
(IgGs) (Jackson Immuno-Research, West Grove, PA,
USA) and no specific immunolabeling was detected.
All IHC slides were viewed on an Olympus BX-51
bright field and fluorescence microscope (Olympus
America Inc. Center Valley, PA, USA). Dual or triple immunofluorescence slides were also imaged confocally to
verify co-labeling (Zeiss LSM 510, Carl Zeiss Microimaging,
Thornwood, NY, USA).
Western blots

Western blots were performed to determine protein
levels in ischemic white matter. Proteins were extracted
in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer from
ischemic and nonischemic hemispheres. A total of 50 μg
of total proteins were separated on 4% to 20% gradient
gels (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). The
proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride
(PVDF) membranes. The membranes were then incubated with primary antibodies: claudin-5 (1:500, Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), occluding (1:500,
Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), zona
occluden-1 (ZO-1) (1:500, Life Technologies, Grand Island,
NY, USA), MMP-3 (1:1,000, Epitomics, Burlingame, CA,
USA), TNF-α (1:500, Abcam), IL-1β (1:500, Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA), IL-10 (1:1,000, Abcam, Cambridge,
MA, USA), TGF-β (1:500, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA),
YM1 (1:400, StemCell Technologies, Vancouver, Canada).
The membranes were incubated with the respective secondary antibodies and blots were developed using the
West Pico Detection System (Thermo Scientific, Rockford,
IL USA). Protein bands were visualized on X-ray film.
Semi-quantitation of target protein intensities was done
with the use of ImageJ (National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA), and actin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis,
MO, USA) immunoblots on the same PVDF membranes
that were used to normalize protein loading and transfer.
The results are reported as normalized band intensity for
quantifying relative protein expression.
Gelatin zymography

MMP-2 and −9 in brain tissue proteins extracted in RIPA
buffer were analyzed by gelatin zymography. Briefly, 50 μg
of total protein were electrophoretically separated on 10%
SDS-polyacrylamide gels co-polymerized with gelatin
(Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Gels were then
incubated for 90 hours at 37°C with a developing buffer
before they were stained with Brilliant Blue R (SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 30 minutes. Gels were
destained until clear bands of gelatinolytic activity appeared on a dark blue background. The gels were dried
and scanned for densitometry (Alpha Imager™ 2200; Alpha

Page 4 of 15

Innotech, San Leandro, CA, USA). Supernatants of human
fibrosarcoma HT-1080 cells were used as gelatinase standards for MMP-2 and −9.
Quantification of Iba-1 fluorescence intensity and colocalization of cytokines with Iba-1

In order to evaluate the effect of minocycline on microgliosis (microglial proliferation), we first attempted to perform
quantitative morphometry to assess Iba-1+ microgliosis
over the time course. However, we found certain technical
challenges to acquire accurate cell counts when a majority
of Iba-1+ cells overlap in the ischemic hemispheres from
one to four weeks after stroke [31]. Alternatively, we used
the mean staining density of Iba-1 immunofluorescence to
quantify the activation of microglia. Since Iba-1 is specifically expressed in microglia/macrophages and is upregulated during the activation of these cells in ischemic
stroke brain [31,32], we reasoned that the density of Iba-1
immunofluorescence proportionally reflects both Iba-1+
cell number and level of Iba-1 protein in microglia/macrophages, which is sufficient to represent the changes of
microgliosis. Rats were killed and perfused for vessel
counting at 24 hours, 48 hours, and one, two and four
weeks of reperfusion after stroke. Eight brain sections from
each animal with an interval of 100 μm covered a span of
800 μm in the peri-Bregmal region (approximately 1.00 to
0.2 mm rostral to Bregma) [3]. Microglia labeled with Iba1 were measured in images captured from ischemic hemispheres with a low power objective lens (10×) by using
ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA). Indicators of animal identity on slides were
blinded to the investigator. Three images from the ischemic area were captured for each section. The intensity of Iba-1 fluorescence was calculated as the mean of
the intensity obtained from the imaged sections.
For analysis and quantification of cytokines with Iba-1,
eight brain sections from each animal were used as described above. Three areas from ischemic hemispheres
were captured with a 40× objective lens. Automatic and
quantitative measurement of co-localization of cytokines
and Iba-1 was performed using co-localization plugin
Coloc 2 in Fiji-ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). Briefly, two color channel images
were converted into 8-bit gray images. After background
subtraction, co-localization analysis was done in Coloc
2. A two-dimensional intensity histogram, which displayed the correlation between the intensities of the two
color channels, was presented. Among multiple quantitative results, we chose to report Li et al.’s intensity correlation quotient (ICQ), which provides an overall index
of co-localization. The ICQ values are distributed between −0.5 and +0.5. Random staining: ICQ approximately 0; segregated staining: 0 > ICQ −0.5; co-localized
staining: 0 < ICQ ≤ +0.5 [33].

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Statistical analysis

Unpaired t-tests or one-way Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) were performed for two groups or for multiple
group comparisons (with a post-hoc Student-NewmanKeuls test), respectively. Two-way (−factors) ANOVA
were performed for group comparisons with time course
analysis. In all statistical tests, differences were considered
significant when P <0.05. Data are presented as means +
SE. Statistical analysis was performed using Prism, version
6.0 (GraphPad Software Incorporated, La Jolla, CA, USA).

Results
Minocycline significantly improved stroke outcome
during recovery

By taking advantage of MRI, we temporally measured lesion
sizes in ischemic hemispheres (Figure 1A). Compared with
the vehicle group, T2-weighted images showed significantly
smaller lesions in the minocycline group at two weeks that
continued to four weeks. A decrease in the ADC value was
found in the ischemic hemispheres at two and four weeks,

Page 5 of 15

suggesting decreased diffusivity in the regions of tissue damage (Figure 1B). In line with the anatomic T2 images, the
ADC maps demonstrated significantly reduced tissue breakdown in the minocycline group at two and four weeks after
stroke. Compared with the vehicle group, FA [34] in the
minocycline group (Figure 1C) showed white matter that
was significantly protected from damage at four weeks.
Minocycline facilitates cerebral blood flow and reduces
blood–brain barrier permeability in peri-infarct areas

We measured the CBF with ASL (Figure 2). CBF maps
showed hyperperfusion in the lesion hemisphere, specifically in the peri-infarct areas, at 48 hours and one week
compared with the contralateral normal hemispheres, as
seen previously [35]. We found that the hyperperfusion in
the lesion hemisphere began to reduce after two weeks.
However, higher perfusion still can be seen in the periinfarct areas at two weeks. This observation was also seen
in ischemic brains at three weeks reperfusion in our previous study, which correlates to the high density of newly

Figure 1 Stroke recovery monitored by magnetic resonance imaging. A. Anatomical T2 MR images. Arrows indicate ischemic hemispheres.
Line graph demonstrates quantification of infarct volumes in ischemic hemispheres. B. ADC maps. Line graph demonstrates quantification of
edema (acute stage) and tissue loss (late stage) in ischemic hemispheres. C. FA maps. Line graph demonstrates quantification of white matter
change in ischemic hemispheres. *P <0.05, ***P <0.001 versus vehicle group, n = 8 in each group.

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Page 6 of 15

some major TJPs [3]. DCE-MRI showed a remarkably
decreased BBB transfer rate (Ki) in the peri-infarct area
in the minocycline group at four weeks compared with
the vehicle group (Figure 3A,B). The light blue area in
the brain cartoon of Figure 3B indicates the region
where the BBB permeability of angiogenic vessels [3] in
peri-infarct areas (Figure 3C) was measured.
Minocycline enhances levels of tight junction proteins
and matrix metalloproteinase-3 during recovery

Western blot analysis revealed that the levels of TJPs, including (zona occluden-1) ZO-1, occludin and claudin-5,
in the ischemic cortices of minocycline-treated rats were
significantly higher compared with the vehicle-treated
group (Figure 4A). Figure 4B shows that significantly increased levels of pro and active MMP-2 were detected in
both vehicle- and minocycline-treated ipsilateral cortices
compared with the contralateral, while no differences
were detected between the vehicle and minocycline
groups. A very low expression of MMP-9 was detected
in ischemic brains at four weeks, consistent with our
previous observation [3]. Increased levels of MMP-3
were seen both in vehicle- and minocycline-treated ipsilateral cortices (Figure 4C). A significant difference was
only detected between the contralateral and ipsilateral
cortex in minocycline-treated brains. As expected, all
treatments had no significant effect on the basal levels of
TJPs and MMPs in the contralateral tissue.
Inflammatory cytokines expressed by alternatively
activated microglia/macrophages are involved in
neurovascular remodeling

Figure 2 ASL maps monitored by MRI at 48 hours and one, two
and four weeks after stroke. Arrows indicate ischemic hemispheres.
Line graph demonstrates quantification of blood flow in peri-infarct
areas. *P <0.05 versus vehicle group, n = 8 in each group.

formed vessels in the peri-infarct areas [3]. The graph in
Figure 3 shows that minocycline caused a higher ASL value
at each time point. Significant differences between the vehicle and minocycline groups were seen at one and two
weeks.
Increased BBB permeability in the angiogenic vessels
was seen due to immature BBB functions with a lack of

To evaluate the effect of minocycline on the alternative
activation of microglia activation, we next investigated
the response of microglia to stroke and reperfusion injury by using immunohistochemistry with an antibody
against Iba-1. Iba-1 is a 17-kDa protein that is specifically expressed in microglia and macrophages and is upregulated during the activation of these cells [31,32].
Microglia and macrophages are virtually undistinguishable since they express the most commonly used cell
markers in vivo. Fortunately, recent data show that the
vast majority of Iba-1-positive cells in the ischemic
brain represent activated resident microglia [20,36,37].
However, its specificity for microglia staining is limited
in injured brain tissue, where peripheral macrophages
may infiltrate [32]. Therefore, the Iba-1- positive cells
were referred to as microglia/macrophages. Additional
file 1: Figure S1 shows that Iba-1-positive microglia/macrophages were seen in ischemic hemispheres as early as
24 hours after reperfusion and reached a peak at one week
that extended to four weeks. Various morphological
shapes of microglia/macrophages were seen at different
time points (Figure 5A). Microglia/macrophages with

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Page 7 of 15

Figure 3 Blood–brain barrier permeability monitored by magnetic resonance imaging. A. Parametric image Ki map by DCE-MRI represents
BBB transfer rate at four weeks after stroke. Color-coded permeability coefficient maps reconstructed from contrast-enhanced MRI data demonstrate
the regions of high (red) and low (blue) permeability. B. Histogram demonstrates the quantification of BBB permeability in peri-infarct areas (light blue areas
in the brain slice cartoon). *P = 0.0504 versus vehicle group, n = 8 in each group. C. RECA1 (marker of endothelial cells) immunostaining shows increased
density of new vessels in the peri-infarct area (arrows), corresponding to the regions where BBB transfer rate and plasma volume were measured.

Figure 4 Expression of tight junction proteins and matrix metalloproteinases at four weeks after stroke. A. Western blot analysis for TJPs.
ZO-1: **P <0.05 versus V-I, V-C and Mino-C. Occludin: *P <0.05 versus V-I, V-C and Mino-C. Claudin-5: *P <0.05 versus V-I, V-C and Mino-C. B. Gel zymography
analysis for MMP-2 and −9. **P <0.01 versus V-C and Mino-C. n = 8 in the vehicle group, 9 in the minocycline group. C. Western blot analysis for MMP-3.
Level of MMP-3 including preform (57 kDa) and active form (45 kDa): *P <0.05 versus V-C and Mino-C. Mino-C: minocycline contralateral. Mino-I: minocycline
ipsilateral. V-C: Vehicle contralateral. V-I: Vehicle ipsilateral. n = 8 in the vehicle group, 9 in the minocycline group.

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Figure 5 (See legend on next page.)

Page 8 of 15

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Page 9 of 15

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 5 Microglia/macrophage activation by immunofluorescence staining of Iba-1. A. Morphological changes of microglia/macrophage
in ischemic hemispheres over reperfusion courses. Scale bar = 100 μm. The right panels at each time point present a higher magnification of the
images shown in squares in the left panels. Scale bar = 50 μm. DAPI was used to show nuclei and vessel at one week. core-i: core infarct area;
peri-i: peri-infarct area; V: vessel. B. Quantification of Iba-1 fluorescence (FL) intensity in ischemic hemispheres over reperfusion courses. *P <0.05,
***P <0.001 versus vehicle group, n = 5 in each group. The brain cartoon shows the three images measured by ImageJ that were obtained from
the infarct areas, indicated by the squares in red.

extending processes were the majority of Iba-1-positive
cells in the ischemic hemispheres at 24 hours, which exhibited morphological evidence of activation [38]. At
48 hours, round Iba-1-positive microglia/macrophages
began to appear. By one week, the vast majority of Iba-1positive cells in the ischemic brain were round, especially
in the core infarct areas. However, microglia/macrophages
with extending processes reappeared in the peri-infarct
areas by two weeks, and were continually seen for up to
four weeks (Figure 5A and Additional file 1: Figure S1).
A significant reduction of Iba-1 fluorescence intensity
was detected from 48 hours to two weeks in the minocycline group compared with the vehicle (Figure 5B), suggesting that treatment with minocycline significantly
decreased microglia/macrophage activation. We did not
detect a significant reduction of Iba-1 fluorescence intensity in minocycline animals at four weeks. One of the
reasons for this could be the greater tissue loss in ischemic hemispheres in the vehicle animals (Figures 1 and
5A and Additional file 1: Figure S1). Expression of M2
microglia/macrophage marker YM1 was co-localized in
the microglia/macrophages (Additional file 1: Figure S2),
suggesting the shifting of microglia/macrophage activation from M1 to M2 at four weeks. More importantly,
IHC and Western blot analysis also showed that treatment with minocycline significantly increased expression
of YM1 compared with vehicle treatment (Figure 6A,B).
There were no detectable differences in YM1 levels in
the contralateral tissues across the two animal groups.
We next investigated the expression of four cytokines in
microglia/macrophages in peri-infarct areas at four weeks
reperfusion: pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL1β, and anti-inflammatory cytokines TGF-β and IL-10.
We found that the microglia/macrophages in the periinfarct areas expressed all four cytokines (Figure 7A).
However, minocycline reduced expression of TNF-α and
IL-1β, and significantly increased expression of TGF-β
and IL-10 in the microglia/macrophages (Figure 7A,B).
Furthermore, we found that little TNF-α or IL-1β staining
was seen in the microglia/macrophages with extending
processes in peri-infarct areas that are adjacent to intact
tissues (far from core infarct regions) (Figure 7C). Using
an antibody for PDGFR-β for immunostaining (an established early marker of activated pericytes) we demonstrated that the proliferating pericytes, which closely
surround the newly formed vessels in the peri-infarct areas

and are involved in the formation of TJPs [3], expressed
TGF-β (Figure 7D).
Minocycline increased expression of active antiinflammatory cytokines in ischemic hemispheres during
recovery

Levels of active (cleaved) forms of these cytokines in the
cortex at four weeks were assessed using Western blots
(Figure 8). A lower amount of TNF-α and IL-1β in the
ischemic cortex were seen compared with the contralateral cortex. Treatment with minocycline resulted in a
significant reduction of IL-1β in the ischemic cortex
compared with the vehicle. The levels of IL-10 and TGF-β
in the ischemic cortices of minocycline-treated rats were
significantly higher compared with the vehicle-treated
group. The administration of minocycline significantly facilitated the expression of TGF-β in the ischemic cortex.
As expected, minocycline had no significant effects on the
levels of these cytokines in the contralateral tissues compared with the vehicle.

Discussion
We demonstrate that a single dose of minocycline at an
early stage of reperfusion after stroke effectively prevented
brain damage, and impacted neurovascular remodeling
favorably during recovery. This facilitated vascular remodeling in peri-infarct areas by promoting TJP formation and
BBB function during recovery. In contrast, treatment with
minocycline did not impair expression of MMP-2 and −3
during recovery, which are required for stroke- induced
angiogenesis. Finally, we showed that minocycline promoted
neuroprotective phenotype alternative activation of microglia/macrophages, which is involved in the neurovascular remodeling after stroke.
Minocycline has shown anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic
and neuroprotective effects, as well as inhibition of MMPs,
in many models of cerebral ischemia and neurodegenerative disease. High penetration of the BBB and a good safety
profile make minocycline ideal for use in stroke treatment
[4,6]. However, prior studies of minocycline in animal
models have investigated neuroprotective effects during
acute and subacute stages [4,11], and the late effects on
neurovascular remodeling are less studied. By taking advantage of non-invasive MRI, we monitored the outcome during spontaneous and minocycline-induced recovery.
Multimodal MRI analysis with anatomical T2, ADC and

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Page 10 of 15

Figure 6 Phenotype of microglia/macrophage alternative activation at four weeks after stroke. A. Double immunostaining shows
expression of YM1 in microglia/macrophage (OX-42). Scale bars = 50. DAPI was used to show nuclei. B. Western blot analysis for protein level of YM1.
**P <0.01 versus V-C and Mino-C. ***P <0.001 versus V-C and Mino-C. #P <0.05 versus V-I. n = 8 in the vehicle group, 9 in the minocycline group.

FA showed significant protection from brain injury with
minocycline from two to four weeks after stroke. The early
neuroprotective role of minocycline on BBB may attenuate
the secondary injury, such as entrance of neurotoxic blood
compounds, infiltration of inflammatory cells, systemic
MMPs and especially neutrophil-derived MMP-9 [39,40].
This would provide the cellular and molecular basis to promote later recovery from stroke. Considering the limited
treatment options for ischemic stroke and the promising
results of both early phase human trials and animal models,
a drug like minocycline, producing even modest improvements
in outcome, may substantially increase patient functional
recovery and quality of life while decreasing public financial burden.
We noted that the significant improvements measured
by MRI were first seen at two weeks after stroke, while
significantly reduced infarct size minocycline treatment

was detected at 48 hours after stroke by triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining of fresh rat brain tissues
[11]. This may have resulted from MRI signals from
penumbra areas, as well as postischemic hyperperfusion
(PIH) [35]; while TTC stains only dead cells. In addition,
present data show that a significant reduction of microglia activation by minocycline was seen beginning at
48 hours, consistent with the TTC stains. These differences between MRI in living subjects and histology in
postmortem tissues seen in this study may provide important preclinical information for diagnosis and treatment for stroke.
PIH is thought to arise as a result of disturbed cerebral
autoregulation. PIH has been reported to be harmful
(aggravate edema and hemorrhage, and neuronal damage from reperfusion injury) and beneficial (prevent
infarct growth) [35,41,42]. Our ASL data show that significantly

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Page 11 of 15

Figure 7 Inflammatory factors expressed by active microglia/macrophage in peri-infarct areas at four weeks after stroke. A. Double
immunostaining shows expression of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-10 and TGF-β in active microglia (Iba-1). B. Analysis and quantification for co-localization of
cytokines and Iba-1 in the microglia/macrophages with Fiji-ImageJ. Representative two-dimensional histogram and scatterplots visualize the correlation
of the pixel intensities, over all pixels and voxels in the images with different Li’s ICQ values, generated by Fiji-ImageJ. Statistical bar figures demonstrate
the quantification of Li’s ICQ values for co-localization of each cytokine with Iba-1 in vehicle- and minocycline-treated ischemic hemispheres. *P <0.05,
**P <0.01 versus V-I. n = 5 in each group. C. Double immunostaining shows little expression of TNF-α and IL-1β in active microglia/macrophage, with
extending processes in the peri-infarct areas bordering with intact tissues. Scale bars = 50 μm. D. Double immunostaining shows expression of TGF-β in
PDGFR-β-positive pericytes that closely surround the vessels (V). Scale bars = 50 and 100 μm.

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

Page 12 of 15

Figure 8 Western blot analysis for active forms of inflammatory factors in rat brains at four weeks after stroke. TNF-α: levels of TNF-α
were decreased in ischemic rat brains and treatment with minocycline facilitated the reduction. IL-1β: *P <0.05 versus V-I. IL-10: *P <0.05 versus
V-I. TGF-α: *P <0.05 versus V-I; ##P <0.01 versus V-C and Mino-C. n = 8 in the vehicle group, 9 in the minocycline group.

higher CBF in peri-infarct regions with minocycline occurred from one to two weeks after reperfusion. Considering its protective role in BBB disruption, the higher
perfusion in peri-infarct regions in response to minocycline
treatment at a later stage is beneficial for repair. With magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), Tanaka et al. revealed
recanalization of the right middle cerebral artery at two
hours after stroke. The MRA at 48 hours also showed many
additional dilated vessels in the affected hemisphere, which
were highly perfused [35]. We proposed that minocycline
reduced BBB damage and protected the vessels in lesion
hemispheres at the acute stage, which increased the perfusion and prevented the reperfusion injury growth at the
subacute stage that facilitates repair.
In this study, permeability coefficient maps (Ki) demonstrate lower BBB permeability in minocycline-treated
rats at four weeks, which was correlated with a higher
blood flow (ASL) in peri-infarct regions, suggesting optimal barrier function. In line with the MRI results, treatment with minocycline enhanced the level of TJPs,
claudin-5, occludin and ZO-1. TJPs are normally seen
within endothelial cells, where they form the first barrier
to blood-borne substances. Previously, we observed BBB

leakage in the peri-infarct regions where new angiogenic
vessels are located, indicating an incomplete barrier
function due to absence of major TJPs, occludin and
ZO-1 in endothelium. However, this endothelial leakage
may be compensated, at least in part, by the overexpression
of TJPs in pericytes and astrocytes that closely surround
the new vessels [3], which contribute to extra-endothelial
TJP formation during neurovascular remodeling. Our present data suggest the possibility that an enhanced restructuring of the BBB TJPs by minocycline may provide
functionality to the BBB, in spite of an immature endothelium during neurovascular remodeling.
Stroke induces ischemic infarct with a cascade of metabolic and inflammatory consequences that extend into the
penumbra. After stroke, microglia, the brain-resident
macrophage [13], become activated, obtain an amoeboid
morphology and release inflammatory cytokines (classical
activation/the M1 phenotype) [20]. However, microglia
can also be alternatively activated, performing crucial roles
in limiting inflammation and phagocytosing tissue debris
(alternative activation/the M2 phenotype) [13,18,20,36,43].
Studies reveal that the dynamics of the microglial immunophenotype change over time after ischemic stroke and

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

that the location of the microglia (core versus penumbra)
is critical in determining that phenotype [20]. Treatment
with minocycline after stroke significantly reduced microglial activation in brains [20,44-46]. We postulated that
minocycline inhibiting inflammatory response at an early
stage of stroke may influence the microglia/macrophage
immunophenotype change. In this study, we found various
morphological shapes and locations (core infarct and periinfarct) of microglia/macrophages at different time points
over the four weeks of reperfusion. During the first few
days, active microglia/macrophages, with extending processes located within the ischemic attacked regions,
seemed to represent the brain resident microglia that rapidly responded to injury, which is comparable with other
reports [31,37]. Morphological changes of active microglia/
macrophages over time are similar with the time-dependent
recruitment of brain resident microglia and blood-derived
macrophages after stroke [31,37]. From two to four weeks,
active microglia/macrophages with extending processes reappeared in the peri-infarct areas, especially in the areas adjacent to intact tissue, indicating a new population of active
microglia/macrophages. The expression of M2 microglia/
macrophage marker YM1 was co-localized in these active
morphometry, suggesting shifting of microglia/macrophage
activation from M1 to M2 at four weeks.
In cerebral ischemia, early research showed the effectiveness of minocycline in decreasing infarct size and inflammation when administered within five hours of an
ischemic event [6,25]. Some early phase clinical trials have
shown minocycline to be safe and potentially effective in
acute ischemic stroke, alone or in combination with tissue
plasminogen activator [4,7]. Our acute study on rat MCAO
shows that minocycline alone or along with normobaric
hyperoxia effectively reduces brain injury in transient focal
cerebral ischemia, with protection due to the inhibition of
MMP-2/9-mediated occludin degradation and attenuation
of caspase-dependent and independent apoptotic pathways
[11]. We postulated that minocycline inhibiting inflammatory response at an early stage of stroke may influence the
microglia/macrophage immunophenotype change. The
present data demonstrated that a single dose of minocycline treatment right after reperfusion onset induced significant inhibition of microglia/macrophage activation at
48 hours and increased YM1 expression in ischemic brains
at four weeks following stroke. These results indicate that
early treatment of minocycline after stroke that protects
the BBB from disruption and attenuates inflammation, also
sustains the ischemic tissue in brain, which facilitates
the neuroprotective phenotype alternative activation of
microglia/macrophage during the recovery stage.
Recent studies show that minocycline for five and seven
days of treatment is able to attenuate infarct size and
microglial activation induced by stroke by seven days [16]
and by 22 days, respectively [17]. Because microglia are

Page 13 of 15

involved in neurogenesis and neuroplasticity following ischemic insult, inhibition of microglial activation is unlikely
to be the sole mechanism of minocycline’s long-term neuroprotective effect. Continuous behavioral and neurological
recoveries are seen when minocycline is administered four days
following MCAO, and subsequently for four weeks [44,47]. In
our study, at four weeks, the active microglia/macrophages
surrounding and within the peri-infarct areas expressed
both pro-inflammatory factors (TNF-α and IL-1β) and
anti-inflammatory factors (TGF-β and IL-10) [36]. Further, reduced TNF-α and IL-1β were seen in the microglia/macrophages with extended processes that were
seen in the peri-infarct border adjacent to intact tissues,
suggesting a change in phenotype depending on the
source and active timing of microglia/macrophages
[13,20]. Importantly, our current data show that one
dose of minocycline treatment at an early stage of
reperfusion promotes the neuroprotective phenotype
alternative activation of microglia/macrophage during
recovery, and increased expression of TGF-β and IL-10.
TGF-β and IL-10 are pleiotropic immunoregulatory cytokines that have a crucial role in the development of
the anti-inflammatory milieu associated with tissue repair [36]. Although TGF-β is well known for its proinflammatory effects, it can also suppress inflammation
by inhibiting T helper (TH) type 1 and TH2 responses
and promoting Treg cell development. Similarly, the
immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10, produced by multiple cell types including Treg cells, has both neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory activities [36].
Besides the active microglia/macrophages, the proliferating pericytes, closely surrounding angiogenic vessels in
the peri-infarct areas, also expressed TGF-β. We and
others have shown that the proliferating vascular pericytes acquire a microglial phenotype after stroke by expressing microglial markers, such as NG2, Gal-3, Iba-1
and CD11b [3,48]. The TGF-β signaling pathway has
been demonstrated to be involved in the regulation of
BBB functional integrity and TJP expression during inflammation, and may lower the endothelial permeability
[49,50]. We previously showed that the microglia-like
pericytes participate in the neovascularization of periinfarct areas after stroke by expressing TJPs [3]. Our
data suggest a novel treatment potential for facilitating
neurological recovery by influencing these spontaneous
repair-related alternative activation of microglia/macrophages in the brain after stroke with medicine exposure.

Conclusions
We demonstrated that a single dose of minocycline
administered early after stroke benefits neurovascular
remodeling during the recovery phase. Functional alternative
activation of microglia is involved in the BBB restoration during neurovascular remodeling after stroke. We found that

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

minocycline promotes the neuroprotective phenotype of
microglia/macrophage alternative activation during recovery.
Due to the limited treatment time for acute stage in ischemic
stroke, the potential acute and delayed effects of therapeutic
intervention with minocycline will provide important preclinical information with strong translational potential.

Page 14 of 15

2.

3.

4.

Additional file
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Immunofluorescence photomicrographs
representing Iba-1-positive microglia/macrophages in ischemic hemispheres
at different time points after stroke. Arrows indicate ischemic hemisphere.
Figure S2. Double-immunofluorescence staining represented expression of
M2 microglia/macrophage marker YM1 in active microglia/macrophage
(OX-42) in ischemic hemispheres at four weeks after stroke. Peri-I: peri-infarct
area. Scale bars = 100 μm.

5.

6.

7.

8.
Abbreviations
ADC: apparent diffusion coefficient; ANOVA: analysis of variance; ASL: arterial
spin labeling; BBB: blood–brain barrier; CBF: cerebral blood flow; DCEMRI: dynamic contrast-enhanced-MRI; DMSO: dimethyl sulfoxide; EPI: echoplanar imaging; FA: fractional anisotropy; FAIR-RARE: flow-sensitive alternating
inversion recovery rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement; Iba-1: ionized
calcium biding adapter molecule 1; ICQ: intensity correlation quotient; IL1β: interleukin-1β; IL-10: interleukin-10; ISA: image sequence analysis;
MCAO: middle cerebral artery occlusion; MMP: matrix metalloproteinase;
MRA: magnetic resonance angiography; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging;
NBO: normobaric hyperoxia; PDGFR-β: beta-type platelet-derived growth factor
receptor; PIH: postischemic hyperperfusion; PVDF: polyvinylidene fluoride;
RECA1: rat endothelial cell antigen-1; SHR: spontaneously hypertensive rat; TGFβ: transforming growth factor-β; TJP: tight junction protein; TNF-α: factors tumor
necrosis factors-α; TTC: triphenyl tetrazolium chloride; ZO-1: zona occluden-1.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.
14.
15.

Authors’ contributions
YRY performed MRI scans and analyzed the raw data, developed the analysis
software of BBB permeability analysis, and contributed to revision of the
manuscript. VMS and LY performed biochemical and histologic studies, and
contributed to the acquisition of data and manuscript revision. JFT
contributed to biochemical and histologic studies, the interpretation of the
data, and critical revision of the manuscript. EYE performed MCAO surgery.
YY conceived and designed the experiments, obtained funding, conducted
statistical analyses, interpreted the data, and was the primary writer of the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the American Heart Association (grant
number: 13GRNT17060032) and Brain & Behavioral Health Institute pilot
grants from the University of New Mexico to Dr Yi Yang. We thank Dr Kiran
Bhaskar for his scientific advice in alternative microglia activation.
Author details
1
Department of Neurology, University of New Mexico Health Sciences
Center, 1 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA. 2College
of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 1 University
of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

22.
23.
24.

Received: 7 July 2014 Accepted: 11 January 2015
25.
References
1. Yang Y, Candelario-Jalil E, Thompson JF, Cuadrado E, Estrada EY, Rosell A,
et al. Increased intranuclear matrix metalloproteinase activity in neurons
interferes with oxidative DNA repair in focal cerebral ischemia.
J Neurochem. 2010;112:134–49.

26.

Yang Y, Estrada EY, Thompson JF, Liu W, Rosenberg GA. Matrix
metalloproteinase-mediated disruption of tight junction proteins in cerebral
vessels is reversed by synthetic matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor in focal
ischemia in rat. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2007;27:697–709.
Yang Y, Thompson JF, Taheri S, Salayandia VM, McAvoy TA, Hill JW, et al.
Early inhibition of MMP activity in ischemic rat brain promotes expression of
tight junction proteins and angiogenesis during recovery. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2013;33:1104–14.
Fagan SC, Cronic LE, Hess DC. Minocycline development for acute ischemic
stroke. Transl Stroke Res. 2011;2:202–8.
Murata Y, Rosell A, Scannevin RH, Rhodes KJ, Wang X, Lo EH. Extension of
the thrombolytic time window with minocycline in experimental stroke.
Stroke. 2008;39:3372–7.
Fagan SC, Waller JL, Nichols FT, Edwards DJ, Pettigrew LC, Clark WM, et al.
Minocycline to improve neurologic outcome in stroke (MINOS): a dosefinding study. Stroke. 2010;41:2283–7.
Switzer JA, Hess DC, Ergul A, Waller JL, Machado LS, Portik-Dobos V, et al.
Matrix metalloproteinase-9 in an exploratory trial of intravenous minocycline
for acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2011;42:2633–5.
Machado LS, Kozak A, Ergul A, Hess DC, Borlongan CV, Fagan SC. Delayed
minocycline inhibits ischemia-activated matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9
after experimental stroke. BMC Neurosci. 2006;7:56.
Machado LS, Sazonova IY, Kozak A, Wiley DC, El-Remessy AB, Ergul A, et al.
Minocycline and tissue-type plasminogen activator for stroke: assessment of
interaction potential. Stroke. 2009;40:3028–33.
Lee CZ, Yao JS, Huang Y, Zhai W, Liu W, Guglielmo BJ, et al. Dose–response
effect of tetracyclines on cerebral matrix metalloproteinase-9 after vascular
endothelial growth factor hyperstimulation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2006;26:1157–64.
Jin X, Liu J, Liu KJ, Rosenberg GA, Yang Y, Liu W. Normobaric hyperoxia
combined with minocycline provides greater neuroprotection than either
alone in transient focal cerebral ischemia. Exp Neurol. 2013;240:9–16.
Yenari MA, Xu L, Tang XN, Qiao Y, Giffard RG. Microglia potentiate damage
to blood–brain barrier constituents: improvement by minocycline in vivo
and in vitro. Stroke. 2006;37:1087–93.
Colton CA. Heterogeneity of microglial activation in the innate immune
response in the brain. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2009;4:399–418.
Emsley HC, Tyrrell PJ. Inflammation and infection in clinical stroke. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 2002;22:1399–419.
Jacobs AH, Tavitian B. Noninvasive molecular imaging of
neuroinflammation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32:1393–415.
Oliveira GB, Fontes Ede Jr A, de Carvalho S, da Silva JB, Fernandes LM,
Oliveira MC, et al. Minocycline mitigates motor impairments and cortical
neuronal loss induced by focal ischemia in rats chronically exposed to
ethanol during adolescence. Brain Res. 2014;1561:23–34.
Lartey FM, Ahn GO, Ali R, Rosenblum S, Miao Z, Arksey N, et al. The
relationship between serial [(18) F]PBR06 PET imaging of microglial
activation and motor function following stroke in mice. Mol Imaging Biol.
2014;16:81–9.
Lampron A, Elali A, Rivest S. Innate immunity in the CNS: redefining the
relationship between the CNS and its environment. Neuron. 2013;78:214–32.
Gordon S, Martinez FO. Alternative activation of macrophages: mechanism
and functions. Immunity. 2010;32:593–604.
Taylor RA, Sansing LH. Microglial responses after ischemic stroke and
intracerebral hemorrhage. Clin Dev Immunol. 2013;2013:746068.
Giunti D, Parodi B, Cordano C, Uccelli A, Kerlero de Rosbo N. Can we switch
microglia’s phenotype to foster neuroprotection? Focus on multiple
sclerosis. Immunology. 2014;141:328–39.
Cramer SC. Repairing the human brain after stroke: I. Mechanisms of
spontaneous recovery. Ann Neurol. 2008;63:272–87.
Cramer SC. Repairing the human brain after stroke: II. Restorative therapies.
Ann Neurol. 2008;63:549–60.
Yang Y, Hill JW, Rosenberg GA. Multiple roles of metalloproteinases in
neurological disorders. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2011;99:241–63.
Xu L, Fagan SC, Waller JL, Edwards D, Borlongan CV, Zheng J, et al. Low
dose intravenous minocycline is neuroprotective after middle cerebral
artery occlusion-reperfusion in rats. BMC Neurol. 2004;4:7.
Hill JW, Poddar R, Thompson JF, Rosenberg GA, Yang Y. Intranuclear matrix
metalloproteinases promote DNA damage and apoptosis induced by
oxygen-glucose deprivation in neurons. Neuroscience.
2012;220:277–90.

Yang et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:26

27. Sood R, Yang Y, Taheri S, Candelario-Jalil E, Estrada EY, Walker EJ, et al.
Increased apparent diffusion coefficients on MRI linked with matrix
metalloproteinases and edema in white matter after bilateral carotid artery
occlusion in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2009;29:308–16.
28. Taheri S, Sood R. Partial volume effect compensation for improved reliability
of quantitative blood–brain barrier permeability. Magn Reson Imaging.
2007;25:613–25.
29. Patlak CS, Blasberg RG, Fenstermacher JD. Graphical evaluation of blood-tobrain transfer constants from multiple-time uptake data. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 1983;3:1–7.
30. Ewing JR, Knight RA, Nagaraja TN, Yee JS, Nagesh V, Whitton PA, et al.
Patlak plots of Gd-DTPA MRI data yield blood–brain transfer constants
concordant with those of 14C-sucrose in areas of blood–brain opening.
Magn Reson Med. 2003;50:283–92.
31. Ito D, Tanaka K, Suzuki S, Dembo T, Fukuuchi Y. Enhanced expression of
Iba1, ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1, after transient focal
cerebral ischemia in rat brain. Stroke. 2001;32:1208–15.
32. Patel AR, Ritzel R, McCullough LD, Liu F. Microglia and ischemic stroke: a
double-edged sword. Int J Physiol Pathophysiol Pharmacol. 2013;5:73–90.
33. Li Q, Lau A, Morris TJ, Guo L, Fordyce CB, Stanley EF. A syntaxin 1, Galpha(o),
and N-type calcium channel complex at a presynaptic nerve terminal:
analysis by quantitative immunocolocalization. J Neurosci. 2004;24:4070–81.
34. Charlton RA, Barrick TR, McIntyre DJ, Shen Y, O’Sullivan M, Howe FA, et al.
White matter damage on diffusion tensor imaging correlates with agerelated cognitive decline. Neurology. 2006;66:217–22.
35. Tanaka Y, Nagaoka T, Nair G, Ohno K, Duong TQ. Arterial spin labeling and
dynamic susceptibility contrast CBF MRI in postischemic hyperperfusion,
hypercapnia, and after mannitol injection. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2011;31:1403–11.
36. Iadecola C, Anrather J. The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to
translation. Nat Med. 2011;17:796–808.
37. Schilling M, Besselmann M, Muller M, Strecker JK, Ringelstein EB, Kiefer R.
Predominant phagocytic activity of resident microglia over hematogenous
macrophages following transient focal cerebral ischemia: an investigation
using green fluorescent protein transgenic bone marrow chimeric mice.
Exp Neurol. 2005;196:290–7.
38. Snook ER, Fisher-Perkins JM, Sansing HA, Lee KM, Alvarez X, MacLean AG,
et al. Innate immune activation in the pathogenesis of a murine model of
globoid cell leukodystrophy. Am J Pathol. 2014;184:382–96.
39. McColl BW, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM. Systemic inflammation alters the kinetics
of cerebrovascular tight junction disruption after experimental stroke in
mice. J Neurosci. 2008;28:9451–62.
40. Rosell A, Cuadrado E, Ortega-Aznar A, Hernandez-Guillamon M, Lo EH,
Montaner J. MMP-9-positive neutrophil infiltration is associated to blood–
brain barrier breakdown and basal lamina type IV collagen degradation
during hemorrhagic transformation after human ischemic stroke. Stroke.
2008;39:1121–6.
41. Schaller B, Graf R. Cerebral ischemia and reperfusion: the pathophysiologic
concept as a basis for clinical therapy. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2004;24:351–71.
42. Pan J, Konstas AA, Bateman B, Ortolano GA, Pile-Spellman J. Reperfusion
injury following cerebral ischemia: pathophysiology, MR imaging, and
potential therapies. Neuroradiology. 2007;49:93–102.
43. Jin R, Yang G, Li G. Inflammatory mechanisms in ischemic stroke: role of
inflammatory cells. J Leukoc Biol. 2010;87:779–89.
44. Liu Z, Fan Y, Won SJ, Neumann M, Hu D, Zhou L, et al. Chronic treatment
with minocycline preserves adult new neurons and reduces functional
impairment after focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 2007;38:146–52.
45. Weng YC, Kriz J. Differential neuroprotective effects of a minocycline-based
drug cocktail in transient and permanent focal cerebral ischemia. Exp Neurol.
2007;204:433–42.
46. Kobayashi K, Imagama S, Ohgomori T, Hirano K, Uchimura K, Sakamoto K,
et al. Minocycline selectively inhibits M1 polarization of microglia. Cell
Death Dis. 2013;4:e525.
47. Hewlett KA, Corbett D. Delayed minocycline treatment reduces long-term
functional deficits and histological injury in a rodent model of focal
ischemia. Neuroscience. 2006;141:27–33.
48. Ozen I, Deierborg T, Miharada K, Padel T, Englund E, Genove G, et al. Brain
pericytes acquire a microglial phenotype after stroke. Acta Neuropathol.
2014;128:381–96.

Page 15 of 15

49. Ronaldson PT, Demarco KM, Sanchez-Covarrubias L, Solinsky CM, Davis TP.
Transforming growth factor-beta signaling alters substrate permeability and
tight junction protein expression at the blood–brain barrier during
inflammatory pain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2009;29:1084–98.
50. Dohgu S, Yamauchi A, Takata F, Naito M, Tsuruo T, Higuchi S, et al.
Transforming growth factor-beta1 upregulates the tight junction and
P-glycoprotein of brain microvascular endothelial cells. Cell Mol Neurobiol.
2004;24:491–7.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

