ORIGINAL RESEARCH

BRAIN

Effects of Agmatine on Blood-Brain Barrier Stabilization
Assessed by Permeability MRI in a Rat Model of Transient
Cerebral Ischemia
S.S. Ahn, S.H. Kim, J.E. Lee, K.J. Ahn, D.J. Kim, H.S. Choi, J. Kim, N.-Y. Shin, and S.-K. Lee
EBM

2

ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: BBB disruption after acute ischemic stroke and subsequent permeability increase may be enhanced by
reperfusion. Agmatine has been reported to attenuate BBB disruption. Our aim was to evaluate the effects of agmatine on BBB stabilization
in a rat model of transient cerebral ischemia by using permeability dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging at early stages and subsequently to demonstrate the feasibility of dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging for the investigation of new therapies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-four male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to transient MCA occlusion for 90 minutes. Immediately after reperfusion, agmatine (100 mg/kg) or normal saline was injected intraperitoneally into the agmatine-treated group (n ⫽ 17) or
the control group, respectively. MR imaging was performed after reperfusion. For quantitative analysis, regions of interest were deﬁned
within the infarct area, and values for volume transfer constant, rate transfer coefﬁcient, volume fraction of extravascular extracellular
space, and volume fraction of blood plasma were obtained. Infarct volume, infarct growth, quantitative imaging parameters, and numbers
of factor VIII–positive cells after immunohistochemical staining were compared between control and agmatine-treated groups.
RESULTS: Among the permeability parameters, volume transfer constant and volume fraction of extravascular extracellular space were
signiﬁcantly lower in the agmatine-treated group compared with the control group (0.05 ⫾ 0.02 minutes⫺1 versus 0.08 ⫾ 0.03 minute⫺1,
P ⫽ .012, for volume transfer constant and 0.12 ⫾ 0.06 versus 0.22 ⫾ 0.15, P ⫽ .02 for volume fraction of extravascular extracellular space).
Other permeability parameters were not signiﬁcantly different between the groups. The number of factor VIII–positive cells was less in the
agmatine-treated group than in the control group (3-fold versus 4-fold, P ⫽ .037).
CONCLUSIONS: In ischemic stroke, agmatine protects the BBB, which can be monitored in vivo by quantiﬁcation of permeability by using
dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging. Therefore, dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging may serve as a potential imaging biomarker
for assessing the BBB stabilization properties of pharmacologic agents.
ABBREVIATIONS: DCE ⫽ dynamic contrast-enhanced; Ktrans ⫽ volume transfer constant

B

BB disruption occurs within 1–2 hours after acute ischemic
stroke by inflammatory cytokines and proteases.1 Although
thrombolysis has been increasingly used for the treatment of acute
ischemic stroke, reperfusion after thrombolytic therapy has been
reported to enhance BBB breakdown and, consequently, symptomatic hemorrhagic transformation, which is a fatal complica-

Received April 28, 2014; accepted after revision July 31.
From the Department of Radiology and the Research Institute of Radiological Science (S.S.A., D.J.K., J.K., N.-Y.S., S.-K.L.), Department of Pathology (S.H.K.), Brain Research Institute, and Department of Anatomy (J.E.L.), Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea; and Department of Radiology (K.J.A., H.S.C.),
The Catholic University College of Medicine, Seoul, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Please address correspondence to Seung-Koo Lee, MD, PhD, Department of
Radiology and the Research Institute of Radiological Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Republic of
Korea; e-mail: slee@yuhs.ac, lee.seungkoo@gmail.com
EBM

2 Evidence-Based Medicine Level 2.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A4113

tion of ischemic stroke.2,3 Therefore, evaluation of the therapeutic
effect of a BBB blocking agent is important to improve treatment
outcomes in patients with stroke. One can estimate the permeability properties of the BBB by using various techniques; however,
many of these methods are invasive or suitable only for animal
models.4 Many studies have used MR imaging to measure BBB
permeability to develop a feasible clinical technique for evaluating
the integrity of the BBB and predicting hemorrhagic transformation in acute ischemic stroke.5-7 Dynamic contrast-enhanced
(DCE)-MR imaging by using contrast agents, an emerging MR
imaging technique based on kinetic modeling of microvascular
permeability, enables quantification of BBB breakdown.8 A recent
animal study reported that increased permeability measured by
MR imaging correlates well with BBB disruption and hemorrhagic transformation on histology.9
A number of investigators have explored the use of neuroprotective drugs in animal experimental models to salvage regions of
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 36:283– 88

Feb 2015

www.ajnr.org

283

treated group and 2 rats in the control
group). Seven rats died after MR imaging
acquisition and before we obtained
pathologic specimens (2 rats in the agmatine-treated group and 5 rats in the control group), and they were included only
for image analysis.

Image Acquisition

FIG 1. Flowchart overview of the experimental protocols.

ischemia and to minimize reperfusion injury.10-12 Agmatine is a
primary amine formed by decarboxylation of L-arginine and has
been shown to protect neurons by blocking the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor or nitric oxide synthase.13 Because a previous
animal study reported that agmatine showed a protective effect in
rodent models of neurotoxic and ischemic brain injuries,14 many
additional studies have also shown beneficial effects of agmatine
and its mechanisms.15-17 Another recent study also suggested that
agmatine attenuated BBB disruption and consequently reduced
brain swelling when administered at the time of reperfusion.11
Therefore, the aim of this study was to quantitatively evaluate
the BBB stabilization effect of agmatine in rat models of transient
cerebral ischemia by using DCE-MR imaging at early stages and
subsequently to demonstrate the feasibility of DCE-MR imaging
for the investigation of new therapies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animal Preparation
All animal procedures were performed according to a protocol
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in
accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines. Thirtyfour male Sprague-Dawley rats (Orient Bio, Seongnam, Korea)
weighing 250 –300 g were subjected to transient middle cerebral
artery occlusion. Animals were anesthetized with Xylazine, 10
mg/kg, and Zoletil, a combination of tiletamine and zolazepam,
30 mg/kg, intraperitoneally. Rectal temperature was maintained
at 37°C by a heating pad during the operation. The depth of anesthesia was assessed by toe pinch every 15 minutes. Middle cerebral artery occlusion was induced by using the filament model as
previously described.18 Briefly, under an operating microscope,
an uncoated 23-mm segment of 4 – 0 polypropylene monofilament suture with the tip rounded by flame was inserted into the
arteriotomy and advanced into the internal carotid artery approximately 19 –20 mm from the bifurcation to occlude the ostium of the
middle cerebral artery. After 90 minutes, the suture was withdrawn
and surgical incisions were closed. The animal was allowed to awaken
and recover with free access to food and water. We injected 100
mg/kg of agmatine mixed in normal saline solution intraperitoneally
immediately after reperfusion in the agmatine-treated group (n ⫽
17). In the experimental control group, the animals received an
equivalent volume of normal saline (n ⫽ 17). The experimental design is shown in Fig 1. Four rats were excluded because they died
before MR imaging acquisition (2 rats in the agmatine284

Ahn

Feb 2015

www.ajnr.org

After anesthesia with Rumpun, 10 mg/kg,
and Zoletil, 30 mg/kg, intraperitoneally,
MR imaging was performed by using a 3T
system (Achieva; Philips, Best, Netherlands) and an 8-channel coil. Animals
were divided into 2 sets to correlate MR
imaging with histopathology at 2 different stages. MR imaging
was performed 4 and 30 hours after reperfusion in 18 rats (set 1:
n ⫽ 9 agmatine-treated, n ⫽ 9 controls) and only 4 hours after
reperfusion in 12 rats (set 2: n ⫽ 6 agmatine-treated, n ⫽ 6 controls) before obtaining the specimens. All images were obtained in
the coronal plane with a 60-mm FOV. Pre- and postcontrast T1weighted (TR/TE, 625/18 ms), T2-weighted (TR/TE, 2006/80
ms), and T2*-weighted (TR/TE, 549/16 ms) images were acquired
with 2-mm section thickness, 0.2-mm section gap, and 192 ⫻ 192
matrix. Diffusion-tensor imaging was performed by applying 6
different directions of orthogonal diffusion gradients and b-values of 600 and 0 s/mm2 (TR/TE, 3327/52 ms; 2-mm section thickness; 0.2-mm section gap; 128 ⫻ 128 matrix). To achieve quantitative hemodynamic measurements of cerebral permeability and
perfusion, we injected 2 boluses via tail veins. The first bolus of
contrast was administered to measure permeability and served as
a preload bolus for the perfusion scans. For DCE-MR imaging,
precontrast 3D T1-weighted images were obtained with the following parameters: TR/TE, 13.2/6.5 ms; 112 ⫻ 112 mm matrix;
2-mm section thickness; 0.2-mm section gap; and flip angle, 5°.
After the precontrast scan, 60 dynamic contrast-enhanced T1weighted images were obtained with the same MR imaging parameters except for an increased flip angle of 15°. After acquisition
of the fifth image volume, gadolinium-based contrast, gadobutrol
(Gadavist, 0.2 mmol/kg; Bayer Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany) was injected. The total scan time for DCE-MR imaging was
4 minutes 30 seconds with a temporal resolution of 4.5 seconds.
Perfusion-weighted imaging (the rapid principles of echo shifting
with a train of observations; TR/TE, 26.6/38.2 ms; 64 ⫻ 64 matrix)
with 60 dynamic scans was performed following injection of the
second bolus of Gadavist (0.2 mmol/kg) 4 hours after reperfusion.
Relative cerebral blood volume maps were acquired by using
commercially available postprocessing software (ViewForum;
Philips), and reperfusion status was examined. All animals
showed ⬎90% relative cerebral blood volume of the contralateral
hemisphere.

Image Analysis
Quantitative imaging analysis was performed by an investigator (a neuroradiologist with 4 years of experience) blinded to
the treatments. First, DICOM data of diffusion-tensor imaging
were transferred to a commercial software package (nordicICE;

Immunohistochemical Analysis

FIG 2. Semiautomatic measurement of infarct volume on diffusionweighted imaging. The infarcted area with diffusion restriction is
semiautomatically segmented (right) by using a commercial software
package.

NordicNeuroLab, Bergen, Norway). On diffusion-weighted images, infarct volumes were calculated by using a semiautomated
thresholding method to identify regions of interest with high signal intensity (Fig 2), and infarct volume fraction was expressed as
a percentage of the ipsilateral hemisphere volume. Then, volumes
of infarct growth were calculated in set 1.
All images were reviewed, and sections with the largest infarct
area, near the sections of Bregma 1.60 mm, were selected for
quantitative analysis of DCE-MR imaging.
All image data from DCE-MR imaging were transferred to an
independent workstation for analysis. Permeability parameters
for each pixel from DCE-MR imaging—volume transfer constant
(Ktrans), rate transfer coefficient, volume fraction of extravascular
extracellular space, and volume fraction of blood plasma—were
calculated, and color-coded parametric maps were generated by
off-line Pride tools provided by Philips, which are based on the
pharmacokinetic 2-compartment model of Tofts and Kermode.8
Postprocessing was composed of motion correction of pixels
from dynamic images, T1 mapping by using different flip angles
(5° and 15°), registration of pixels on the T1 map, arterial input
function estimation, and pharmacokinetic modeling. All these
processes were automatically performed by Pride tools except
drawing ROIs for the arterial input function. Arterial input function was measured several times at the area of the left internal
carotid artery, and the proper arterial input function showing
high amplitude, early sharp rise, and fast decay was selected for
processing. Each permeability parameter was obtained in the infarct area. Permeability maps were also used for estimating brain
tissue volume with BBB disruption, which was measured by obtaining pixel values and counting the numbers of pixels with Ktrans
of ⬎0. Volume with BBB disruption was also expressed as a percentage of the ipsilateral hemisphere.

Pathologic Specimens
After performing MR imaging, the rats were anesthetized with
Zoletil, 150 mg/kg, intravenously and perfused transcardially with
4% paraformaldehyde until the outflow fluid from the right
atrium was colorless. The brain was rapidly removed and embedded in paraffin for histologic processing. Coronal sections (6-␮m
thick) were taken at 2-mm intervals through the brain region
corresponding to the MR imaging sections and stained with hematoxylin-eosin for histopathologic evaluation. Gross hemorrhage was defined as blood evident to the unaided eye on the
hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections and confirmed by microscopy. Microscopic hemorrhage was defined as blood evident only
by microscopy (original magnification ⫻40).

Seven rats were used in each group for immunohistochemical
analysis. Paraffin-embedded sections were rehydrated. After permeabilization with proteinase K, sections were immunostained
with primary antibodies against factor VIII (1:200 dilution) followed by biotinylated secondary antibodies. Sections were visualized by using horseradish peroxidase and then reacted with diaminobenzidine (DAB) as a substrate.
Images were observed and captured on an AX80 microscope
equipped with a DP-72 digital camera (Olympus, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan). The stained cells were assessed in 2 consecutive coronal sections with the largest infarct areas from each rat. All data
for immunohistochemistry were collected from 10 high-power
fields (original magnification, ⫻200) within the infarct area per
slide. These included 5 regions from the striatum, 3 regions from
the parietal cortex, and 2 regions from the border area of infarct
showing the highest expression. Another 10 regions were selected
in the corresponding area in the contralateral hemisphere.
The captured images from immunohistochemistry were analyzed by an investigator blinded to the treatments with the aid of
ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland). The numbers of factor VIII–positive cells were counted in
10 images from the infarct area and contralateral hemisphere and
expressed as a ratio.

Statistical Analysis
Infarct volume and volume with BBB disruption showed interaction with groups and time; therefore, linear mixed modeling followed by Bonferroni correction was used for between-group
comparisons and within-group comparisons at different time
points. Otherwise, independent t tests were performed to compare infarct growth, quantitative imaging parameters, and numbers of factor VIII–positive cells between control and agmatinetreated groups on the basis of normality testing by the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. All statistical analyses were performed
by using statistical software (SAS, Version 9.2 m; SAS Institute,
Cary, North Carolina). P values ⬍ .05 were considered significant.

RESULTS
Image Analysis
To investigate the effect of agmatine on ischemic damage, we
assessed infarct volume by MR imaging and found that agmatine
significantly reduced infarct volume. Absolute infarct volumes
were 160.7 ⫾ 69.4 mm3 in the agmatine-treated group and 250 ⫾
60.4 mm3 in the control group at 4-hour reperfusion (P ⬍ .001).
Infarct-volume fractions to the ipsilateral brain volume were
36.1 ⫾ 10.8% in the agmatine-treated group and 54.2 ⫾ 7.1% in
the control group at 4-hour reperfusion (P ⬍ .001). At 30-hour
reperfusion in set 1, infarct volumes were 45.8 ⫾ 13% in the
agmatine-treated group and 73.9 ⫾ 10.8% in the control group
(P ⬍ .001). In addition, infarct growth was less in the agmatinetreated group than in the control group (60 ⫾ 44.4 mm3 versus
130 ⫾ 55.2 mm3, P ⫽ .009).
DCE-MR imaging showed an increase in permeability parameters in the ipsilateral hemisphere of the middle cerebral artery
occlusion. There were no cases with positive values of permeability parameters in the contralateral hemisphere on DCE-MR imAJNR Am J Neuroradiol 36:283– 88

Feb 2015

www.ajnr.org

285

FIG 3. Permeability changes at 2 different time points. A, Ktrans values. B, Brain tissue volume with BBB disruption expressed as a percentage of
the ipsilateral hemisphere. Square and diamond-shaped dots are mean values; horizontal lines above and below the dots represent 95%
conﬁdence intervals. The asterisk indicates P ⬍ .05; 2 asterisks, P ⬍ .01).

FIG 4. Representative MR images. Infarcted areas can be seen as hyperintensity on T2-weighted
images (A and D). The color-coded permeability maps obtained 4 hours after reperfusion demonstrate increased permeability in the infarcted areas (B and E). The mean Ktrans values were
0.05 ⫾ 0.02 minutes⫺1 in the agmatine-treated groups and 0.08 ⫾ 0.03 minutes⫺1 in the control
group (P ⫽ .012). C and F, Ktrans curves ﬁt the data points (small plus sign) in the corresponding
maps.
Permeability imaging parameters measured 4 hours after reperfusiona
Control Group
Agmatine-Treated Group
(n = 15)
(n = 15)
0.08 ⫾ 0.03
0.05 ⫾ 0.02
Ktrans (min⫺1)
0.46 ⫾ 0.3
0.44 ⫾ 0.28
Kep (min⫺1)
Ve
0.22 ⫾ 0.15
0.12 ⫾ 0.06
Vp
0.042 ⫾ 0.03
0.038 ⫾ 0.02
Volume of BBB disruption (%)
32.5 ⫾ 16.5
10.4 ⫾ 8.7

erfusion, P ⫽ .06). Other permeability parameters were not significantly different
between the groups at each time point
(Table). The volume with BBB disruption
estimated from the permeability map was
significantly less in the agmatine-treated
group than in the control group. The volumes were 10.4 ⫾ 8.7% in the agmatinetreated group and 32.5 ⫾ 16.5% in the
control group at 4-hour reperfusion (P ⬍
.001) (Fig 3). At 30-hour reperfusion in
set 1, the volumes with BBB disruption
were 5.8 ⫾ 5.1% in the agmatine-treated
group and 15.2 ⫾ 8.6% in the control
group (P ⫽ .367). Overall, the volume
with BBB disruption at 30-hour reperfusion was significantly less than that at
4-hour reperfusion (22.4 ⫾ 15.4% at
4-hour reperfusion versus 10.5 ⫾ 8.4%
at 30-hour reperfusion, P ⬍ .001).

Histopathologic Analysis

On histopathologic examination, gross
hemorrhage was observed within the
ischemic region of 2 rats in the agmatinetreated group and 2 rats in the control
group. In addition, microscopic hemorrhage was observed in 1 agmatine-treated
rat and 2 control rats.
Note:—Kep indicates rate transfer coefﬁcient; Ve, volume fraction of extravascular extracellular space; Vp, volume
fraction of blood plasma.
The ratio of the number of factor
a
Data are means.
VIII–positive cells in the ipsilateral to that
in contralateral hemispheres was lower in
aging. Among the permeability parameters, Ktrans and volume
the agmatine-treated group than in the control group (3.1-fold
fraction of extravascular extracellular space were significantly
versus 4-fold, P ⫽ .037) (Fig 5). The ratio of the number of factor
lower in the agmatine-treated group compared with the control
VIII–positive cells in the ipsilateral to that in contralateral hemigroup (0.05 ⫾ 0.02 minutes⫺1 versus 0.08 ⫾ 0.03 minutes⫺1, P ⫽
spheres in set 2, from which histopathology was obtained after the
.012, for Ktrans and 0.12 ⫾ 0.06 versus 0.22 ⫾ 0.15, P ⫽ .02, for
first MR imaging acquisition, was lower than that in set 1 (2.8-fold
volume fraction of extravascular extracellular space) 4 hours after
versus 3.9-fold, P ⫽ .021).
reperfusion (Figs 3 and 4). However, Ktrans and volume fraction of
extravascular extracellular space measured 30 hours after reperDISCUSSION
fusion in set 1 were not significantly different between the 2
In this study, we found that agmatine protects the BBB in ischgroups. Overall, there was a tendency of Ktrans to decrease with
emic stroke and the BBB stabilization effect of agmatine can be
time without statistical significance (0.06 ⫾ 0.03 minutes⫺1 at
monitored in vivo by quantification of permeability by using
4-hour reperfusion versus 0.05 ⫾ 0.03 minutes⫺1 at 30-hour repDCE-MR imaging. Ktrans, volume fraction of extravascular extra286

Ahn

Feb 2015

www.ajnr.org

P Value
.012
.856
.02
.187
⬍.001

FIG 5. Immunohistochemical staining with primary antibodies against
factor VIII. The ratio of the number of factor VIII–positive cells
(brown) in the ipsilateral to that in contralateral hemisphere was
lower in the agmatine-treated group (upper row) than in the control
group (lower row) (3.1-fold versus 4-fold, P ⫽ .037) (original magniﬁcation ⫻200).

cellular space, and brain tissue volume with BBB disruption were
significantly less in the agmatine-treated group than in the control
group at 4-hour reperfusion. Our results support a previous study
that showed the protective effects of agmatine on the BBB by using
Evans blue.11 Moreover, in another previous study, decreased expression of matrix metalloproteinase by agmatine was suggested
as a possible mechanism limiting BBB disruption because matrix
metalloproteinases are known to be associated with BBB disruption and subsequent vasogenic edema after cerebral ischemia.19
Although Evans blue has been widely used to assess BBB disruption with its property of binding to serum albumin, it is only
available for use in animal models.20 DCE-MR imaging provides
both permeability values and spatial maps of permeability
changes without killing the animals, which enabled us to investigate the BBB blocking properties of pharmaceutical agents as a
longitudinal study by acquiring multiple images at different time
points. In addition, MR imaging is a more sensitive measure of
BBB disruption because of the lower molecular weight of gadolinium compared with that of Evans blue as described in a previous experimental study (604.7 Da versus 75.8 kDa).21 Therefore,
in the present study, DCE-MR imaging was used for monitoring
the time course of focal cerebral ischemia and the BBB stabilization effects of agmatine.
Our results showed a significant increase of Ktrans and braintissue volume with BBB disruption at 4-hour reperfusion, which
may be attributed to increased inflammatory and oxidative stress
on the BBB after reperfusion.20,22 There was a tendency of Ktrans
to decrease with time, and brain tissue volume with BBB disruption at 30-hour reperfusion was less than that at 4-hour reperfusion. Previous experimental studies have also shown a biphasic
opening of the BBB after transient ischemic injury, which has
been generally accepted.20,23,24 Even though the mechanisms of
this partial recovery of the BBB at 30-hour reperfusion are not
well-understood, the results suggest that the reverse of reactive
oxygen species-mediated disassembly of tight junction proteins
within 6 hours may contribute to a decrease in the extravasation

of gadolinium contrast agent.23 On the other hand, recent animal
studies have demonstrated continuous opening of the BBB.21,25
However, they also observed a nonsignificant drop in gadolinium
enhancement and Evans blue extravasation at 24- and 36-hour
reperfusion, which can be explained by microvascular plugging
caused by infiltrating neutrophils, fibrin, and platelets. Therefore,
longitudinal studies with a large number of subjects need to be
conducted to investigate temporal changes of the BBB and its
mechanisms.
We performed immunohistochemical staining with factor
VIII to assess angiogenesis following cerebral ischemia and found
that the expression of factor VIII–positive cells was less in the
agmatine-treated group than in the control group. These results
may be because BBB disruption in the agmatine-treated group
was significantly less than that of the control group according to
DCE-MR imaging. Because the formation of new microvessels is a
hallmark tissue response to ischemic injury, reduced expression
of factor VIII–positive cells in the agmatine-treated group may be
attributed to the protective effect of agmatine on the BBB. Overall,
the expression of factor VIII–positive cells was lower at 4-hour
reperfusion than at 30-hour reperfusion. Although expression of
angiogenesis-related factors begins within 1–2 hours after focal
ischemia, it increases for up to 14 days1; therefore, new vessels can
be visualized better at later stages.
An increase in permeability measured by DCE-MR imaging
may not directly reflect hemorrhagic transformation because the
size of the gadolinium molecule is much smaller than that of
red blood cells. Although BBB disruption was demonstrated in
all cases of transient ischemic stroke, gross hemorrhage was
observed in 2 rats of the agmatine-treated group and 2 rats of
the control group. Therefore, on the basis of the results from
this study, it is difficult to say whether agmatine would have a
potential benefit preventing gross hemorrhage, which is clinically significant.
Agmatine was administered immediately after reperfusion because this timing is optimal for using agents with BBB blocking
properties in a clinical setting. In addition, a previous animal experimental study reported that agmatine showed neuroprotective
effects up to 4 hours after reperfusion.16 Further studies are
needed to investigate functional recovery and ultimate stroke outcome when agmatine is administered early, late, or throughout
the phase of ischemic injury because timely pharmacotherapy is
important for dynamic temporal changes in BBB permeability.
If the treatment window for effective reperfusion therapy can
be expanded with agmatine, considerably more patients with
stroke would be eligible for therapy. The results of the present
study suggest that DCE-MR imaging has the potential to provide
imaging biomarkers that are valuable for adjunctive therapy to
reduce complications associated with thrombolytic therapy in
ischemic stroke.
There are several limitations in our study. First, spatial maps of
permeability could not be correlated with images of immunohistochemical staining because it is not technically possible to match
regions on both MR imaging and histopathology. Second, the
long-term effects of agmatine could not be assessed because the
rats were sacrificed to obtain pathologic specimens right after we
performed MR imaging. Further studies are warranted to deterAJNR Am J Neuroradiol 36:283– 88

Feb 2015

www.ajnr.org

287

FIG 6. Immunohistochemical staining with high power (original magniﬁcation ⫻400). Factor VIII is stained in the endothelium along the
blood vessels.

mine the neuroprotective effects of agmatine, such as functional recovery, with serial follow-up. Third, a 3T MR imaging scanner, which
is not dedicated for animal imaging, was used in this study. However,
it is commonly used in clinical practice, and acceptable images can be
obtained to evaluate permeability in rat stroke models. Thus, a 3T
MR imaging scanner with the methods identical to those used in this
study may possibly be applied in humans. Last, because we had tried
to stain the brain tissue by immunoperoxidase, we did not perform
reference staining such as 4⬘,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining,
which is necessary to prove that the factor VIII was stained in the cell.
Instead, we confirmed that factor VIII was stained in the endothelium along the blood vessels with higher power magnification (original magnification ⫻400) (Fig 6).

CONCLUSIONS
Agmatine protects the BBB in ischemic stroke, which can be monitored in vivo by quantification of permeability by using DCE-MR
imaging. Therefore, DCE-MR imaging may serve as a potential
imaging biomarker for assessing the BBB stabilization properties
of pharmacologic agents, including agmatine, at early stages to
reduce complications associated with thrombolytic therapy in
ischemic stroke.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Special thanks to Ah-Reum Yang and Jae Young Kim (Department of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea), who helped us through the experimental processes from
making the animal experimental models to obtaining pathologic
specimens. The authors are grateful to Sei Young Kim (MR imaging technician, Severance Hospital, Seoul, Korea) for his help with
the examinations and for his valuable suggestions.
Disclosures: Dong Joon Kim—UNRELATED: Grants/Grants Pending: Yonsei University College of Medicine faculty grant, Korea Healthcare Technology R&D Project;
Patents (planned, pending or issued): stent delivery system.

REFERENCES
1. del Zoppo GJ, Mabuchi T. Cerebral microvessel responses to focal
ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003;23:879 –94
2. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke: the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke
Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1581– 87
3. Berger C, Fiorelli M, Steiner T, et al. Hemorrhagic transformation of
ischemic brain tissue: asymptomatic or symptomatic? Stroke 2001;
32:1330 –35
288

Ahn

Feb 2015

www.ajnr.org

4. Sood R, Taheri S, Estrada EY, et al. Quantitative evaluation of the
effect of propylene glycol on BBB permeability. J Magn Reson Imaging 2007;25:39 – 47
5. Kassner A, Roberts T, Taylor K, et al. Prediction of hemorrhage in
acute ischemic stroke using permeability MR imaging. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2005;26:2213–17
6. Bang OY, Buck BH, Saver JL, et al. Prediction of hemorrhagic transformation after recanalization therapy using T2*-permeability
magnetic resonance imaging. Ann Neurol 2007;62:170 –76
7. Wu S, Thornhill RE, Chen S, et al. Relative recirculation: a fast,
model-free surrogate for the measurement of blood-brain barrier
permeability and the prediction of hemorrhagic transformation in
acute ischemic stroke. Invest Radiol 2009;44:662– 68
8. Tofts PS, Kermode AG. Measurement of the blood-brain barrier
permeability and leakage space using dynamic MR imaging. 1. Fundamental concepts. Magn Reson Med 1991;17:357– 67
9. Hoffmann A, Bredno J, Wendland MF, et al. Validation of in vivo
magnetic resonance imaging blood-brain barrier permeability
measurements by comparison with gold standard histology. Stroke
2011;42:2054 – 60
10. Nonaka Y, Tsuruma K, Shimazawa M, et al. Cilostazol protects against
hemorrhagic transformation in mice transient focal cerebral ischemia-induced brain damage. Neurosci Lett 2009;452:156 – 61
11. Kim JH, Lee YW, Park KA, et al. Agmatine attenuates brain edema
through reducing the expression of aquaporin-1 after cerebral ischemia. J Cerebr Blood Flow Metab 2010;30:943– 49
12. Wang CC, Chio CC, Chang CH, et al. Beneficial effect of agmatine
on brain apoptosis, astrogliosis, and edema after rat transient cerebral ischemia. BMC Pharmacol 2010;10:11
13. Gilad GM, Gilad VH. Accelerated functional recovery and neuroprotection by agmatine after spinal cord ischemia in rats. Neurosci
Lett 2000;296:97–100
14. Gilad GM, Salame K, Rabey JM, et al. Agmatine treatment is neuroprotective in rodent brain injury models. Life Sci 1996;58:PL 41– 46
15. Feng Y, Piletz JE, Leblanc MH. Agmatine suppresses nitric oxide
production and attenuates hypoxic-ischemic brain injury in neonatal rats. Pediatric Res 2002;52:606 –11
16. Kim JH, Yenari MA, Giffard RG, et al. Agmatine reduces infarct area in
a mouse model of transient focal cerebral ischemia and protects cultured neurons from ischemia-like injury. Exp Neurol 2004;189:122–30
17. Kim DJ, Kim DI, Lee SK, et al. Protective effect of agmatine on a
reperfusion model after transient cerebral ischemia: temporal evolution on perfusion MR imaging and histopathologic findings.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2006;27:780 – 85
18. Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, et al. Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 1989;20:84 –91
19. Kim JH, Lee YW, Kim JY, et al. The effect of agmatine on expression
of MMP2 and MMP9 in cerebral ischemia. Korean J Anatomy
2008;41:97–104
20. Belayev L, Busto R, Zhao W, et al. Quantitative evaluation of bloodbrain barrier permeability following middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Brain Res 1996;739:88 –96
21. Strbian D, Durukan A, Pitkonen M, et al. The blood-brain barrier is
continuously open for several weeks following transient focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience 2008;153:175– 81
22. Heo JH, Han SW, Lee SK. Free radicals as triggers of brain edema
formation after stroke. Free Radic Biol Med 2005;39:51–70
23. Pillai DR, Dittmar MS, Baldaranov D, et al. Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats: a 3 T MRI study on biphasic blood-brain
barrier opening and the dynamics of edema formation. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2009;29:1846 –55
24. Kuroiwa T, Ting P, Martinez H, et al. The biphasic opening of the
blood-brain barrier to proteins following temporary middle cerebral artery occlusion. Acta Neuropathol 1985;68:122–29
25. Durukan A, Marinkovic I, Strbian D, et al. Post-ischemic bloodbrain barrier leakage in rats: one-week follow-up by MRI. Brain Res
2009;1280:158 – 65

