525856

research-article2014

NNRXXX10.1177/1545968314525856Neurorehabilitation and Neural RepairShichinohe et al

Basic Research Article

Bone Marrow Stromal Cells Rescue Ischemic
Brain by Trophic Effects and Phenotypic
Change Toward Neural Cells

Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair
2015, Vol. 29(1) 80­–89
© The Author(s) 2014
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1545968314525856
nnr.sagepub.com

Hideo Shichinohe, MD, PhD1, Takeshi Ishihara2,
Koji Takahashi2, Yoshikazu Tanaka, PhD2, Michiyuki Miyamoto, MD, PhD1,
Tomohiro Yamauchi, MD1, Hisayasu Saito, MD1, Hiroshi Takemoto, PhD2,
Kiyohiro Houkin, MD, PhD1, and Satoshi Kuroda, MD, PhD3

Abstract
Background. Transplantation of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) may contribute to functional recovery after stroke.
This study was designed to clarify their mechanisms, trophic effects of neurotrophic factors, and neural differentiation.
Methods. Mouse neurons exposed to glutamate were cocultured with mouse BMSCs. Either neutralizing antibodies against
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) or nerve growth factor (NGF) or Trk inhibitor K252a was added to explore
the mechanism of their protective effects. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was used to assess BDNF or NGF
mRNA expression in BMSCs. The mice were subjected to permanent focal ischemia, and 7 days later, either BMSCs or
the vehicle was stereotactically transplanted into the ipsilateral striatum. The mouse brains were processed for FISH and
immunostaining 2 or 4 weeks after transplantation. Results. BMSCs significantly ameliorated glutamate-induced neuronal
death. Treatment with anti-BDNF antibody significantly reduced their protective effects. FISH analysis showed that the
majority of BMSCs expressed BDNF and NGF mRNA in vitro. BMSC transplantation significantly improved the survival of
neurons in peri-infarct areas. FISH analysis revealed that approximately half of BMSCs expressed BDNF and NGF mRNA
2 weeks after transplantation; however, the percentage of BDNF and NGF mRNA-positive cells decreased thereafter.
Instead, the percentage of microtubule-associated protein 2–positive BMSCs gradually increased during 4 weeks after
transplantation. Conclusions. These findings strongly suggest that BDNF may be a key factor underlying the trophic effects
of BMSCs. BMSCs might exhibit the trophic effect in the early stage of cell therapy and the phenotypic change toward
neural cells thereafter.
Keywords
bone marrow stromal cells, regenerative medicine, coculture, permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion, neurotrophic
factor

Introduction
Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) are known to hold
great potential as a cell source for rescue from ischemic
stroke.1-5 When BMSCs were transplanted into animal models of ischemic stroke, the cells could survive in the ischemic
brain, migrate toward the cerebral infarct, and promote functional recovery.6-8 Although several hypotheses have been
proposed, the exact mechanisms underlying the efficacy of
BMSC transplantation remain relatively unknown.9 First,
several reports supported the hypothesis of BMSC differentiation into neural cells in the host brain (transdifferentiation). This mechanism is based on the findings that BMSCs
simulate neuronal morphology and express specific neural
markers in vitro10,11 or in vivo.1,12 Reportedly, certain BMSC
subpopulations can alter their gene expression profiles and

differentiate into neural cells in response to the surrounding
environment.13 Second, BMSCs can reportedly fuse with
host neurons and simulate neural differentiation (cell
fusion).14 However, the roles and fates of the fused cells
1

Depertment of Neurosurgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan
2
Shionogi Innovation Center for Drug, Shionogi & Co Ltd, Sapporo,
Japan
3
Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Science for Education, University of Toyama, Toyama,
Japan
Corresponding Author:
Satoshi Kuroda, MD, PhD, Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate
School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Science for Education, University
of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama, 930-0194, Japan.
Email: skuroda@med.u-toyama.ac.jp

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

81

Shichinohe et al	
remain unknown.9 Finally, there is increasing evidence that
BMSCs can produce neuroprotective or neurotrophic factors
and support the survival of host neural cells.7,9,15,16 This
“nursing functions” to the damaged brain tissue17,18 may
play a key role in the efficacy of BMSC transplantation;
however, some questions regarding these mechanisms still
remain unanswered. Thus, the present study was designed to
clarify the mechanisms of BMSC neural differentiation and
the subsequent trophic effect through the nourishing of damaged neurons in ischemic cerebral tissue with neurotrophic
factors, particularly brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) and nerve growth factor (NGF).

Materials and Methods
Isolation and Culture of Mouse BMSCs
BMSCs were harvested from 8-week-old male Balb/c mice
(CLEA Japan, Inc, Tokyo, Japan) or transgenic mice
expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP; The
Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) using previously
reported procedures.6 In brief, the mouse femur was dissected, and the marrow was extruded with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis,
MO) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), 100 U/mL of penicillin/streptomycin (Life Technologies), and 10% heparin (Mochida
Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd, Tokyo, Japan). Whole marrow
cells were placed in a culture flask coated with type I collagen (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes,
NJ) in DMEM/10% FBS. After 24 hours, the nonadherent
cells were removed for use in subsequent experiments after
3 passages. All the animal experiments were approved by
the Animal Studies Ethical Committee of Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine (Sapporo, Japan).

Three-Dimensional (3D) Coculture of BMSCs
and Neurons
For the 3D coculture experiments, 1   × 105 mouse BMSCs
were plated onto 24-well cell culture inserts (pore size,
1.0 µm; Becton, Dickinson and Company) and incubated for
3 days in DMEM/10% FBS at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5%
CO2. The primary-cultured neurons were obtained by dissociating a frozen form of fetal mouse cerebral cortex (Nerve
Cell CX <M>; Sumitomo Bakelite Co, Ltd, Tokyo, Japan).
A total of 2 × 105 neurons were seeded into each well of
24-well poly-D-lysine-coated plates containing nerve cell
culture medium (Sumitomo Bakelite) and cultured for
14 days. Following this, BMSCs were added and cocultured
for 24 hours using a previously reported 3D coculture technique.9 Subsequently, the neurons were exposed to 100 µM
glutamate for 10 minutes and again cocultured with BMSCs
for 72 hours. To investigate the protective effect of BMSCsecreted BDNFs on neurons against glutamate toxicity,

neutralizing antibodies against either BDNF (Promega,
Fitchburg, WI)19,20 or NGF (Sigma-Aldrich)21,22 or the Trk
tyrosine kinase inhibitor K252a (Millipore Corp, Billerica,
MA) were added to the cocultures.

Cell Viability Assay
Cell viability was analyzed using the LIVE/DEAD cell viability assay (Life Technologies) after 72 hours of glutamate
exposure. In brief, the neurons were rinsed with phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) and subsequently incubated with viability assay solution containing 2.0 mM calcein AM and 4.0 mM
ethidium homodimer I in PBS for 30 minutes at room temperature (RT). After incubation, the cells were washed with
PBS and then stained with Hoechst 33342 nucleic acid stain
(Life Technologies). Cell viability was analyzed in each group
(n = 5) using the IN Cell Analyzer 2000 Imaging System (GE
Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK).

Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) of
Cultured BMSCs
Mouse BMSCs were seeded onto type I collagen-coated culture slides (Becton, Dickinson and Company) and cultured
for 3 days. FISH analysis of cultured BMSCs was performed
using the ISHR Starting Kit (Nippon Gene, Tokyo, Japan).
Digoxigenin-modified RNA probes for NGF were prepared
using complementary DNA included in the ISHR Starting
Kit. Meanwhile, probes for BDNF were prepared using plasmid DNA (clone ID: 5730414D07; DNAFORM, Yokohama,
Japan). After fixation and acetylation, the slides were incubated in 50% formamide and 2× sodium chloride-sodium
citrate solution for 30 minutes at 42°C as a prehybridization
step. Hybridization for each probe was performed overnight
at 42°C. After hybridization, the slides were washed to clear
excess RNA and then blocked with 10% goat serum for 30
minutes. Following this, the slides were sequentially incubated with sheep polyclonal antibody against digoxigenin
(dilution 1:100; Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) for 2
hours at RT, treated with Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated secondary antibodies (dilution, 1:200; Molecular Probes,
Eugene, OR) for 1 hour at RT, and subsequently counterstained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; SigmaAldrich). Fluorescence was observed through each
appropriate filter using a fluorescence microscope (BX61;
Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and was digitally photographed
using a cooled charged-coupled device (CCD) camera
(model VB-6000; Keyence Corporation, Osaka, Japan).

Permanent Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA)
Occlusion and BMSC Transplantation
Permanent MCA occlusion and stereotactic BMSC transplantation were performed as described previously.6 In
brief, 8-week-old male Balb/c mice (n = 20) were

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

82	

Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 29(1)

anesthetized, and a skin incision was made between the
right eye and ear. Following this, the temporal muscle was
mobilized, the skull was exposed, and a burr hole was
drilled. The main trunk of MCA was exposed and directly
occluded with a bipolar coagulator. The core temperature
was maintained between 36.5°C and 37.5°C during the
procedures. This method produces a stable infarct lesion
only in the ipsilateral neocortex.
BMSCs derived from EGFP mice (EGFP-BMSC) were
prepared as a cell suspension in PBS. The mice were fixed
under anesthesia to a stereotactic apparatus (model DKI900; David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA) 7 days after the
insult. The cell suspension (2 × 105 cells in 10 µL) or vehicle was injected 2.0 mm to the right of the bregma at a depth
of 3.0 mm (n = 10) using an automatic microinjection pump
(model KDS-310; Muromachi Kikai Co, Ltd, Tokyo,
Japan). All the animals were subcutaneously injected daily
with 10 mg/kg of cyclosporine A until they were killed
humanely 2 or 4 weeks after cell transplantation (n = 5).
The brain was removed and embedded in paraffin, and
8-µm thick coronal sections were prepared for subsequent
staining.

FISH and Immunostaining Analyses of Ischemic
Brain Tissues After BMSC Transplantation
After the FISH procedure for identification of BDNF or
NGF mRNA in the brain sections, we performed fluorescence immunostaining against EGFP on the basis of the
procedure reported by Rylski et al.23 After these procedures,
the sections were treated for 1 hour at RT with a mouse
monoclonal antibody against EGFP (dilution, 1:100; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) that was previously
labeled with Zenon Alexa Fluor 488 (Mouse IgG2a Labeling
Kit; Molecular Probes).
Fluorescence double staining for neuronal makers and
EGFP was also performed. In brief, the sections were
treated with a monoclonal antibody against microtubuleassociated protein 2 (MAP2; dilution, 1:100; Chemicon
International, Inc, Temecula, CA) or neuronal nuclei
(NeuN; dilution, 1:400; Chemicon International, Inc.) overnight at 4°C and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated secondary
antibodies (dilution, 1:200) for 1 hour at RT. Subsequently,
the sections were immunostained for EGFP and then counterstained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole. The fluorescence was observed using a fluorescence microscope
equipped with a cooled CCD camera as described above
and concomitantly with a confocal laser-scanning microscope (Fluoview FV10i; Olympus).

Cell Counting for Histological Analysis
To count the NeuN-positive cells, 2 regions of interest
(ROIs; 800 × 640 µm2) were set on the ischemic boundary

zone and contralateral region in each animal. We also set 4
ROIs (160 × 128 µm2) around the infarct lesion to count the
cells coexpressing EGFP and BDNF or NGF and set ROI
(160 × 128 µm2) to count cells coexpressing EGFP and
MAP2 in each animal. We used Image J image processing
software (v 1.32J; National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD) to count the cell numbers.

Statistical Analysis
All data are expressed as means ± standard deviations. The
data were compared using the unpaired t test for cases
involving 2 groups or 1-factor analysis of variance followed
by Fisher’s protected least-significant-difference post hoc
test for cases with more than 2 groups. A probability (P)
value <.05 was considered statistically significant.

Results
Neuroprotective Effect After Coculture With
BMSCs
Fetal mouse cortical neurons in culture appeared healthy
with few dead cells (Figure 1A), whereas the cultured neurons exposed to 100 mM glutamate appeared injured with
an increased rate of mortality 72 hours after exposure. Even
the living cells appeared swollen with involvement. After
the insult, only 40.7% ± 14.3% (vs control) of the neurons
survived at 72 hours (Figure 1B). The coculture with
BMSCs significantly ameliorated glutamate-induced neuronal injury. Thus, the neurons maintained normal morphologies, and 104.8% ± 30.4% survived (P < .01, Figure 1B).
When a high concentration (20 µg/mL) of neutralizing antibody was used against BDNF, the neuroprotective effect
was significantly canceled (Figure 1A). Under these conditions, a significant reduction in cell viability at high concentrations of the neutralizing antibody was observed. The
neuronal death rate decreased with a decrease in antibody
concentration (20 µg/mL, 49.7% ± 5.0%, P < .05; 2 µg/mL,
83.3% ± 5.8%; Figure 1B). Similarly, when a high concentration of anti-NGF antibody or K252a was used, cell viability also tended to decrease (100 µg/mL of neutralizing
antibodies against NGF, 85.7% ± 23.1%; 200 µM K252a,
53.8% ± 19.9%; Figure 1B). These results demonstrated
that BMSCs protected the neurons against glutamate toxicity by secreting BDNF.

Production of BDNF and NGF by Cultured
BMSCs
FISH analysis with antisense RNA probes showed that most
cultured BMSCs expressed both BDNF and NGF mRNA
(Figure 2). In most BMSCs, these mRNAs were localized to
the center of the cell body, adjacent to the nucleus. In

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

83

Shichinohe et al	

Figure 1.  Neuronal cell viability assay after coculturing with BMSCs: Panel A shows a representative photomicrograph from the
neuronal cell viability assay. The upper panels show living cells (green), and the lower panels show the nuclei of dead cells (red) in the
same areas. Controls are depicted in the left panels. The caption “100 µM glutamate” indicates that the cells were exposed to
100 µM glutamate and “+ BMSC” indicates that the cells were cocultured with BMSCs. Moreover, “+20 ng/mL BDNF Ab,” “+100
ng/mL NGF Ab,” or “+200 nM K252a” indicate cells treated with each neutralizing antibody or drug (scale bar, 100 µm). The bar
graph (B) shows the viability of neurons cocultured with BMSCs for 72 hours after glutamate exposure. Values are presented as the
percentages of living cells as determined by the cell viability assay. The numerals on the X-axis indicate the concentrations of each
additive to the coculture system. Error bars represent standard deviations.
Abbreviations: BMSC, bone marrow stromal cells; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF, nerve growth factor.
*P < .05; **P < .01.

contrast, FISH analysis with sense RNA probes for either
BDNF or NGF revealed no positive cells (Figure 2).
Quantitative analysis indicated that 89.1% ± 2.9% and
82.6% ± 7.3% of the cultured BMSCs expressed BDNF and
NGF mRNA, respectively.

Neuroprotective Effect Around the Ischemic
Boundary Zone
Two weeks after transplantation (3 weeks after ischemia),
the necrotic changes were complete, and brain atrophy
was observed in the ischemic core lesions of both the
groups. There was no difference in the infarct areas
between the 2 groups (BMSC, 19.9% ± 6.2%; vehicle,

19.7% ± 3.9%). In the peri-infarct area, some neocortical
neurons were clearly damaged (Figure 3A). In the vehicle-transplanted animals, the density of NeuN-positive
cells in the peri-infarct area decreased to 73.2% ± 9.2% of
the density in the contralateral side. On the other hand,
BMSC transplantation significantly ameliorated the neuronal loss in the peri-infarct area (92.4% ± 9.7%, P < .05;
Figure 3C).

Production of BDNF and NGF Around the
Ischemic Boundary Zone
Most EGFP-positive cells were observed in the peri-infarct
area (Figure 4). In addition, 3D analysis using the confocal

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

84	

Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 29(1)
(BDNF, Figure 5A; NGF, Figure 5B). At 2 weeks after
transplantation, 55.9% ± 12.7% of the EGFP-expressing
cells in the peri-infarct area also expressed BDNF mRNA
(Figure 4A). Similarly, 56.6% ± 14.3% were also positive
for NGF mRNA (Figure 4C). At 4 weeks after transplantation, however, the percentage of both BDNF and NGF
mRNA-positive cells significantly decreased to 35.0% ±
13.9% and 34.1% ± 9.7%, respectively (Figures 5B and
5D, P < .05).

Phenotypic Change Toward Neural Cells in
BMSCs

Figure 2.  FISH analysis of cultured BMSCs: Panel A contains a
representative photomicrograph of cultured BMSCs processed
for FISH analysis using an RNA probe for either BDNF (left) or
NGF (right). Upper, antisense-RNA probes; lower, sense-RNA
probes as negative controls; red, mRNA; blue, 4′, 6-diamidino-2phenylindole (scale bar: 50 µm).
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; BMSC, bone
marrow stromal cells; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF,
nerve growth factor.

laser-scanning microscope showed that some EGFPpositive cells expressed each mRNA in the cell body

Double immunostaining for EGFP and NeuN showed that
a number of EGFP-positive cells already migrated from the
transplantation site to the peri-infarct area 2 weeks after
transplantation. Of the migrated donor cells, we observed
that some had a tendency for neural differentiation, whereas
others did not (Figure 6). Double immunostaining for
EGFP and MAP2 also revealed that the number of cells
coexpressing the 2 markers in the peri-infarct area gradually increased over a 4-week period after transplantation
(Figure 7). Thus, the percentage of cells double positive for
GFP and MAP2 significantly increased from 26.2% ± 9.2%
at 2 weeks to 73.9% ± 7.2% at 4 weeks (P < .01). Some of
these cells exhibited morphological changes to neuronal
cells (Figure 7).

Figure 3.  Immunostaining for NeuN in the peri-infarct area: panel A contains a representative photomicrograph of brain sections
processed for immunostaining against NeuN in the BMSC group (left) and the vehicle group (right). Upper, ischemic side; lower,
contralateral side as controls (scale bar: 200 µm). Panel B shows a schematic image of the host brain. The box on the ischemic
boundary zone (i) and the box on the contralateral site (c) indicate the locations of each ROI. The bar graph (C) shows the density of
NeuN-positive cells in the peri-infarct area (Y-axis, percentage of positive cells vs control). Error bars represent standard deviations.
Abbreviations: NeuN, neuronal nuclei; BMSC, bone marrow stromal cells; ROI, region of interest.
*P < .05.

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

85

Shichinohe et al	

Figure 4.  FISH analysis to determine the expression of BDNF or NGF mRNA in vivo: the panels show representative photomicrographs
of the sections processed for FISH analysis using an antisense probe for BDNF (A and B) or NGF (C and D). They are fluorescent
micrograms of the peri-infarct areas in animals 2 (A and C) and 4 (B and D) weeks after cell transplantation. The left line shows EGFPpositive cells (green), the center shows BDNF-positive or NGF-positive cells (red), and the right shows their merged images. Arrows,
cells double positive for EGFP and BDNF; arrowheads, cells positive for EGFP and negative for BDNF (scale bar: 20 µm).
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF, nerve growth factor; EGFP, enhanced green
fluorescent protein.

Discussion
The results of the present study clearly demonstrated that
BMSCs can promote the survival of neurons exposed to
glutamate by producing Trk-activating factors such as NGF
and BDNF in vitro, and their biological activities can be
confirmed in the rodent brain. We found that more than half
of the engrafted BMSCs expressed NGF and BDNF mRNA,
which contributed to neuron survival in the peri-infarct
areas during the first 2 weeks after transplantation. However,
the number of BMSCs that expressed mRNA for BDNF or
NGF decreased over an additional 2 weeks, whereas the

number of MAP2-positive BMSCs rapidly increased
(Figure 8A). These findings strongly suggested that the
engrafted BMSCs were biologically heterogeneous and
contributed to functional recovery after ischemic stroke
through multiple mechanisms with biphasic temporal profiles (Figure 8B). Thus, a certain BMSC subpopulation may
promote the survival of host neurons in the peri-infarct area
by BDNF secretion in the early posttransplantation stage
(up to 4 weeks). However, BMSC survival in the host brain
may be rather short-lived. Subsequently, another BMSC
subpopulation may begin to proliferate and differentiate
into neural cells, thereby regenerating cells in the infarcted

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

86	

Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 29(1)

Figure 5.  Three-dimensional (3D) imaging of FISH analysis: the panels show the 3D images in the peri-infarct area 2 weeks after
transplantation using a confocal laser-scanning microscope (A, EGFP and BDNF; B, EGFP and NGF). The colocalized cells placed on
intersections were projected as 3D images inside and under bars of each panel (scale bars: 20 µm).
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; EGFP, enhanced green fluorescent protein; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; NGF,
nerve growth factor.

brain around 4 weeks after transplantation. Thus, the ratios
of cells double positive for EGFP and MAP2 were 26.2% ±
9.2% and 73.9% ± 7.2% at 2 and 4 weeks after transplantation, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study to show that engrafted BMSCs contribute to protect the host brain tissue against cerebral ischemia through
a trophic effect in the early stage of cell therapy and “neural
differentiation” thereafter.
As mentioned above, BMSCs may produce some neuroprotective factors that support the survival of host neural cells. This hypothesis is reasonable because BMSCs
per se support the localization and proliferation of hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow by producing various
cytokines. BMSCs reportedly release soluble neuroprotective factors, including BDNF, NGF, stromal cell–
derived factor 1α, hepatocyte growth factor, transforming
growth factor β1, and insulin-like growth factor 1, and

significantly ameliorate glutamate-induced neuronal
damage.9 Furthermore, in the present study, the BMSCconditioned medium activated the phosphorylation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal–
regulated protein kinase and/or phosphoinositide
3-kinase/serine/threonine kinase in primary cultures of
rat dorsal root ganglion neurons.24 In 2011, He et al25
reported that BMSCs significantly increased the expression of basic fibroblast growth factor, BDNF, and vascular endothelial growth factor in the ischemic brain. These
findings strongly suggest that BMSCs trigger endogenous
signaling pathways of survival and repair in neurons by
secreting soluble neurotrophic factors.
BMSCs are thought to differentiate into neural cells in the
host brain. Although this hypothesis is quite attractive, several questions still remain unanswered. Recent studies have
shown that BMSCs can undergo alterations in gene

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

87

Shichinohe et al	

Figure 6.  Double immunostaining for EGFP and NeuN: the panels show representative low-power photomicrographs after double
immunostaining for EGFP and NeuN of the peri-infarct area 2 weeks after transplantation. EGFP-positive cells (green in A), NeuNpositive cells (red in B), and their merged images (C) are depicted. Panel D shows a schematic image of the host brain. The box and
“×” in panel D indicate the locations of the photomicrographs and the cell transplantation sites, respectively. Arrows, cells double
positive for EGFP and NeuN; arrowheads, cells positive for EGFP and negative for NeuN (scale bars: 100 µm).
Abbreviations: EGFP, enhanced green fluorescent protein; NeuN, neuronal nuclei.

Figure 7.  Double immunostaining for EGFP and MAP2: the panels show representative photomicrographs of brain sections
processed for double immunostaining for EGFP and MAP2 of the peri-infarct area in animals 2 (A) and 4 (B) weeks after cell
transplantation. EGFP-positive cells (green, left), MAP2-positive cells (red, center), and their merged images (right) are depicted.
Arrows, cells double positive for EGFP and MAP2 (scale bars: 20 µm).
Abbreviations: EGFP, enhanced green fluorescent protein; MAP2, microtubule-associated protein 2.

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

88	

Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 29(1)

Figure 8.  Quantitative analysis for FISH and
immunohistochemical analyses and schematic images of
therapeutic mechanisms: the bar graph (A) shows the percentage
of cells double positive for EGFP and BDNF (red), for EGFP
and NGF (orange), and for EGFP and MAP2 (green) in the total
EGFP-positive cell population in vitro or in the peri-infarct area of
the mouse ischemic brain (2 and 4 weeks after transplantation).
The error bars represent standard deviations. Panel B contains
a schematic image of the multiple therapeutic mechanisms
of BMSC transplantation. More than half of the engrafted
BMSCs expressed BDNF and NGF mRNA, which contributed
to neuronal survival in the peri-infarct area during the first 2
weeks after transplantation. However, the number of BMSCs
expressing mRNA decreased over an additional 2 weeks (trophic
effect, red line). On the other hand, the number of MAP2positive BMSCs rapidly increased (phenotypic change, green
line). This schematic image shows that the engrafted BMSCs
were biologically heterogeneous and contributed to functional
recovery after ischemic stroke through multiple mechanisms
with biphasic temporal profiles.
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; EGFP, enhanced
green fluorescent protein; BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor;
NGF, nerve growth factor; MAP2, microtubule-associated protein 2;
BMSC, bone marrow stromal cells.
*P < .05; **P < .01.

expression in response to exogenous stimuli and increase the
expression of genes related to neural cells.13,26 Using microarray analysis, Yamaguchi et al13 reported that the expression of mesenchymal cell–related genes was significantly
downregulated and that of neuron-related genes was significantly upregulated in BMSCs when chemically treated with
basic fibroblast growth factor, retinoic acid, or dimethyl
sulfoxide. Thus, BMSCs can acquire the neuronal phenotype under several physiological conditions. WisletGendebien et al27 reported that nestin-positive BMSCs
cocultured with cerebellar granule cells express other

neuronal markers and that BMSC-derived neuron-like cells
fire single-action potentials in response to neurotransmitters
such as glutamate. Hokari et al9 also demonstrated that a certain BMSC subpopulation morphologically resembles neurons and expresses neuron-specific proteins without any
evidence of cell fusion when cocultured with neurons. These
findings strongly suggest that certain BMSC subpopulations
have the potential to undergo gene expression profile modifications and can differentiate into the neural cells in
response to surrounding environmental factors. More important, our present findings indicate that only the subgroup of
BMSCs with the potential for neural differentiation can survive in the host brain for periods of more than 4 weeks.
Very recently, Kuroda et al28 demonstrated the presence of multilineage-differentiating stress-enduring
(Muse) cells in BMSC populations that are characterized
by stress tolerance, expression of pluripotency markers,
self-renewal, and the ability to generate cells with the
characteristics of the 3 germ layers from a single cell.
When transplanted into immunodeficient mice by local or
intravenous injection, these cells integrated into the damaged skin, muscle, or liver and differentiated into cytokeratin 14-, dystrophin-, or albumin-positive cells in the
respective tissues. Furthermore, they can be efficiently
isolated as stage-specific embryonic antigen 3–positive
cells. Unlike authentic embryonic stem cells, the proliferation activity of BMSCs is limited, and they do not
form teratomas in the testes of immunodeficient mice.
These findings are quite attractive because nontumorigenic stem cells with the ability to generate multiple cell
types of the 3 germ layers can be obtained through easily
accessible adult human mesenchymal cells without introducing exogenous genes.28 These results strongly suggest
that a certain BMSC subpopulation may possess the biological properties of neural differentiation that can contribute to the regeneration of the infarcted brain.
The present study had some limitations that might
weaken the conclusions. First, we evaluated the neuroprotective effects of BMSCs by the secretion of BDNFs only in
vitro. Also, the use of appropriate nonspecific IgG controls
was an indispensable in vitro assay. Second, although we
evaluated the tendency for neural differentiation by the
expression of neural markers, we could not utilize strict
colocalization of the phenotype markers (NeuN or MAP2)
with the GFP label. In future studies, we plan to investigate
the in vivo neuroprotective effects of small hairpin RNA
interference or knockout BMSCs for BDNF or NGF to elucidate the true neural differentiation in a study on neuronal
action potentials.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

89

Shichinohe et al	
Funding
The authors received the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This
study was supported by Grant-in-aids from the Ministry of
Education, Science and Culture of Japan (No.23390342 and
No.24390336).

References
	 1.	 Azizi SA, Stokes D, Augelli BJ, DiGirolamo C, Prockop DJ.
Engraftment and migration of human bone marrow stromal
cells implanted in the brains of albino rats: similarities to astrocyte grafts. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95:3908-3913.
	 2.	 Hess DC, Hill WD, Martin-Studdard A, Carroll J, Brailer
J, Carothers J. Bone marrow as a source of endothelial
cells and NeuN-expressing cells After stroke. Stroke.
2002;33:1362-1368.
	 3.	 Shichinohe H, Kuroda S, Yano S, Hida K, Iwasaki Y. Role
of SDF-1/CXCR4 system in survival and migration of bone
marrow stromal cells after transplantation into mice cerebral
infarct. Brain Res. 2007;1183:138-147.
	 4.	 Bang OY, Lee JS, Lee PH, Lee G. Autologous mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in stroke patients. Ann Neurol.
2005;57:874-882.
	 5.	 Honmou O, Houkin K, Matsunaga T, et al. Intravenous administration of auto serum-expanded autologous mesenchymal
stem cells in stroke. Brain. 2011;134(pt 6):1790-1807.
	 6.	 Shichinohe H, Kuroda S, Lee JB, et al. In vivo tracking of
bone marrow stromal cells transplanted into mice cerebral
infarct by fluorescence optical imaging. Brain Res Brain Res
Protoc. 2004;13:166-175.
	 7.	 Borlongan CV, Lind JG, Dillon-Carter O, et al. Bone marrow
grafts restore cerebral blood flow and blood brain barrier in
stroke rats. Brain Res. 2004;1010(1-2):108-116.
	 8.	 Shichinohe H, Kuroda S, Yano S, et al. Improved expression of
gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor in mice with cerebral infarct
and transplanted bone marrow stromal cells: an autoradiographic and histologic analysis. J Nucl Med. 2006;47:486-491.
	 9.	 Hokari M, Kuroda S, Shichinohe H, Yano S, Hida K, Iwasaki
Y. Bone marrow stromal cells protect and repair damaged
neurons through multiple mechanisms. J Neurosci Res.
2007;86:1024-1035.
	10.	Sanchez-Ramos J, Song S, Cardozo-Pelaez F, et al. Adult
bone marrow stromal cells differentiate into neural cells in
vitro. Exp Neurol. 2000;164:247-256.
	11.	 Woodbury D, Schwarz EJ, Prockop DJ, Black IB. Adult rat
and human bone marrow stromal cells differentiate into neurons. J Neurosci Res. 2000;61:364-370.
	12.	 Kopen GC, Prockop DJ, Phinney DG. Marrow stromal cells
migrate throughout forebrain and cerebellum, and they differentiate into astrocytes after injection into neonatal mouse
brains. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:10711-10716.
	13.	 Yamaguchi S, Kuroda S, Kobayashi H, et al. The effects of
neuronal induction on gene expression profile in bone marrow
stromal cells (BMSC): a preliminary study using microarray
analysis. Brain Res. 2006;1087:15-27.

	14.	Terada N, Hamazaki T, Oka M, et al. Bone marrow cells
adopt the phenotype of other cells by spontaneous cell fusion.
Nature. 2002;416:542-545.
	15.	 Chen J, Zhang ZG, Li Y, et al. Intravenous administration
of human bone marrow stromal cells induces angiogenesis
in the ischemic boundary zone after stroke in rats. Circ Res.
2003;92:692-699.
	16.	 Wilkins A, Kemp K, Ginty M, Hares K, Mallam E, Scolding
N. Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
secrete brain-derived neurotrophic factor which promotes
neuronal survival in vitro. Stem Cell Res. 2009;3:63-70.
	17.	 Savitz SI, Chopp M, Deans R, Carmichael ST, Phinney D,
Wechsler L. Stem Cell Therapy as an Emerging Paradigm for
Stroke (STEPS) II. Stroke. 2011;42:825-829.
	18.	Janowski M, Walczak P, Date I. Intravenous route of cell
delivery for treatment of neurological disorders: a meta-analysis of preclinical results. Stem Cells Dev. 2010;19:5-16.
19.	Alder J, Kramer BC, Hoskin C, Thakker-Varia S. Brain	
derived neurotrophic factor produced by human umbilical
tissue-derived cells is required for its effect on hippocampal
dendritic differentiation. Dev Neurobiol. 2012;72:755-765.
	20.	 Kohara K, Kitamura A, Adachi N, et al. Inhibitory but not
excitatory cortical neurons require presynaptic brain-derived
neurotrophic factor for dendritic development, as revealed by
chimera cell culture. J Neurosci. 2003;23:6123-6131.
	21.	 Gassei K, Ehmcke J, Schlatt S. Initiation of testicular tubulogenesis is controlled by neurotrophic tyrosine receptor
kinases in a three-dimensional Sertoli cell aggregation assay.
Reproduction. 2008;136:459-469.
	22.	 Rana OR, Saygili E, Gemein C, et al. Chronic electrical neuronal stimulation increases cardiac parasympathetic tone by
eliciting neurotrophic effects. Circ Res. 2011;108:1209-1219.
	23.	 Rylski M, Amborska R, Zybura K, et al. Yin Yang 1 is a
critical repressor of matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression in
brain neurons. J Biol Chem. 2008;283:35140-35153.
	24.	 Gu Y, Wang J, Ding F, Hu N, Wang Y, Gu X. Neurotrophic
actions of bone marrow stromal cells on primary culture of
dorsal root ganglion tissues and neurons. J Mol Neurosci.
2010;40:332-341.
	25.	He XY, Chen ZZ, Cai YQ, Xu G, Shang JH, Kou SB,
et al. Expression of cytokines in rat brain with focal cerebral ischemia after grafting with bone marrow stromal
cells and endothelial progenitor cells. Cytotherapy. 2011
Jan;13(1):46-53.
	26.	 Bossolasco P, Cova L, Calzarossa C, Rimoldi SG, Borsotti
C, Deliliers GL, et al. Neuro-glial differentiation of
human bone marrow stem cells in vitro. Exp Neurol. 2005
Jun;193(2):312-25.
	27.	 Wislet-Gendebien S, Hans G, Leprince P, Rigo JM, Moonen
G, Rogister B. Plasticity of cultured mesenchymal stem cells:
switch from nestin-positive to excitable neuron-like phenotype. Stem Cells. 2005 Mar;23(3):392-402.
28.	Kuroda Y, Kitada M, Wakao S, Nishikawa K, Tanimura
	
Y, Makinoshima H, et al. Unique multipotent cells in adult
human mesenchymal cell populations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 2010 May 11;107(19):8639-43.

Downloaded from nnr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

