[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.004315/-/DC1
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.004315/-/DC1
[Link]
mailto:wei.yang@duke.edu
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
1115
Small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs) are covalently
conjugated to lysine residues of target proteins, 
and thereby modulate their function, stability, and localization.1,2 SUMO1, SUMO2, and SUMO3 are widely 
expressed in mammalian tissues. SUMO2 and SUMO3 
are almost identical and are often referred to as SUMO2/3. 
They are distinct from SUMO1, however, with about 50% 
homology. The SUMO conjugation (SUMOylation) is an 
energy-dependent process catalyzed by activating enzyme 
(SAE1/SAE2), conjugating enzyme (Ubc9), and ligating 
enzyme.1,2 SUMOylation is a dynamic and reversible reaction
, as SUMOylated proteins can be readily deconjugated 
by SUMO proteases.3
SUMOylation modulates many cellular functions including
DNA repair, genome maintenance, gene transcription, 
and protein degradation control4–6 and plays key roles in 
many human diseases such as cerebral ischemia/stroke, cancer
, and heart failure.1,7–9 It is, therefore, of tremendous clinical
interest to characterize the SUMO-modified proteome in 
these disorders. This is particularly evident for cerebral ischemia
/stroke because transient cerebral ischemia dramatically 
activates SUMOylation, and this is believed to be a neuroprotective
stress response. It is, therefore, of key interest to 
identify the proteins SUMOylated after brain ischemia to 
uncover the mechanisms linking SUMOylation to neuroprotection.
However, SUMO proteomics analysis is hampered 
Background and Purpose—Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) conjugation is a post-translational modification 
associated with many human diseases. Characterization of the SUMO-modified proteome is pivotal to define the 
mechanistic link between SUMO conjugation and such diseases. This is particularly evident for SUMO2/3 conjugation, 
which is massively activated after brain ischemia/stroke, and is believed to be a protective response. The purpose of this 
study was to perform a comprehensive analysis of the SUMO3-modified proteome regulated by brain ischemia using a 
novel SUMO transgenic mouse.
Methods—To enable SUMO proteomics analysis in vivo, we generated transgenic mice conditionally expressing tagged 
SUMO1-3 paralogues. Transgenic mice were subjected to 10 minutes forebrain ischemia and 1 hour of reperfusion. 
SUMO3-conjugated proteins were enriched by anti-FLAG affinity purification and analyzed by liquid chromatography–
tandem mass spectrometry.
Results—Characterization of SUMO transgenic mice demonstrated that all 3 tagged SUMO paralogues were functionally 
active, and expression of exogenous SUMOs did not modify the endogenous SUMOylation machinery. Proteomics 
analysis identified 112 putative SUMO3 substrates of which 91 candidates were more abundant in the ischemia group 
than the sham group. Data analysis revealed processes/pathways with putative neuroprotective functions, including 
glucocorticoid receptor signaling, RNA processing, and SUMOylation-dependent ubiquitin conjugation.
Conclusions—The identified proteins/pathways modulated by SUMOylation could be the key to understand the mechanisms 
linking SUMOylation to neuroprotection, and thus provide new promising targets for therapeutic interventions. The new 
transgenic mouse will be an invaluable platform for analyzing the SUMO-modified proteome in models of human disorders 
and thereby help to mechanistically link SUMOylation to the pathological processes. (Stroke. 2014;45:1115-1122.)
Key Words: brain ischemia ◼ proteomics ◼ SUMO proteins ◼ transgenic mice
Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier 3–Modified Proteome 
Regulated by Brain Ischemia in Novel Small Ubiquitin-Like 
Modifier Transgenic Mice
Putative Protective Proteins/Pathways
Wei Yang, PhD; Huaxin Sheng, MD; J. Will Thompson, PhD; Shengli Zhao, PhD; 
Liangli Wang, PhD; Pei Miao, BS; Xiaozhi Liu, MS; M. Arthur Moseley, PhD; Wulf Paschen, PhD
Received December 2, 2013; final revision received January 15, 2014; accepted January 21, 2014.
From the Department of Anesthesiology (W.Y., H.S., L.W., P.M., X.L., W.P.), Proteomics Core Facility (J.W.T., M.A.M.), and Department of Neurobiology 
(S.Z.), Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; and Department of Neurosurgery, The Fifth Central Hospital of Tianjin, Tianjin, China (X.L.).
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.
113.004315/-/DC1.
Correspondence to Wei Yang, PhD, Multidisciplinary Neuroprotection Laboratories, Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, 
PO Box 3094, Durham, NC 27710. E-mail wei.yang@duke.edu
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.004315
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
1116 Stroke April 2014
by the low levels of SUMOylated proteins. A common strategy
is, therefore, to perform proteomics analysis on purified 
SUMO-conjugated proteins from cells stably expressing 
tagged SUMOs. Recently, a His
6
-HA-SUMO1 knockin 
mouse was generated, which allowed researchers, for the 
first time, to characterize the SUMO1-modified proteome 
in brains.10 In the present study, we generated a transgenic 
mouse (CAG-loxP-STOP-loxP-SUMO, hereafter referred to 
as CAG-SUMO) in which His-SUMO1, HA-SUMO2, and 
FLAG-SUMO3 are expressed in a Cre-dependent manner. 
Using this new mouse line, we report here the first profile 
of the SUMO3-modified proteome in mouse brain after ischemia
, a pathological state associated with a dramatic activation
of SUMO2/3 conjugation.8,9
Methods
Full details of the methods are provided in the online-only Data 
Supplement.
Transgenic Mice
Animal experiments were approved by the Duke University Animal 
Care and Use Committee. CAG-SUMO transgenic mice were generated
by pronuclear injection of the transgene vector illustrated in 
Figure 1A.
Animal Surgery
Transient forebrain ischemia was performed as described previously 
with minor modifications.8
Sample Preparation for Proteomic Analysis
Each sample for proteomic analysis was generated by FLAG 
pull-down of nuclear fraction from cortical tissues pooled from 4 
mice. Three biological replicates were used for each group.
Liquid Chromatography–Tandem Mass 
Spectrometric Analysis and Data Analysis
All 9 samples derived from FLAG pull-down were separated on 
SDS-PAGE gel, and each lane was dissected into 14 slices. After 
in-gel digestion, peptides from each slice were analyzed by liquid 
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry. Data were analyzed by 
various programs.
Results
Generation and Characterization of  
CAG-SUMO Mice
We designed a transgene vector based on Cre/lox recombination
and 2A-mediated cotranslational cleavage to express 
His-SUMO1, HA-SUMO2, and FLAG-SUMO3 from a single 
multicistronic transgene in a conditional manner (Figure 1A). 
We used the cDNAs encoding precursor SUMO1-3 that allows 
the endogenous SUMO proteases to remove the extra 2A peptides11 and expose the C-terminal di-glycine motif of SUMOs. 
Green fluorescent protein (GFP) and mCherry were used as 
indicators of transgene expression before and after Cre recombination.
We obtained 8 founder lines with varying levels and 
patterns of GFP expression. Because of ubiquitous expression 
of GFP, line 10 was chosen for the present study. To examine 
the global pattern of Cre-mediated transgene expression, mice 
were cross-bred with hemizygous β-actin-Cre mice to generate
double transgenic CAG-SUMO/β-actin-Cre mice. CAGSUMO
line 10 exhibited strong GFP fluorescence in all organs 
examined including brain, heart, lung, kidney, and liver; those 
organs showed mCherry expression in CAG-SUMO/β-actin-
Cre mice. Expression of FLAG-SUMO3 was also confirmed 
in those organs (data not shown).
Figure 1. Generation of CAG-small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) transgenic mice. A, Scheme of the transgene construct. The transgene 
consists of the cytomegalovirus early enhancer/chicken β-actin promoter (CAG), a fragment containing GFP and a transcriptional/translational
STOP cassette (STOP) flanked by loxP sites, 3 tagged SUMOs linked by 2A sequences, mCherry, and a polyadenylation signal (pA). 
B, Expression patterns of native GFP fluorescence in a CAG-SUMO line 10 mouse brain. A sagittal brain section indicated widespread GFP 
expression (top). Bottom, Confocal images of different areas of the brain. C, A sagittal brain section of a double transgenic CAG-SUMO/
Emx1-Cre mouse showing the mCherry expression, indicative of expression of tagged SUMOs, restricted to forebrain regions. CA1 indicates
hippocampal CA1 subfield; Cb, cerebellum; Ct, cortex; Hi, hippocampus; OB, olfactory bulb; SC, superior colliculus; St, striatum; 
and Th, thalamus (scale bars, 50 μm).
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1308001346)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Yang et al SUMO3-Modified Proteome in Postischemic Brain 1117
In the brain of CAG-SUMO line 10, GFP was ubiquitously 
expressed with strong signals in hippocampus and cerebellum 
(Figure 1B). Because we were particularly interested in the 
SUMO-modified proteome regulated by forebrain ischemia, 
we mated hemizygous CAG-SUMO mice with homozygous 
Emx1Cre/Cre mice to generate double transgenic CAG-SUMO/
Emx1-Cre as tagged SUMO-expressing mice and littermates 
Emx1Cre/+ as control mice. In line with a previous report,12
CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice showed strong mCherry expression
in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus (Figure 1C). For 
both CAG-SUMO and CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice, we did 
not find any obvious physical or behavioral abnormalities.
Postischemic SUMOylation in the Brain of 
Transgenic Mice
To extend our previous findings8 and also demonstrate the 
suitability of CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice for in vivo SUMO 
studies, we investigated the temporal and spatial profiles of 
postischemic SUMOylation by endogenous and exogenous 
SUMOs in brains of Emx1Cre/+ control and CAG-SUMO/
Emx1-Cre mice. First, the temporal profile studies indicated 
that SUMO1-3 conjugation was decreased dramatically during
and rapidly activated after ischemia (Figure 2A). Similar 
pattern was found for FLAG-SUMO3 (data not shown). Then, 
we carefully compared SUMOylation response to brain ischemia
in Emx1Cre/+ and CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice to check 
for possible off-target effects that might be caused by overexpressing
SUMOs. In both sham and ischemia groups, levels 
of SUMO1 and SUMO2/3 conjugates in the high-molecularweight
regions were comparable in controls and double transgenic
mice, although there were substantially higher levels 
of unconjugated SUMOs in CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice 
because of expression of tagged SUMOs (Figure 2B–2D, 
data not shown). Finally, transient forebrain ischemia induced 
nuclear accumulation of SUMO2/3-conjugated proteins, and 
the same pattern was also observed for HA-SUMO2 and 
FLAG-SUMO3 (Figure 3 and Figure IA in the online-only 
Data Supplement).
SUMO3-Modified Proteome Regulated by Transient 
Forebrain Ischemia
To compare results to our previous SUMO3 proteomics analysis 
using an in vitro ischemia model,13 we focused on the SUMO3-
modified proteome in this study. We chose 1 hour of reperfusion
when SUMO2/3 conjugation was maximally activated 
(Figure 2A). Furthermore, we used cortical tissues because we 
were interested in the neuroprotective role of SUMOylation, 
and the cortex is spared from damage in this ischemia model.14
For future studies, we also performed a small-scale HA pulldown
to confirm enrichment of HA-SUMO2–conjugated proteins
(Figure IB in the online-only Data Supplement).
First, we optimized the FLAG pull-down procedure by 
using nuclear fractions as input for FLAG pull-down. This 
greatly enhanced specificity because nuclear fractions were 
devoid of unconjugated FLAG-SUMO3, had markedly less 
unspecific bands on Western blots (Figure IA in the onlineonly
Data Supplement), and exhibited dramatically lower total 
protein levels (Figure IC in the online-only Data Supplement). 
Indeed, FLAG-SUMO3–conjugated proteins were immunoprecipitated
effectively from nuclear fractions (Figure ID 
in the online-only Data Supplement). Interestingly, we did 
not notice a marked decrease in SUMO2/3 and HA signals 
in flow-through samples (Figure ID in the online-only Data 
Supplement). This suggested that FLAG-SUMO3 represented 
only a small fraction of the total SUMO2/3 pool. We also 
found HA-SUMO2 in FLAG-SUMO3 pull-down eluates, and, 
notably, there was a shift toward higher molecular weights in 
the ischemic sample, implying increased length of SUMO2/3 
chains (Figure ID in the online-only Data Supplement).
For the large-scale SUMO3 proteomics study, 3 groups of 
mice were used: Emx1Cre/+ without surgery (control, to account 
for background binding to anti-FLAG beads) and CAG-SUMO/
Emx1-Cre double transgenic mice with sham (transgenic 
sham) or ischemia surgery (transgenic ischemia; Figure 4A). 
All 9 FLAG pull-down samples (n=3/group) were confirmed 
by Western blotting (Figure IIA in the online-only Data 
Supplement) and then separated on an SDS-PAGE gel (Figure 
IIB in the online-only Data Supplement). Fourteen gel slices per 
lane were cut for liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometric
analysis (Figure IIB in the online-only Data Supplement).
Proteomics data showed that SUMO2/3 and ubiquitin shared 
a similar distribution of spectral counts (Figure 4B), suggesting a 
marked postischemic activation of the cross talk between these 2 
post-translational modifications. Indeed, we found ubiquitin conjugation
to be activated after ischemia, particularly pronounced 
in nuclei (Figure IIC in the online-only Data Supplement). Based 
on selection criteria described in online-only Data Supplement
Methods, 112 proteins were considered as putative SUMO3 
substrates (Table I in the online-only Data Supplement), and 91 
proteins (Table I in the online-only Data Supplement, asterisks) 
were considered as ischemia-upregulated candidates of which 
46 candidates were found only in ischemia samples (Table I in 
the online-only Data Supplement, triangles), including the general
transcription factor IIi (TFII-I/GTF2I), tripartite motif containing
33 (TRIM33), glucocorticoid receptor (GR/GCR), and 
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia 11B (CTIP2/BCL11B).
Gene ontology annotation analysis by the PANTHER program
indicated that 38.5% and 47.3% of the 91 candidates were 
predicted to have nuclear and cytoplasmic localization, respectively
(Figure 4C). We did not expect that most of the identified 
proteins would have predicted cytoplasmic localization, considering
that nuclear fractions were used for proteomics analyses. 
A plausible explanation is that cytoplasmic SUMO3 target proteins
were translocated to the nucleus after ischemia (eg, see 
below for GR). PANTHER analysis also revealed that most 
of the 91 proteins belonged to a group of binding proteins of 
which nucleic acid binding accounted for 55.1% (Figure 4D). 
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis core analysis of the 91 candidates 
revealed significant enrichment in the categories of neurological
disease (46 targets) and cell death and survival (47 targets; 
Figure IIIA and IIIB in the online-only Data Supplement). 
Strikingly, 27 proteins were grouped with functions in RNA 
processing with high confidence (Ingenuity Pathway Analysis 
score=72; Figure IIIC in the online-only Data Supplement).
To verify proteomics analysis findings independently, a 
separate large-scale FLAG pull-down was performed using 3 
CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice per group (sham and ischemia). 
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.350201664)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
1118 Stroke April 2014
First, we treated FLAG pull-down samples with SUMO/
sentrin-specific protease 2 catalytic fragment (SENP2c) for 
de-SUMOylation. Western blot analysis confirmed that the 
strong high-molecular-weight smear of bands indeed represented
SUMO-conjugated proteins (Figure 5A). The presence 
of SUMO1 is consistent with the report that SUMO1-3 can 
form mixed chains.15 Interestingly, ubiquitinated proteins 
slightly shifted to lower molecular weight after SENP2c 
treatment (Figure 5A). These data suggest that ubiquitin and 
SUMO conjugated to different lysine residues for a subset of 
Figure 2. Effect of transient forebrain ischemia on small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)ylation. A, CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice were 
subjected to 10 minutes forebrain ischemia and 0, 1, 3, or 6 hours reperfusion (n=3 per group). Sham-operated mice were used as control.
SUMO conjugates in high-molecular-weight regions are marked by brackets. B–D, Comparison of SUMO2/3 conjugation in brains 
of Emx1Cre/+ (control) and CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre (transgenic [TG]) mice. Emx1Cre/+ and CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre mice were subjected to 
sham surgery or 10 minutes forebrain ischemia and 1 hour reperfusion (n=3 per group). Protein samples were prepared from the cortex 
(B) and the hippocampus (C) and analyzed by Western blotting using indicated antibodies. D, The high-molecular-weight regions marked 
by brackets were used to quantify SUMO2/3 conjugates in the cortex and hippocampus. Films with shorter exposure times were used to 
measure intensities. Data were normalized to β-actin and presented as means±SD. NS indicates not significant; and WB, Western blot.
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Yang et al SUMO3-Modified Proteome in Postischemic Brain 1119
postischemic SUMO3 conjugates. Similar findings were also 
reported in cells exposed to ischemia-like conditions or proteasome
inhibitor MG132.13,16
Then, we selected 5 candidate SUMO substrates for further 
verification, GR, TFII-I, TRIM33, transcriptional intermediary
factor 1β (TIF1β), and CTIP2. The unmodified forms 
Figure 3. Nuclear accumulation of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)2/3–conjugated proteins after ischemia. A and B, CAG-SUMO/
Emx1-Cre mice were subjected to sham surgery or 10 minutes forebrain ischemia and 1 hour reperfusion. Brain sections were stained 
with antibodies against SUMO2/3, HA, and microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) as neuron-specific marker. Ischemia-induced nuclear 
accumulation of SUMO2/3- and HA-SUMO2–conjugated proteins was found both in cortex and hippocampus neurons (scale bars, 20 μm).
Figure 4. Proteomics analysis of small 
ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)3–conjugated
proteins in postischemic mouse 
brains. A, Overview of the workflow to 
identify FLAG-SUMO3-conjugates in 
the postischemic cerebral cortex. Coronal
brain sections of Emx1Cre/+ (control; 
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining, 
blue) and CAG-SUMO/Emx1-Cre double 
transgenic (transgenic [TG]; mCherry fluorescence
, red) mice were shown to indicate
cortical regions used in the study. 
B, Distribution of total spectral counts 
for SUMO1, SUMO2/3, and ubiquitin for 
each gel slice of ischemia samples from 
high (slice 1) to low (slice 14) molecular 
weights. Subcellular localization (C) and 
molecular functions (D) of the 91 putative
SUMO3 substrates with upregulated 
SUMO3 conjugation state after ischemia 
were grouped by the PANTHER program. 
LC-MS/MS indicates liquid chromatography
–tandem mass spectrometry.
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1607669775)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
1120 Stroke April 2014
of all 5 proteins were detected in sham and ischemia input 
samples (Figure 5B). In contrast, only slower migrating bands 
were present in FLAG pull-down samples, with much stronger
signals in the ischemia sample. After SENP2c treatment, 
almost all slower migrating bands disappeared, and bands 
representing unmodified forms appeared (Figure 5B). These 
experiments convincingly confirmed that these 5 proteins are 
authentic SUMO3 substrates and that SUMOylation of these 
proteins was markedly increased after ischemia (Figure 5B).
We further determined the quantitative trend across molecular
weight for 4 of these proteins (GR, TFII-I, TRIM33, and 
TIF1β) by performing a targeted data extraction from the liquid
chromatography–tandem mass spectrometric analysis of 
each gel band (Figure 5C). TFII-I and TRIM33 were virtually 
undetectable in sham samples, whereas GR and TIF1β were 
detectable in sham but highly upregulated in ischemia samples.
All 4 proteins showed the highest quantity in molecular 
weight regions that are significantly higher than the unmodified
protein molecular weight (Figure 5C), consistent with 
multiple SUMO modifications.
Finally, we further characterized GR SUMOylation. SUMO3-
conjugated GR was already detected in postischemic nuclear 
fractions without immunoprecipitation (Figure 5B, input), a 
remarkable observation considering that only a small fraction 
of a given protein is usually SUMOylated. This suggests a dramatic
postischemic activation of GR SUMOylation. Indeed, we 
found that ischemia/reperfusion triggered massive SUMO conjugation
and nuclear accumulation of GR (Figure 5D).
Discussion
Here, we presented a novel SUMO transgenic mouse model 
(CAG-SUMO) and the first study on tissue samples to uncover 
the SUMO-modified proteome in a pathological state. CAGSUMO
/Emx1-Cre mice did not show any obvious phenotype. 
This was expected because our data demonstrated that exogenous
tagged SUMOs did not disturb global SUMOylation in 
the brain. Indeed, the tagged SUMOs were functionally intact 
and processed by the endogenous SUMOylation machinery 
in the same way as endogenous SUMOs (Figures 2 and 3 
and Figure I in the online-only Data Supplement). Moreover, 
expression of exogenous tagged SUMO1-3 did not induce an 
increase in levels of SUMO-conjugated proteins, although it 
resulted in a rise in levels of free SUMOs (Figure 2). These 
data suggest that in the brain SUMO conjugation is controlled 
by the activity of SUMOylation machinery and not by levels 
of free SUMOs. Together, our findings demonstrate that this 
new transgenic mouse model is well suited for SUMO proteomics
studies in vivo.
Figure 5. Verification of small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)3 proteomics data. A and B, The FLAG pull-down samples (sham and 
ischemia) treated with/without SUMO/sentrin-specific protease 2 catalytic fragment (SENP2c) were analyzed by Western blotting with 
the indicated antibodies. SENP2c is glutatione S-transferase (GST) tagged. C, Quantitative analysis of 4 identified SUMO3 substrates. 
The areas under the curve of 2 peptides from each protein were used to perform relative quantification of sham (black) and ischemia 
(gray) samples as a function of molecular weight. The expected molecular weight of each unmodified protein was indicated by a shaded 
region. Data were presented as mean±SD (n=3 per group). D, Whole cell lysates (WCL), cytoplasmic (Cy), and nuclear (Nu) fractions prepared
from cortical samples (n=2/group, sham and ischemia) were analyzed by Western blotting (left) to evaluate SUMOylation of glucocorticoid
receptor (GR). To confirm that slow migrating bands were indeed SUMOylated forms of GR, a postischemic nuclear fraction 
was treated with/without SENP2c. SENP2c treatment abolished almost all slow migrating bands (right). GADPH and H2AX were used 
as cytoplasmic and nuclear markers, respectively. I indicates ischemia; S, sham; Ub, ubiquitin; and WB, Western blot. by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1001241984)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Yang et al SUMO3-Modified Proteome in Postischemic Brain 1121
The new SUMO transgenic mouse model has several 
advantages compared with previously published approaches 
to investigate the SUMO2/3-modified proteome using tissue
samples.17,18 Protein sequences of SUMO2 and SUMO3 
are almost identical and cannot be differentiated by available
antibodies. Because SUMO2 and SUMO3 are expressed 
with different tags in this new transgenic mouse, it is possible 
for future studies to identify individually the SUMO2- and 
SUMO3-modified proteome. Furthermore, because tagged 
SUMOs are expressed in a conditional manner, they can be 
expressed in any cell/organ type for which the respective Cre 
mouse is available, thus making this new mouse model a universal
tool for characterizing the SUMO-modified proteome.
Increased SUMOylation is thought to be a protective 
response that shields neurons from ischemia-induced damage.19,20 Transient forebrain ischemia triggered a massive 
increase in levels of SUMO2/3-conjugated proteins in neurons
of the resistant cortex and vulnerable hippocampal CA1 
subfield (Figures 2 and 3). Whether this postischemic activation
of SUMO2/3 conjugation is a stress response protecting 
neurons in both regions needs to be established in future studies.
Recently, we have generated a novel SUMO knockdown 
transgenic mouse that will be well suited for these studies.21
It also needs to be verified whether transient cerebral ischemia
may activate SUMOylation in non-neuronal cells such 
as astrocytes and endothelial cells. Notably, SUMOylation of 
the liver X receptor in brain astrocytes blocks inflammatory 
responses,22 and inflammation is a major contributing factor to 
ischemia-induced brain damage. Crossing our CAG-SUMO 
mice with mice expressing Cre in non-neuronal brain cells 
will help to identify the postischemic SUMO-modified proteome
in these cells and thereby clarify this important aspect.
We have identified 91 protein candidates that exhibit a postischemic
upregulated SUMO3 conjugation state in cortex, a 
brain region relatively resistant to a short interruption of blood 
supply (Table I in the online-only Data Supplement, asterisks
). This high stringency list includes many known SUMO 
substrates, such as TIF1β, heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(hnRNPs), TFII-I, and GR.17,23–25 When we compared 
the in vivo data presented here with a previous in vitro study,13
we found that 34 of the 91 candidates (37%) were identified in 
both studies. Furthermore, we confidently confirmed 5 in vivo 
SUMO3 substrates regulated by ischemia (Figure 5). Taken 
together, these analyses confirm the validity of the approach 
and new SUMO mouse model and establish the credibility of 
our SUMO substrate list.
Our data revealed several potentially important processes 
modulated by SUMO3 conjugation that may play neuroprotective
roles during reperfusion. First, we provided evidence 
that the cross talk between ubiquitylation and SUMOylation 
was activated after ischemia. Our data suggested that ubiquitin
and SUMO3 are conjugated to different lysine residues 
in a subset of SUMO3 substrates (Figure 5A). This implies 
postischemic activation of the SUMO-dependent ubiquitin 
conjugation pathway that plays pivotal roles in DNA damage
repair.26 Second, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis analysis 
revealed that proteins involved in post-transcriptional RNA 
modification are highly enriched in postischemia FLAGSUMO3
pull-down samples (Figure IIIC in the online-only 
Data Supplement). These included various isoforms of 
hnRNPs, a group of proteins that are involved in mRNAs 
splicing, stability, and translation.27 Because transcription and 
translation processes are dramatically impaired during and 
after ischemia, the post-transcriptional regulation of existing 
mRNAs is crucial to determine the expression pattern in this 
pathological state. Therefore, we speculate that SUMOylation 
of such a large fraction of hnRNPs after ischemia is likely 
related to the decision of cell survival or death.
Finally, the GR was identified as a SUMO3 target in postischemia
samples at a level of SUMO conjugation so pronounced
that the SUMOylated GR could be identified in 
homogenate even without enrichment (Figure 5D). Stressinduced
GR activation is associated with increased cell damage
triggered by transient cerebral ischemia.28 GR function is 
modulated by post-translational modifications, and phosphorylation
activates GR SUMOylation, resulting in repression 
of transcriptional activity.24 Taken together, these observations
suggest that the massive postischemic activation of GR 
SUMOylation is a protective stress response.
In summary, we report here the first proteomics analysis of 
SUMO3-conjugated proteins in tissue samples from a pathological
state, brain ischemia. We identified several pathways 
modulated by SUMOylation in the postischemic brain that 
warrant future investigations because they could be therapeutic
targets for neuroprotection in brain ischemia. Because a 
large portion of identified SUMO targets were nuclear proteins
involved in gene expression, genome stability, and RNA 
processing, we expect activation of SUMOylation to have 
long-lasting effects on postischemic neurons. The new conditional
SUMO transgenic mouse and the highly stringent 
purification approach developed in the present study provide 
an invaluable platform for in-depth analysis of the SUMO-
modified proteome in vivo in physiological or pathological 
states under investigation.
Acknowledgments
We thank Laura Dubois and Meredith Turner for their excellent technical
support, Dr Christoph Harms and Dr Matthew Foster for helpful 
discussions, and Kathy Gage for excellent editorial contribution.
Sources of Funding
This study was supported by a DREAM Innovation Grant from the 
Department of Anesthesiology and an American Heart Association 
Scientist Development Grant 12SDG11950003 to Dr Yang and 
National Institutes of Health grants HL095552 and NS081299 to Dr 
Paschen.
Disclosures
None.
References
1. Flotho A, Melchior F. Sumoylation: a regulatory protein modification in 
health and disease. Annu Rev Biochem. 2013;82:357–385.
2. Hay RT. SUMO: a history of modification. Mol Cell. 2005;18:1–12.
3. Hickey CM, Wilson NR, Hochstrasser M. Function and regulation of 
SUMO proteases. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2012;13:755–766.
4. Ayaydin F, Dasso M. Distinct in vivo dynamics of vertebrate SUMO 
paralogues. Mol Biol Cell. 2004;15:5208–5218.
5. Johnson ES. Protein modification by SUMO. Annu Rev Biochem. 
2004;73:355–382.
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
1122 Stroke April 2014
6. Gareau JR, Lima CD. The SUMO pathway: emerging mechanisms that 
shape specificity, conjugation and recognition. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 
2010;11:861–871.
7. Kho C, Lee A, Jeong D, Oh JG, Chaanine AH, Kizana E, et al. 
SUMO1-dependent modulation of SERCA2a in heart failure. Nature. 
2011;477:601–605.
8. Yang W, Sheng H, Warner DS, Paschen W. Transient global cerebral 
ischemia induces a massive increase in protein sumoylation. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab. 2008;28:269–279.
9. Yang W, Sheng H, Warner DS, Paschen W. Transient focal cerebral ischemia
induces a dramatic activation of small ubiquitin-like modifier conjugation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2008;28:892–896.
10. Tirard M, Hsiao HH, Nikolov M, Urlaub H, Melchior F, Brose N. In 
vivo localization and identification of SUMOylated proteins in the 
brain of His6-HA-SUMO1 knock-in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2012;109:21122–21127.
11. de Felipe P, Luke GA, Hughes LE, Gani D, Halpin C, Ryan MD. E unum 
pluribus: multiple proteins from a self-processing polyprotein. Trends 
Biotechnol. 2006;24:68–75.
12. Gorski JA, Talley T, Qiu M, Puelles L, Rubenstein JL, Jones KR. Cortical 
excitatory neurons and glia, but not GABAergic neurons, are produced in 
the Emx1-expressing lineage. J Neurosci. 2002;22:6309–6314.
13. Yang W, Thompson JW, Wang Z, Wang L, Sheng H, Foster MW, et al. 
Analysis of oxygen/glucose-deprivation-induced changes in SUMO3 
conjugation using SILAC-based quantitative proteomics. J Proteome 
Res. 2012;11:1108–1117.
14. Sheng H, Laskowitz DT, Mackensen GB, Kudo M, Pearlstein RD, 
Warner DS. Apolipoprotein E deficiency worsens outcome from global 
cerebral ischemia in the mouse. Stroke. 1999;30:1118–1124.
15. Matic I, van Hagen M, Schimmel J, Macek B, Ogg SC, Tatham MH, 
et al. In vivo identification of human small ubiquitin-like modifier 
polymerization sites by high accuracy mass spectrometry and an in vitro 
to in vivo strategy. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008;7:132–144.
16. Schimmel J, Larsen KM, Matic I, van Hagen M, Cox J, Mann M, et al. 
The ubiquitin-proteasome system is a key component of the SUMO-2/3 
cycle. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2008;7:2107–2122.
17. Becker J, Barysch SV, Karaca S, Dittner C, Hsiao HH, Berriel Diaz M, 
et al. Detecting endogenous SUMO targets in mammalian cells and tissues. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2013;20:525–531.
18. Bruderer R, Tatham MH, Plechanovova A, Matic I, Garg AK, Hay RT. 
Purification and identification of endogenous polySUMO conjugates. 
EMBO Rep. 2011;12:142–148.
19. Datwyler AL, Lättig-Tünnemann G, Yang W, Paschen W, Lee SL, 
Dirnagl U, et al. SUMO2/3 conjugation is an endogenous neuroprotective
mechanism. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011;31:2152–2159.
20. Lee YJ, Mou Y, Maric D, Klimanis D, Auh S, Hallenbeck JM. Elevated 
global SUMOylation in Ubc9 transgenic mice protects their brains 
against focal cerebral ischemic damage. PLoS One. 2011;6:e25852.
21. Wang L, Rodriguiz RM, Wetsel WC, Sheng H, Zhao S, Liu X, et al. 
Neuron-specific SUMO1-3 knockdown in mice impairs episodic and 
fear memories. J Psychiatr Neurosci. doi: 10.1503/jpn.130148. In press.
22. Lee JH, Park SM, Kim OS, Lee CS, Woo JH, Park SJ, et al. Differential 
SUMOylation of LXRalpha and LXRbeta mediates transrepression of 
STAT1 inflammatory signaling in IFN-gamma-stimulated brain astrocytes. Mol Cell. 2009;35:806–817.
23. Li T, Evdokimov E, Shen RF, Chao CC, Tekle E, Wang T, et al. 
Sumoylation of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, zinc finger 
proteins, and nuclear pore complex proteins: a proteomic analysis. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004;101:8551–8556.
24. Davies L, Karthikeyan N, Lynch JT, Sial EA, Gkourtsa A, Demonacos C, 
et al. Cross talk of signaling pathways in the regulation of the glucocorticoid
receptor function. Mol Endocrinol. 2008;22:1331–1344.
25. Vassileva MT, Matunis MJ. SUMO modification of heterogeneous 
nuclear ribonucleoproteins. Mol Cell Biol. 2004;24:3623–3632.
26. Prudden J, Pebernard S, Raffa G, Slavin DA, Perry JJ, Tainer JA, 
et al. SUMO-targeted ubiquitin ligases in genome stability. EMBO J. 
2007;26:4089–4101.
27. Dreyfuss G, Kim VN, Kataoka N. Messenger-RNA-binding proteins and 
the messages they carry. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2002;3:195–205.
28. Balkaya M, Prinz V, Custodis F, Gertz K, Kronenberg G, Kroeber J, et al. 
Stress worsens endothelial function and ischemic stroke via glucocorticoids. Stroke. 2011;42:3258–3264.
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-462598339)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/45/4/1115
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2014/02/25/STROKEAHA.113.004315.DC1.html
[Link]
http://www.ahajournals.org/site/rights/
[Link]
http://www.lww.com/reprints
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Liu, M. Arthur Moseley and Wulf Paschen
Wei Yang, Huaxin Sheng, J. Will Thompson, Shengli Zhao, Liangli Wang, Pei Miao, Xiaozhi
Proteins/Pathways
Novel Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier Transgenic Mice: Putative Protective 
Modified Proteome Regulated by Brain Ischemia in - Small Ubiquitin-Like Modifier 3
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628 
Copyright © 2014 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231 Stroke 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.113.004315
2014;45:1115-1122; originally published online February 25, 2014; Stroke. 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/45/4/1115
World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2014/02/25/STROKEAHA.113.004315.DC1.html
Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
is online at: Stroke  Information about subscribing to Subscriptions:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
 Information about reprints can be found online at: Reprints:
document. Permissions and Rights Question and Answer process is available in the
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Stroke in
 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published Permissions:
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(8.0.0.2542,111226448 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
	   1	  
SUPPLEMENTAL	  MATERIAL	  
Supplemental	  Methods	  
Generation	  and	  breeding	  of	  transgenic	  mice .	  	  Animal	  experiments	  were 	  approved	  by	  the	  
Duke	  University	  Animal	  Care	  and	  Use	  Committee .	  The	  fragment	  for	  generating	  the	  CAG -­‐
SUMO	  transgenic	  mice	  contained	  a	   CMV	  early	  en hancer/chicken	  β-­‐ actin	  promoter	   (CAG)	  
promoter	   with	   loxP	   sites	   flanking	   both	   the	   GFP	   coding	   sequence	   and	   a	   transcription-­‐
al/translational	   STOP	  cassette	   (STOP),	  followed	  by	  tagged	  SUMO1 -­‐ 3	   and	   mCherry	  coding	  
sequences,	   and	   a	   polyadenylation	   signal	   (pA).	   (Fig.	   1A).	   	   Three	   different	   2A	   peptide	   s e-­‐
quences	  were	  used	  to	  link	  SUMOs	  and	  mCherry. 	   The	  transgene	  fragment	   was	  purified	  and	  
injected	  into	  fertilized	  oocytes	  of	  FVB/N	  mice	  at	   the	   Duke	  Transgenic	  Mouse	  Facility .	  After	  
founders	  were	  identified	  by	  genotyping	   and	   their	  GFP	  express ion	  patterns	  were	  characte r-­‐
ized,	  mouse	  l ine	  10	  was	  chosen	  for	  the	  present	  study.	  CAG -­‐ SUMO	  mouse	  line	  10	  was	  then	  
backcrossed	  to	  C57BL/6	  mice	  for	  3 	  generations.	  	  Emx1Cre/Cre	  mice	  (JAX	  stock	  # 005628;	   The	  
Jackson	   Laboratory,	   Bar	  Harbor,	  ME )	   and	   β-­‐ Actin-­‐ Cre	  mice	   (JAX	  stock	  # 003376;	   The	   Jack-­‐
son	   Laboratory,	   Bar	  Harbor,	  ME )	  were	  used	  to	  crossbreed	  with	  CAG -­‐ SUMO	  mice	  to	  gene r-­‐
ate	   double	   transgenic	   mice.	   For	   genoty ping,	   we	   used	   the	   following	   primers: 	   5’-­‐
GATACTCGAGCTATGTCGGAAGAGAAGCCCAA-­‐ 3’	   (forward)	   a nd	   5'-­‐
ACCTTGAAGCGCATGAACTC-­‐ 3'	   (reverse)	   for	   the	   SUMO	   transgene,	   and 	   5'-­‐
GGTCGATGCAACGAGTGATGAGG-­‐ 3'	   (forward)	   and	   5'-­‐ 	   GCCAGATTACGTATATCCTGGCAG-­‐ 3'	  
(reverse)	  for	  the	  Cre	  transgene.	   	  
Animal	   surgery.	   Transient	  global	  cerebral	  ischemia	  was	  performed	  in	  male	  mice	   as	  de-­‐
scribed	  previously	   with	   minor	  modifications.1	   Briefly,	  male	   mice	  (22-­‐ 28	   g)	  were	  anesth e-­‐
tized	  with	  5%	  isoflurane	  in	  40%	  oxygen	  balanced	  with	  nitrogen.	  Then ,	  mice	   were	  orally	  
intubated	  and	  mechanically	  ventilated	  with	  1.8%	  isoflurane. 	  The	  right	  femoral	   artery	  and	  
the	  right	  internal	  jugular	  vein	  were	  cannulated	  (PE	  10,	  Becton -­‐ Dickson,	  Sparks,	  MD)	  for	  
monitoring	  arterial	  blood	  pressure	  and	  withdrawing	  blood,	  respectively. 	  Cerebral	  ischemia	  
was	  induced	  by	  a	  combination	  of	  10	  min utes	   of	   bilateral	  common	  caro tid	  artery	  occlusion ,	  
and	  hypotension	   to	   a	  mean	  arterial	  blood	  pressure	   of	   30 mm	  Hg	   induced	   by	  blood	  wit h-­‐
drawal.	  During	  the	  surgical	  procedure,	  the	  rectal	  temperature	  was	  maintained	  at	  37°C	  u s-­‐
ing	  a	  heating	  pad.	   	  After	  10 minutes	   of	  ischemia,	  the	  carotid	  arteries	  were	  deoccluded	  and	  
withdrawn	  blood	  was	  reinfused.	  Sham -­‐ operated	  mice	  underwent	  the	  same	  procedures	  e x-­‐
cept	  for	  carotid	  artery	  occlusion	  and	  blood	  withdrawal.	   At	  the	  end	  of	  the	  experiments,	  an i-­‐
mals	  were	   deeply	  anesthetized	  with	  5%	  isoflurane,	   and	  decapitated.	   	  The	  hippocampus	  and	  
cortex	  were	  quickly	   isolated	   on	  ice,	  and	  th e	  samples	  were	  snap	  frozen	  in	  liquid	  nitrogen	  
and	  stored	  at	   -­‐ 80°C.	  
Western	  blot	  and	  immunohistochemistry. 	  Western	  blot	  analysis	  was	  perf ormed	  using	  a	  
standard	   protocol.2	   For	   quantification	   of	   SUMO	   conjugates,	   the	   higher -­‐ molecular-­‐ weight	  
area	  of	  each	  lane ,	  as	  indicated	  in	  the	  respective	  figures ,	  was	  measured	  and	  normalized	  to	   β-­‐
actin	  using	  ImageJ	  software	  (NIH ,	  Bethesda,	  MD ).	  Immunohistochemistry	  was	  pe rformed	  
as	  described	  previously .3	   In	  short,	  brains	  were	  fixed	  with	  4%	  paraformaldehyde	  and	  then	  
paraffin-­‐ embedded.	  After	  deparaffinization	  and	  antigen	  retrieval,	  sections	  were	  incubated	  
with	  the	  primary	  antibodies	  at	  4 °C	  overnight.	  After	  extensive	  washing,	  the	  sections	  were	  
incubated	  with	   fluorescent	   secondary	  antibodies	  for	  1 	   hour	  at	  room	  temperature.	  The	   fol-­‐
(8.0.0.2542.2071438341 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
	   2	  
lowing	   antibodies	   were	   used	  for	  Western	  blot ting	  and	   immunohistochemistry:	  SUMO2/3	  
and	  HA.11	  (16B12)	  from	   Covance	   (Princeton,	  NJ);	  SUMO1	  (a	  g ift	  from	  Dr.	  Matunis );	  FLAG	  
M2	  and	   β-­‐ actin	   (AC-­‐ 15)	   from	   Sigma	   (St.	   Louis,	   MO);	  MAP2	   (PA1-­‐ 4742)	  from	  Thermo 	   Scien-­‐
tific	  (Rockford,	   IL);	  mCherry	  (1C51)	  from	  Novus 	   Biologicals	  (Littleton,	  CO) ;	  HA	  (#3724),	  
His	   (#2366),	   GADPH	   (#5174),	   H2AX	   (#2595),	   ubiquitin	   ( #3936),	   poly	   u biquitin	   K48	  
(#8081),	   TRIM33	  (#8972),	  CTIP2	  ( #12120),	   TIF-­‐ 1β	  (#4123),	  GR	  ( #3660),	   TFII-­‐ I	  (#4562),	  
and	  GST	  ( #2625)	  from	  Cell	  Signaling	  (Danvers,	  MA).	  
Microscopy.	   Overview	  images	  of	  brain	  sections	  were	  generated	  on	  an	  Axio	  Observer	  Z1	  
motorized	  fluorescence	  microscope	  (Carl	  Zeiss	   MicroImaging).	  Confocal	  images	  were	  ca p-­‐
tured	  on	  a	  Leica	  SP5	  confocal	  microscope	  (Leica	  Microsystems).	   	  
Subcellular	  fractionation.	   Frozen	  brain	  tissue	  samples	  were	  homogenized	  by	  30	   strokes	  
with	  pestle	  B	  in	  a	   Dounce	   homogenizer	   in	   hypotonic	  buffer	  (10	  mM	  HE PES	  pH	  7.9,	  1.5	  mM	  
NaCl2,	  10	  mM	  KCl,	  0.5	  mM	  EDTA,	  0.5	  mM	  DTT)	  supplemented	  with	  0.5%	  NP40,	  1	  mM	  PMSF,	  
20	  mM	   N-­‐ ethylmaleimide	   (NEM),	   and	  1X	  protease	  inhibitor	  cocktail	  (Sigma ,	   St.	   Louis,	   MO).	  
Homogenates	  were	  filtered	  through	  4 -­‐ ply	  sponges	  to	  remove	  cell	  debris,	  and	  were	   then	  
centrifuged	  to	  pellet	  nuclei.	  Supernatants	  constituted	  the	  cytosolic	  fractions.	  	  Nuclear	  pe l-­‐
lets	  were	  washed	  3	  times	  with	  hypotonic	  buffer,	  and	   were	  then	  resuspended	  in	  lysis	  buffer	  
(50	  mM	  Tris	  pH	  7.5,	  250	  mM	  NaCl,	  0.5% 	   sodium	  deoxycholate,	  1	  mM	  EDTA, 	   0.5%	  Triton	  X	  
100)	   supplemented	  with	   1%	  SDS,	   10	  mM	  NEM,	  and	  1X	   protease	  inhibitor	   cocktail.	  After	  
brief	  sonication	  and	  centrifugation,	  supernatants	  were	  collected	  as	  nuclear	  fractions.	  	  	  	   	  
FLAG	   pulldown	   samples 	   for	   proteomic	   analysis .	   Brain	   tissue	   samples 	   were	   collected	  
from	  3	  experimental	  groups	  (control,	  TG	  Sham,	  and	  TG	  Ischemia).	  For	  each	  group,	  samples	  
were	  prepared	  in	  triplicate.	  To	  minimize	  the	  variation	  in	  biological	  replicates,	  affinity	  pur i-­‐
fication	   was	   performed	   under	   the	   identical	   conditions	   for	   all	   triplicate	   samples	   in	   the	   3	  
groups.	  For	  each	  sample,	  cortices	  from	  4	  mouse	  brains	  were	  pooled	  and	  used	  to	  prepare	  
nuclear	  fractions	  as	  described	  above.	  Nuclear	  pellets	  from	  all	  9	  samples	  were	  resuspended	  
in	  1.4	  mL	  lysis	  buffer	  containing	  1%	  SDS	  to	  inac tivate	  the	  deconjugating	  enzymes	  and	  di s-­‐
rupt	  protein-­‐ protein	  interactions.	   	  
Protein	  concentration	  wa s	  measured	  by	  BCA	  assay	  ( Thermo	  Scientific,	   Rockford,	   IL).	  For	  
each	  sample,	  5	  mg	  of	  nuclear	  proteins	  were	  diluted	  1:10	  with	  lysis	  buffer	  without	  SDS.	  A f-­‐
ter	   centrifugation	   and	   filtration	   through	   0.45 -­‐ µm	   PVDF	   syringe	   filters	   (Fisher	   Scientific ,	  
Pittsburgh,	  PA),	  the	  clarified	  nuclear	  fractions	  were	  incubated	  with	  100	   µL	  mouse	  IgG	  ag a-­‐
rose	  beads	  (Sigma ,	  St.	   Louis,	   MO)	  for	  2	  hours	  at	  4 °C	   to	  reduce	  non -­‐ specific	  binding.	  The	  
cleared	  supernatants	  were	  then	  inc ubated	  with	  60	   µL	  anti-­‐ FLAG	  M2	  agarose	  beads	  (Sigma ,	  
St.	   Louis,	   MO)	  on	  a	  rotary	  mixer	  at	  4 °C	   for	  18	  hours.	  Beads	  were	  washed	  6	  times	  with	  1	  mL	  
lysis	  buffer	  co ntaining	  0.1%	  SDS.	  Proteins	  were	  then	  eluted	  twice	  with	  250	   µL	  of	  TBS	  buffer	  
(50	  mM	  Tris	  pH	  8.0,	  2 50	  mM	  NaCl)	  plus	  200	   µg/mL	  3XFLAG	  peptide	  for	  1	  hour	  at	  4 °C.	  Fi-­‐
nally,	  beads	  were	  washed	  with	  200	   µL	  TBS	  buffer,	  and	  this	  wash	  was	  co mbined	  with	  the	  
two	  elutes	  as	  final	  FLAG	  pulldown	  samples.	   	  
LC-­‐ MS/MS	   and	  data	  analysis. 	   Proteins	  from	  the	  9	  FLAG	  pulldown	  sa mples	  were	  precip i-­‐
tated	  with	  4	  volumes	  of	  cold	  acetone	  and	  resuspended	  in	  50	   µL	  SDS	  sample	  buffer.	  Proteins	  
were	  separated	  on	  a	  NuPAGE	  4% -­‐ 12%	  Bis/Tris	  gel	  ( Life	   Technologies,	   Grand	  Island,	  NY ),	  
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-343110731)
	   3	  
and	  stained	  with	   colloidal	  Coomassie	  ( Life	   Technologies,	   Grand	   Island,	  NY).	  Each	  lane	  was	  
then	  dissected	  into	  14	  slices.	   In-­‐ gel	   tryptic	   digestion	  was	  performed	  according	  to	  a	  stan d-­‐
ard	   protocol,	   (http://www.genome.duke.edu/cores/proteomics/sample-­‐ preparation/),	  
adapted	   from	   a	   reference	   protocol .4	   Briefly,	   gel	   pieces	   were	   repeatedly	   shrunken	   and	  
swelled	  in	  MeCN	  and	  50	  mM	  ammonium	  bicarbonate	  (AmBic).	  	  Proteins	   were	  then	  reduced	  
using	  a	  solution	  of	  10	  mM	  dithiothreitol,	  alkylate d	  with	  20	  mM	  i odoacetamide,	  and	   digest-­‐
ed	  in-­‐ gel	  with	  approximat ely	  200	  ng	  trypsin	  per	  band	  at	   37°C	  overnight.	  	  Peptides	  were 	   ex-­‐
tracted	   under	  acidic	  conditions,	   dried,	   and	   resuspended	  in	  12	   µL	  0.2/2/97.8	  v/v/v	   formic	  
acid/MeCN/water	  for	  analysis.	  	   	  
The	  in-­‐ gel	  digested	  peptide	  samples	  from	  each	  slice 	  were	  analyzed	   by	  LC-­‐ MS/MS	  as	  follows. 	  
Five	   µL	  of	  each	  sample 	   were	   injected	  onto	  a	  75 	   µm	  x	  250	  mm	  BEH	  C18	  column	  (Waters ,	  
Milford,	  MA)	  and	  separated	  using	  a	  gradient	  of	  5 %	   to	  40%	  acetonitrile	  with	  0.1%	  formic	  
acid,	  with	  a	  flow	  rate	  of	  0.4	  µ L/min,	  in	  30	  minutes	  on	  a	  nanoAcquity	  liquid	  chromatograph	  
(Waters).	  	  Electrospray	  ionization	  was	  used	  to	  introduce	  the	  sample	  in	  real -­‐ time	  to	  a	  Q -­‐ Tof	  
Synapt	  G2	  mass	  spectrometer	   in	  sensitivity	  mode,	  resolution	  17,000	   (Waters,	  Milford,	  MA).	  	  
Data	   were	   collected	   in	   data -­‐ dependent	   acquisition	   ( DDA)	   mode	   with	   0. 6-­‐ second	   survey	  
scans	  and	   three	  0.6-­‐ second	  MS/MS	  scans	  in	  CID	  mode	  of	  the	  top	   3	  most	  abundant	  multiply -­‐
charged	  precursor	  ions.	  	  Raw	  data	   were	   processed	  in	  Mascot	  Distiller	  (v2.3)	  and	  searched	  
in	  Mascot	  v2.2	  (M atrix	   Science)	  against	  the	   Swissprot	  2013x	   database	  with	   mus	  musculus	  
taxonomy	   (16,611	   entries).	  	  Search	  tolerances	  in	  Mascot	  were	   10	   ppm	  on	  precursor	  and	  
0.04	   Da	   product	   ion	   tolerance,	   requiring	   full	   trypsin	   specificity	   and	   allowing	   at	   most	   2	  
missed	  cleavages.	   	   Carbamidomethylation	  (C)	  was	  included	  as	  a	  fixed	  modification,	  and	  d e-­‐
amidation	  (N	  and	  Q)	  and	  oxidation	  (M)	  were	  allowed	  as	  variable	  modifications.	  	  Scaffold	  
(v4.0.3,	  Proteome	  Software	  Inc.)	  was	  used	  to	  validate	  MS/MS -­‐ based	  peptide	  and	  protein	  
identifications.	   Protein	  and	  peptide 	   identifications	  were	   validated	  using	  the 	   Peptide	  Proph-­‐
et	  algorithm	   with	  decoy	  database	  validation,	  and	  the	  final	  dataset	  was	  curated	  to	  1%	  false -­‐
positive	  rate	  (FDR)	  at	  the	  protein	  level	  and	   0.07%	  FDR	  at	  the	  spectrum	  level .5,6	  MS/MS	  data	  
and	  all	  ide ntifications	  can	  be	  downloaded	  directly	  by	  accessing	  the	  Scaffold	  file	   at	  the	  fo l-­‐
lowing	   link:	  
https://discovery.genome.duke.edu/express/resources/3320/3320_lanewalking_spmouse
_041213_withGOannotations.sf3.	  
The	  LC-­‐ MS/MS	  database	  search	  identifications	  were	  used	  to	  define	  a	  list	  of	  putative	   SUMO3	  
candidates	   and	   SUMO3	   candidates	   upregulated	   by 	   ischemia/reperfusion	   (Supplemental	  
Table	  I)	   according	  to	  the	  following	  selection	  criteria .	  	   The	  FDR	  was	  set	  to	  1%	  at	  the	  protein	  
level	  and	  0.1%	  at	  the	  peptide	  level.	  All	  keratins	  and	   immunoglobulins	  were	  regarded	  as	  
contaminants	  and	  excluded	  from	  the	  list.	  	   Proteins	  that	   were	  detected	  in	   at	  least	  2	  control 	  
samples	  were	  exc luded	  as	  non -­‐ specific	  binding	  proteins .	  	  Proteins	  were	  required	  to	  be	  d e-­‐
tected	  in	   2	  or	  more	  FLAG-­‐ SUMO3	  pulldown	  samples 	  (TG	  Sham	  and 	  TG	  Ischemia)	  in	  order	  to	  
qualify	  as	   putative	  SUMO3	   substrates	  (Supplemental	  Table	  I).	  	  Finally,	  those	  proteins	  that	  
were	  only	  identified	  in	  the	  ischemia	  samples,	  or	  showed	  more	  than	  2	  times	  the	   spectral	  
count	  in	  ischemia	  vs	  sham	  group,	  were	  defined	  as	  the 	   SUMO3	  candidates	  with	  upre gulated	  
SUMO3	  conjugation	  state 	   following	  ischemia/reperfusion	   (Supplemental	  Table	  I,	  marked	  
with	  *).	  	   	  
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1532794696)
	   4	  
Bioinformatics	   analysis.	   	   The	   PANTHER	   (Protein	   Analysis	   Through	   Evolutionary	   Rel a-­‐
tionships;	   http://www.pantherdb.org/)	  program	  was	  used	  to	  categorize	  proteins	  accor d-­‐
ing	   to	  cellular	  component	  and 	   molecular	  function	  based	  on	   the	   Gene	  Ontology	  	  (GO)	  dat a-­‐
base.	   	   	   IPA	   (Ingenuity	   Pathway	   Analysis;	   www.ingenuity.com)	   core	   analyses	   were	   pe r-­‐
formed	  to	  identify	  biological	  functions	   enriched	  in	  our	  protein	  list.	  	   	  
Targeted	  extracted	  ion	  chromatogram	  (XIC)	  quantitation	  was	  performed	  from	  LC -­‐ MS/MS	  
data	  using	  Skyline	  v2.1	  ( http://skyline.gs.washington.edu/).	  	  The	  raw	  data	  analysis	  in	  Sk y-­‐
line	   has	   been	   made	   accessible	   for	   public	   download	   at	   the	   following	   link:	  
https://discovery.genome.duke.edu/express/resources/3320/3320_v2p1_ShamVIschemia
_2013-­‐ 10-­‐ 03_12-­‐ 23-­‐ 44.zip.	  	  Briefly,	  Mascot	  (v2.2)	  search	  results	  from	  the	  LC -­‐ MS/MS	  anal-­‐
yses	  were	  imported	  in	  Skyline	  to	  create	  a	  spectral	  library,	  and	  the	  best	   2	   peptides	  per	  pr o-­‐
tein	  were	  selected	  based	  on	  their	  intensity	  and	  S/N	  in	   the	  gel	  slices	  in	  which	  those	  proteins	  
were	  identified.	  	  MS1 -­‐ based	  quantitation	  for	  these	  peptides	  was	  th en	  performed	  across	  all	  
gel	  slices	   with	  the	  M,	  M+1,	  and	  M+2	  ions	  at	  12,000	  resolut ion.	  	  Finally,	  only	  the	  gel	  slices	  
that	  contained	  a	  detectable	  signal	  in	  one	  or	  m ore	  samples	  were	  retained,	  such	  that	  the	  final	  
quantitative	  analysis	  included	  5	  gel	  bands	  from	  each	  sample,	  encompassing	  the	  molecular	  
weight	  region	  between	  approximately	  65	  and	  205	  kDa. 	  
Statistical	  analysis.	   Quantitative	  Western	  blotting	  data	  are	  presente d	  as	  means	   ±	   SD	   (n	  =	  
3/group).	  Statistical	  significance	  between	  groups	  was	  evaluated	  with	   Student's	  t-­‐ test,	  and	   P	  
values	  <0.05	  were	  considered	  significant .	  	  
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
	   5	  
Supplemental	  Figure	  I.	  Analysis	  of	  SUMO ylation	  in	  the	  brain	   using	  CAG-­‐ SUMO/Emx1-­‐ Cre	  
mice.	  A,	  CAG-­‐ SUMO/Emx1-­‐ Cre	  mice	  were	  subjected	  to	  sham	  surgery	  (S)	  or	  10	  minutes	  
forebrain	  ischemia	  and	   1	  hour	  reperfusion	  (I).	  	  Whole	  cell	  lysates	  (WCL),	  cytoplasmic	  (Cy),	  
and	  nuclear	  (Nu)	  fractions	  were	  prepared	  from	  cortical	  tissues	  and	  analyzed	  by	  Western	  
blotting	  with	  the	  indicated	  antibodies.	  GADPH	  and	  H2AX	  were	  used	  as	  cytoplasmic	  and	  n u-­‐
clear	  markers,	  respectively. 	  B,	  CAG-­‐ SUMO/Emx1-­‐ Cre	  mice	  were	  subjected	  to	  sham	  surgery	  
(S)	  or	  10	  minutes	   forebrain	  ischemia	  and	   1	  hour	  reperfusion	  (I).	  Emx1 Cre/+	  	   mice	  without	  
surgery	  were	  used	  as	  control	  (C).	  Whole	  cell	  lysates	  were	  prepared	  from	  the	  cortical	  ti s-­‐
sues	  and	  used	  for	  HA	  pulldown.	   Enrichment	  of	  free	  HA -­‐ SUMO2	  and	  its	  conjugates	  in	  the	  
eluates	  was	  effective. 	  C-­‐ D,	  CAG-­‐ SUMO/Emx1-­‐ Cre	  mice	  were	  subjected	  to 	  sham	  surgery	  (S)	  
or	  10	  minutes	   forebrain	  ischemia	  and	   1	  hour	  reperfusion	  (I).	  	   C,	  Whole	  cell	  lysates	  (WCL),	  
and	  cytoplasmic	  (Cy)	  and	  nuclear	  (Nu)	  fractions	  were	  prepared	  from	  the	  cortical	  tissues	  
and	  analyzed	  by	  SDS -­‐ PAGE	  with	  colloidal	  Coomassie	  staining .	  D,	  Nuclear	  fractions	  from	  the	  
cortical	  tissues	  (Sham	  and	  Ischemia)	  were	  used	  for	  FLAG	  pulldown.	  Input	  (In),	  flow -­‐
through	  (FT),	  and	  eluates	  (E)	  were	  analyzed	  by	  Western	  blotting	  with	  the	  indicated	  ant i-­‐
bodies.	  WB,	  Western	  blot. 	  	  
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
	   6	  
Supplemental	  Figure	  II.	  The	  large-­‐ scale	  proteomics	  analysis	  of	   FLAG-­‐ SUMO3-­‐ conjugated	  
proteins	  in	  post -­‐ ischemic	  mouse	  brains.	  	   A,	  Enriched	  FLAG-­‐ SUMO3	  conjugates	  prepared	  for	  
the	  large-­‐ scale	  proteomic	  analysis	  were	  verified.	  Western	  blot	  analysis	  was	  used	  to	  eval u-­‐
ate	  all	  inputs	  and	  el uates	  of	  3	  samples	  from	  each	  of	  3	  experimental	  groups	  (control,	  TG	  
Sham,	  and	  TG	  Ischemia).	  	  The	  nuclear	  marker	   H2AX	  indicated	  that	   equal	  amounts	  of	  pro-­‐
teins	  were	  used	  for	  FLAG	  pulldown.	   B,	  All	  9	  FLAG	  pulldown	  samples	  were	  concentrated	  
and	  resolved	  on	  an	  SD S-­‐ PAGE	  gel	  and	  stained	  with	  colloidal	  Coomassie.	  Each	  gel	  lane	  was	  
cut	  into	  14	  slices	  for	  proteomic	  analysis.	   C,	  Nuclear	  accumulation	  of	  ubiquitinated	  proteins	  
after	  ischemia	  revealed	  by	  the	  large -­‐ scale	  SUMO	  proteomics	  analysis	  was	   confirmed	  by	  
Western	  blotting.	  CAG-­‐ SUMO/Emx1-­‐ Cre	  mice	  were	  subjected	  to	  sham	  surgery	  (S)	  or	  10	  
minutes	  forebrain	  ischemia	  and	   1	  hour	  reperfusion	  (I).	  Whole	  cell	  lysates	  (WCL),	  and	  cyt o-­‐
plasmic	  (Cy)	  and	  nuclear	  (Nu)	  fractions	  were	  prepared	  from	  cortical	  tissues	  and	  analyzed	  
by	  Western	  blotting	  with	  ubiquitin	  and	  ubiquitin	  K48	  antibodies.	  GADPH	  and	  H2AX	  were	  
used	  as	  cytoplasmic	  and 	  nuclear	  markers,	  respectively.	   Ub,	  ubiquitin;	  WB,	  Western	  blot. 	   	  
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.874663443)
	   7	  
	  
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
	   8	  
Supplemental	  Figure	   III.	   IPA	  core	  analysis	  of	   the	  91	  putative	  SUMO3	  substrates	  with	  u p-­‐
regulated	  SUMO3	  conjugation	  state	  after	  ischemia.	   A-­‐ B,	   The	  significantly	  enriched	  categ o-­‐
ries	  of	  Diseases	  and	  Disorders	   (A)	   and	  Molecular	  and	  Cellular	  Functions	   (B)	   identified	  by	  
IPA	  core	  analysis	   are	  shown.	  The	  y -­‐ axis	  indicates	  the	  significance	  score	   with	  a	  threshold	  set 	  
at	  0.001	  (Fisher’s	  exact	  test,	  orange	  line). 	   C,	   The	  graph	  shows	  the	  network	  with	  the	  highest	  
score	  (IPA	  score	  =	  72). 	  
	  
Supplemental	  References	  
	  
1.	   Yang	  W,	  Sheng	  H,	  Warner	  DS,	  Paschen	  W.	  Transient	  global	  cerebral	  ischemia	  indu c-­‐
es	  a	  massive	  increase	  in	  prote in	  sumoylation.	   J	  Cereb	  Blood	  Flow	  Metab .	  2008;28:269-­‐ 279.	  
2.	   Yang	  W,	  Thompson	  JW,	  Wang	  Z,	  Wang	  L,	  Sheng	  H,	  Foster	  MW,	  et	  al.	  Analysis	  of	  ox y-­‐
gen/glucose-­‐ deprivation-­‐ induced	  changes	  in	  SUMO3	  conjugation	  using	  SILAC -­‐ based	  quan-­‐
titative	  proteomics.	   J	  Proteome	  R es.	  2011;11:1108-­‐ 1117.	  
3.	   Wang	  L,	  Ma	  Q,	  Yang	  W,	  Mackensen	  GB,	  Paschen	  W.	  Moderate	  hypothermia	  induces	  
marked	  increase	  in	  levels	  and	  nuclear	  accumulation	  of	  SUMO2/3 -­‐ conjugated	  proteins	  in	  
neurons.	  .	  J	  Neurochem.	  2012;123:349-­‐ 359.	  
4.	   Wilm	  M,	  Shevchenko	  A,	  Hout haeve	  T,	  Breit	  S,	  Schweigerer	  L,	  Fotsis	  T,	  et	  al.	  
Femtomole	  sequencing	  of	  proteins	  from	  polyacrylamide	  gels	  by	  nano -­‐ electrospray	  mass	  
spectrometry.	  Nature.	  1996;379:466-­‐ 469.	  
5.	   Keller	  A,	  Nesvizhskii	  AI,	  Kolker	  E,	  Aebersold	  R.	  Empirical	  statistical	  model	  to	   esti-­‐
mate	  the	  accuracy	  of	  peptide	  identifications	  made	  by	  ms/ms	  and	  database	  search.	   Anal	  
Chem.	  2002;74:5383-­‐ 5392.	  
6.	   Nesvizhskii	  AI,	  Keller	  A,	  Kolker	  E,	  Aebersold	  R.	  A	  statistical	  model	  for	  identifying	  
proteins	  by	  tandem	  mass	  spectrometry.	   Anal	  Chem.	  2003;75:4646-­‐ 4658.	  
	  
(8.0.0.2542,2064347408 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
