Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
journal homepage: www.mrijournal.com

Investigating microbleeding in cerebral ischemia rats using
susceptibility-weighted imaging
Yuwei Jiang a, b, Dazhi Yin a, b, Dongrong Xu b, Weiwei Men a, Rui Cao c, Bing Li d, Mingxia Fan a,⁎
a
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance, Key Laboratory of Brain Functional Genomics, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200062,
P.R. China
b
MRI Unit/Epidemiology Division, Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University & New York State Psychiatric Institute, NY, 10032, USA
c
Department of Rehabilitation, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China
d
Jinshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 201508, P.R. China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 29 October 2013
Revised 21 August 2014
Accepted 22 September 2014
Keywords:
Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI)
Cerebral ischemia
Cerebral microbleeding (CMB)
Rats
Blood–Brain barrier (BBB) opening

a b s t r a c t
Purpose: To detect the distribution and prevalence of cerebral microbleeding (CMB) in rats after acute
ischemic stroke using susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI).
Method: After middle cerebral artery occlusion, 3 T MR scanning was performed on 10 rats at 4 h and 24 h
after ischemia. T2-weighted images (T2WI), T2 maps and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) were
generated to estimate the severity of the brain ischemia. The SWI data were used to analyze location
counts, size and distribution of the CMBs. The brain injury was evaluated and determined by hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E) staining.
Result: At 24 h after onset of ischemia, 13 CMBs were found in seven of the nine ischemic rats, whereas only
two CMBs were found at 4 h after ischemia onset in one of the nine ischemic rats. All visible CMBs detected
in the SWI data were located in the ischemic lateral cortex, with diameters ranging from 0.2 to 0.5 mm. In
addition, we observed thickened vessels near the CMBs in the ischemic hemisphere in the SWI minimum
intensity projections that did not appear in the symmetrical regions on the contralateral hemisphere.
Histopathological results conﬁrmed the CMBs, and increased microvascular density was observed in the
ipsilateral hemisphere.
Conclusion: SWI technique allows the detection of CMBs and the accompanying thickened vessels in vivo in
a rat model of cerebral ischemia, which appear to be challenging tasks using T2WI and DTI. The results
reported in this work provide a better understanding of the pathophysiological mechanism of acute stroke.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Cerebral microbleeding (CMB) is the manifestation of sub-clinical
neurological impairment in patients with blood components in brain
tissues [1]. CMBs commonly occur among the elderly. They are
caused by brain microvascular disease and are closely correlated
with aging, blood pressure and heart disease. Recently, increases in
the measurements of clinical CMBs have been interpreted as chronic
small vessel ischemia and perivascular demyelination [1–3]. Stroke
is one of the most common causes of mortality and disability in
people throughout the world; ischemic stroke accounted for 86% of
all stroke. Cerebral ischemia causes dramatic changes in the
structure and function of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), such as
vascular brain edema, which leads to the opening of tight junctions
between capillary endothelial cells in the brain and a signiﬁcant
⁎ Corresponding author at: 3663 North Zhongshan Rd, Putuo District, Shanghai, P.R.
China. Tel.: +86 21 62233778; fax: +86 21 62233871.
E-mail address: mxfan@phy.ecnu.edu.cn (M. Fan).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mri.2014.09.002
0730-725X/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

increase in the permeability of the BBB. BBB damage associated with
the presence of small vessel disease leakage is present during
biphasic BBB openings. It is thought that CMBs are the result of
extravasations of blood components caused by abnormal BBB
permeability; a number of articles have described CMBs in acute
ischemic stroke patients [4,5].
To enable better prognosis and treatment of cerebral ischemia, it
is essential to more precisely predict the extent and severity of
histological brain damage caused by cerebral ischemia in individual
subjects. Therefore, the estimation of CMBs in experimental settings
would be an important contribution to a better assessment of acute
ischemic stroke. Experimental animal models of stroke have
provided evidence for biphasic BBB openings during periods of
cerebral ischemia from 1 to 4 hours and 24 to 48 hours [6]. However,
there has been little research on CMBs in acute stroke animal models
with BBB opening.
In recent years, with the rapid development of MRI, increasing
attention has been paid to small-vessel disease, and it has been
demonstrated that gradient-echo (GRE) T2*-weighted MRI is

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

particularly sensitive for the detection of CMBs [1,7,8]. T2* dephasing
occurs due to inhomogeneities in the local magnetic ﬁeld caused by
hemosiderin deposition [7]. CMBs in the human brain are described
as ellipsoid areas of signal abnormality with a diameter smaller than
5 mm and no peripheral edema, and they are caused by the rupture
of the microvasculature in the basal ganglia and subcortex [9].
However, CMBs in animal models, such as rats, are much smaller and
more difﬁcult to observe using the T2*-weighted GRE sequence. A
susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) is characterized within the
high-pass-ﬁltered phase images. The phase images can be transformed into a special phase mask, which can be multiplied to the
magnitude of the images to generate a kind of new SWI image and to
enhance the conspicuity of magnet-sensitive substances. This
contributes to an enhanced T2* effect of paramagnetic substances,
such as hemosiderin or deoxyhemoglobin. The enhanced T2*
dephasing showed as hypointensity caused by hemosiderin deposition contained in CMBs allows for the detection of more numerous
small microbleeds, which are more conspicuous than they are in
T2*-weighted sequences [10,11]. An MRI examination at different
time points provides a more informative and precise assessment of
brain injury without further impairment; another examination was
also performed after treatment. The objectives of the present study
were to (1) perform SWI in a rat model of acute ischemic stroke to
determine the distribution and prevalence of CMBs and (2) identify
the correlation between the presence and distribution of CMBs and
biphasic BBB opening.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Animal model
Sixteen healthy adult SD rats aged 8 to 12 weeks and weighing
250 to 300 g were used in this study. All rats were cage reared,
provided sufﬁcient food and drinking water and were housed under
light for 12 hours per day at room temperature (23 ± 1) °C.
According to the method described by Longa [12], a nylon
intraluminal suture was placed in the left cervical internal carotid
artery (ICA), the post cerebral artery (PCA) and the middle cerebral
artery (MCA) sequentially, and the suture was advanced into the
intracranial part of the artery to block the left MCA without reaching
the anterior cerebral artery (ACA). In this way, 10 out of 16 adult SD
rats were subjected to ischemic stroke in the left hemisphere of the
brain due to permanent MCA occlusion (MCAO), and the other 6
healthy rats were used for control experiment. A heat source was
used to ensure that the rectal and temporalis temperatures were
(37 ± 0.5) °C with a brain temperature of 30 ~ 33 °C. All of the
animal studies were performed according to a protocol approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of East China
Normal University.
2.2. Magnetic resonance imaging measurements
T2-weighted images (T2WI), T2 maps, diffusion-weighted
images (DWI) and SWI scans of the rat brain were collected using
a 3 T Siemens whole body scanner (MAGNETOM Trio, Erlangen,
Germany) at 4 h and 24 h after induction ischemia; these time
points are believed to correspond to BBB opening [6]. Each rat's head
was positioned inside a 5-cm-diameter, 5-cm-long dual-tuned, dualquadrature, birdcage radiofrequency mouse coil. The scanning
parameters were as follows: (1) to observe ischemic injury in the
brain, T2WI was performed with a T2 spin echo (SE) sequence, a
50 × 50 mm 2 ﬁeld of view (FOV), a spatial resolution of
0.2 × 0.2 × 1.0 mm 3, a repetition time/echo time (TR/TE) of 3330/
68 ms, a ﬂip angle of 120°, parallel imaging used integrated parallel
acquisition techniques with an acceleration factor of 2 (iPAT = 2),

103

and a total of 18 slices. The acquisition time (AT) was 5:21. (2) To
measure the development of tissue water/edema, T2 maps were
acquired using a T2 multi-echo sequence, an FOV of 50 × 50 mm 2, a
spatial resolution of 0.3 × 0.3 × 1.0 mm 3, a TR/TE of 3330/16, 32, 48,
64, 80, and 96 ms, a ﬂip angle of 180°, iPAT = 2, and a total of 15
slices. The AT was 6:04. (3) To detect changes in cerebral ischemia,
DWIs were acquired by an echo-planar pulse sequence with nine
orthogonal directions at different ‘b’ values (0, 1000 s/mm 2), a TR/TE
of 3300/99 ms, an FOV of 67 × 67 mm 2, a spatial resolution of
0.7 × 0.7 × 2.0 mm 3, iPAT = 2, and a total of 8 slices. The AT was
6:21. (4) To detect CMBs, SWI data (including SWI images, SWI
ﬁltered phase images, magnitude images and minimum intensity
projections) were acquired using a 3D-GRE sequence with an FOV
of 50 × 50 mm 2, a spatial resolution of 0.2 × 0.2 × 1.0 mm 3, TR/
TE = 32/20 ms, a ﬂip angle of 20°, iPAT = 2, and a total of 24 slices.
The AT was 8:55.
2.3. Image analysis
All MRI images were analyzed using SPIN (Signal Processing in
NMR, MRI Institute of Biomedical Research, Detroit). We used only
T2WI and DWI data for visual examination of the occurrence and
location of cerebral ischemia. According to the theory of the
measurement of T2 relaxation time, we used the multi-echo T2
map results to reconstruct T2 map images. On the reconstructed T2
maps, all of the T2 relaxation time was acquired from a single coronal
slice of the septal hippocampus (visually located at 6–7 mm from the
front tip of the frontal cortex, which based on the rat brain atlas)
[13]. The selected slice displayed the largest area of edema.
Measurement of the T2 relaxation time was performed in two
regions of interest (ROI) on this coronal slice: the ischemic ipsilateral
hemisphere and the contralateral hemisphere, excluding the
ventricles (Fig. 1A, B, C, D).
On the SWI and SWI-ﬁltered phase images, the CMBs were
numbered sequentially from the rostral-most slice to the caudalmost slice on all coronal slices over the entire brain of each rat. The
CMBs on the phase images appeared as small spherical regions of
hypointensity. Because of the volume averaging, the small CMBs
could not be ignored with 1-mm slice thickness. The locations of the
CMBs and the areas with T2 hyperintensity/reduced ADC were
observed on T2WI, ADC maps, SWI and anatomical drawings within
similar slices. Using minimum intensity projections (mIPs), the
CMBs were easily distinguished from a transverse section of a vessel.
Two observers independently evaluated the CMBs. The CMBs stated
in the results were agreed upon by the two observers.
2.4. Histopathological evaluation
All rats were anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate (0.33 ml/
100 g) and then perfused transcardially with 0.1 M phosphate buffer
saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in 0.1 M PBS
after MRI scanning. The brains were post-ﬁxed overnight in 4% PFA
and cryoprotected in 20% and 30% sucrose; then, 30-μm slices were
cut using a freezing stage microtome. The locations of the brain
specimens corresponded to the scanning direction of MRI slices.
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was used to validate the
results of the MRI scanning. The selected slices, which correspond to
the position of the MRI slices, were examined and recorded using
digital photomicrography (Olympus AH-3) under 100× and 200 ×
magniﬁcations. The edema and morphological changes in the entire
brain were recorded using a digital single-lens reﬂex camera (Canon
EOS 550D). The CMBs and cell nucleus of the H&E histological images
were measured at the regions corresponding to the ROIs of T2WI and
SWI data.

104

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

Fig. 1. The measurement of T2 relaxation time for rats. Measurement of the T2 relaxation time at the ROIs on the coronal slice: the ischemic contra- (A) and ipsilateral (B)
hemisphere at 4 h and the ischemic contra- (C) and ipsilateral (D) hemisphere at 24 h. (E) Comparison of the T2 relaxation times at different time points for the same ROI. The T2
relaxation time of the left (ischemia lateral) hemisphere rose quickly at 24 h compared with 4 h, while it had no signiﬁcant difference in the right (contralateral) hemisphere
between 4 h and 24 h. This ﬁnding provided evidence that there was a close correlation between the severity of the ischemia injury in ipsilateral areas and the time point
(**p b 0.01 vs. 4 h). (F) Comparison of the T2 relaxation time of the different ROIs at the same time point. The T2 relaxation time was longer in the areas of the left (ipsilateral)
hemisphere compared with the right (contralateral) hemisphere at 4 h as well as at 24 h, which indicated that the severity of the ischemic injury was related to the location of the
infarct (**p b 0.01 vs. contralateral).

2.5. Statistical data
Quantitative T2-values are presented as the mean ± S.D. For
comparison between the left and right hemispheres at the same time
point (4 h or 24 h) as well as for comparison in the same hemisphere
at different time points (4 h and 24 h), paired-sample T tests were
performed. A p-value b 0.05 was regarded as signiﬁcant. All
statistical tests were performed using SPSS 16.0.
3. Results
One of the 10 MCAO rats did not survive the MRI scanning;
therefore, 9 MCAO rats and 6 healthy rats were included in this
study. Visual inspections showed that intensities were found to be
equally homogeneous in T2WI, DWI/ADC map and SWI of the

healthy rats between left and right hemisphere (as shown in Fig. 2).
Furthermore, the mean T2-value of healthy rats between left
hemisphere (71.4 ± 5.07 ms) and right hemisphere (71.3 ±
4.38 ms, p = 0.885) had no statistical difference.
3.1. Brain ischemic injury investigated with T2WI combined with
T2-relaxometry and DWI
The T2 values from the ischemic and normal tissues for the ipsiand contralateral hemispheres at 4 h and 24 h are shown in Fig. 1E
and F. At 4 h after the induction of ischemia, the mean T2-value of
the ipsilateral hemisphere (89.9 ± 3.78 ms) was 18.98% ± 5.092%
higher than that of the contralateral hemisphere (75.5 ± 2.37 ms,
p b 0.001). However, DWI detected larger regions of higher
intensity, and accordingly, the ADC maps displayed lower

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

105

Fig. 2. T2WI, DWI/ADC and SWI images of the whole brain for a healthy rat. T2WI, DWI/ADC and SWI images showed the equally homogeneous intensities between left and right hemisphere.

hypointensity in the same ipsi-ischemic hemisphere (Fig. 3, DWI and
ADC images). At 24 h, all ischemic rats showed increased T2
hyperintensity in the ipsilateral hemisphere, which was 59.87% ±
5.118% higher than that in the contralateral hemisphere. The areas of
T2 hyperintensity were mainly located in the ipsilateral cortex and
basal ganglia. The difference in the mean T2 value between the
ipsilateral (121.7 ± 3.82 ms) and contralateral (78.4 ± 2.47 ms)
hemispheres were signiﬁcantly increased (p b 0.001). The ADC
declined rapidly in the location of the ischemic tissues, and the
hypointensity in 8 of the rats extended to the entire ipsilateral
hemisphere in the ADC maps at 24 h. The mean T2-value of the
ischemic lateral hemisphere increased dramatically from 4 h
(89.9 ± 3.78 ms) to 24 h (121.7 ± 3.82 ms, p b 0.001). Meanwhile,
the difference between the mean T2 values of the contralateral
hemisphere between 4 h (75.5 ± 2.37 ms) and 24 h (78.4 ±
2.47 ms) was not signiﬁcant (p = 0.318).

24 h; all of the CMBs were located in the ischemic cortex. In the
remaining 2 rats, there were no CMBs detected on the SWI data.
Compared with that at 4 h, the number of microbleeding rats and
CMBs increased at 24 h. Fig. 5 showed that the 2 CMBs with
diameters of 0.3 mm in one rat at 4 h increased to 0.4 mm and
0.5 mm at 24 h. The other 11 newly appearing CMBs in 7 rats at 24 h
included 1 with a diameter of 0.2 mm, 6 with a diameter of 0.3 mm,
and 4 with a diameter of 0.4 mm. On the SWI (SWI images, SWI
ﬁltered phase images and mIPs), a notably thickened vessel was
observed on the ischemic side in each of the 7 rats (only 1 rat with
CMBs) at 4 h, and it appeared at the same location in 6 rats of these 7
rats (all with CMBs) at 24 h; this thickened vessel was not found in
the identical region of the contralateral side (triangle in Fig. 4D). The
2 CMBs in one rat at 4 h appeared near the thickened vessel (the
CMBs and a thick vessel were in the same or adjacent slice); at 24 h,
only 8 of 13 CMBs were observed in the same slice with the vessels.

3.2. Cerebral microbleeds investigated by SWI at the time of BBB
opening after ischemic injury

3.3. Histopathological evaluation

The CMBs were observed on SWI (SWI images, SWI ﬁltered phase
images and mIPs) as shown in Fig. 4. At 4 h after the induction of
ischemia, 2 CMBs were found in 1 MCAO rat; both CMBs were
located in the ipsilateral ischemic cortex. In total, 13 CMBs (including
the 2 CMBs detected at 4 h) were detected in 7 out of the 9 rats at

The rat whole brain sections after H&E staining were microscopically examined, and signiﬁcant morphological differences were
found between the ipsilateral and the contralateral hemispheres
(Fig. 4E); 24 hours after ischemia, the volume of the ischemic rat
brain tissue increased signiﬁcantly, and nuclear condensation and
eosinophilic cytoplasmic staining were observed (Fig. 4E), which

Fig. 3. T2WI, DWI/ADC images of the whole brain for a MCAO rat at 4 h and 24 h. The T2WI showed that cerebral injury was obvious at 24 h, as the signal intensity in the region of
the ipsilateral hemisphere was higher than that in the contralateral hemisphere. The size of the region of DWI hyperintensity and ADC hypointensity increased from 4 h to 24 h,
indicating that the cerebral injury was aggravated with ischemic duration.

106

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

Fig. 4. A CMB that emerged at the ipsi-ischemic cortex at 24 h after the MCAO on a SWI slice (A, B, C, D) and a H&E section (E, F, G, H). (A) A typical CMB displayed as a clear, dark,
spherical region of hypointensity in one slice of an SWI ﬁltered phase image. The rectangle in the ﬁgure (A) represents the ROI from B to D. (B) The same CMB (depicted in A)
displayed in the phase image (arrow). (C) The same CMB (depicted in A and B) displayed in the SWI images matched with the phase image (arrow in C). (D) The same CMB
(depicted in A, B and C) was close to a widening vessel (triangle in D) in the mIPs. Figure (E) is a section of whole brain of H&E staining. The left side of E (arrow-side)
demonstrates the signiﬁcantly increased volume of ischemic rat brain tissue, nuclear condensation and eosinophilic cytoplasmic staining, comparing with the contralateral
normal tissue pattern. Figure (F) shows a short and thick vessel (triangle in F) near the ventricle on the ipsilateral hemisphere, magniﬁcation = ×100. Around the thick vessel,
comparing with the contralateral normal tissue of the ventricle, the MVD was increased. Figure (G) shows a typical CMB (arrow) examined at the region of ipsilateral cortex of
(E) and the similar region of (B), magniﬁcation = ×100. Figure (H) shows the same CMB of (B) with a magniﬁcation = ×200. Blood clots (the long arrow in Fig. 4H) and single
red-cells (the short arrow in Fig. 4H) frequently appeared inside the CMBs, and there were no vessels crossing the CMBs.

was consistent with the T2WI images at 24 h. The result suggested
that there was severe edema in the ischemic brain. The alterations in
the ipsilateral cortex were reﬂected in the ROIs of the SWI data,
where CMBs were signiﬁcantly observed (Fig. 4 G, H). However,
some smaller scattered CMBs in the basal ganglia were not observed
in the SWI data.
Using the ventricle as a reference, no signiﬁcant difference was
found in the non-ischemic contralateral hemisphere around the
ventricle, while the apoptotic cells including eosinophilic cytoplasmic
staining and nuclear condensation were observed in the ischemic
ipsilateral hemisphere. Furthermore, shorter and thicker blood vessels
at the region of the ipsilateral basal ganglia and increased microvessel
density (MVD) in the ipsilateral hemisphere were observed (Fig. 4 F).

4. Discussion
On a serial MRI examination, ischemia in the rat brain changed
with time after permanent MCAO. T2WI images showed slight

hyperintensity at 4 h after permanent MCAO; after 24 h, the ischemic
regions in the ischemic ipsilateral hemisphere had expanded
considerably, and they all displayed hyperintensity. Measurements
on the T2 maps also demonstrated that water content/edema
formation in the ischemic hemisphere was signiﬁcantly elevated as
the duration of ischemia increased compared with that in the
contralateral hemisphere. Areas of hyperintensity on the DWI,
corresponding to areas of hypointensity on the ADC maps, were
evident in the ischemic ipsilateral hemisphere at the 4-h time point,
and they involved more brain tissue than was detected on T2WI. The
ability to differentiate hemosiderin from other tissues using the
technique of SWI facilitated the successful detection of CMBs with a
diameter as small as 0.2 mm as well as small thick vessels in the
ischemic brain at 4 h and 24 h after the induction of ischemia.
Histopathological studies conﬁrmed the MRI ﬁndings in the rat brain
using T2WI and SWI.
In our study, we used 9 rats to account for individual variability,
and the reported results statistically reﬂect the differences detectable across the two time points. Moreover, the MRI data acquired at

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

107

Fig. 5. The CMBs increased in number and size over time in the phase images. (A) and (C) were from two successive slices at 4 h, (E) and (G) were from two similar successive
slices at 24 h after MCAO. (B), (D), (F) and (H) were the ROI from the rectangle frames represented in (A), (C), (E) and (G), respectively. (B) and (F) showed that the diameter of
one CMB changed from 0.3 mm (arrow in B) at 4 h to 0.5 mm (arrow in F) at 24 h. (D) and (H) showed that the diameter of another CMB changed from 0.3 mm (the long arrow in
D) at 4 h to 0.4 mm (the long arrow in H) at 24 h. Moreover, another two new CMBs (the short arrow in H) appeared around the previous CMB (described in D and H).

the two different time points used exactly the same imaging protocol
and localization on the same MRI scanner, which followed the
popularly-used schema in the literature [6], we thus are conﬁdent
with results in terms of test–retest reliability.
4.1. CMBs located within the ischemic areas
The ischemic signals were detected earlier and observed to
involve more neuronal regions on DWI than that on the T2WI.
Mainly due to the disruption of cell metabolism, the ischemic lesions
ﬁrst cause cytotoxic edema and then lead to the swelling of the brain
cells. In the case of cytotoxic edema, ischemia and hypoxia lead to
membrane depolarization, and extracellular water molecules ﬂow
into the cells, resulting in a decrease of the ADC; thus, the ADC may
be a sensitive parameter during cytotoxic edema [14]. Subsequently,
in the process of cerebral ischemia, the increase in the permeability
of the damaged BBB causes intravascular ﬂuid ﬂow outside of the
vessels, resulting in vasogenic brain edema. The reduction of the ADC
occurs within minutes of the initiation of ischemia [15,16]. However,
T2WI is sensitive to vasogenic edema. Besides the visual qualitative
comparison of T2WI, DWI/ADC map, it has been previously
conﬁrmed that quantitative T2-mapping can detect dynamic
changes of water content in living tissues at different time points,
which invariably reﬂects the state of the barrier function at the BBB
[17]. Quantiﬁcation of edema formation in both hemispheres using
T2-relaxometry over time further suggested that the T2-relaxometry
of the ipsilateral ischemic hemisphere increased rapidly from 4 h to
24 h. As DWI is more sensitive for the detection of infarction than
traditional T2WI [18], it was understandable that the regions of ADC
hypointensity covered more areas than the regions of T2
hyperintensity. In addition, recent studies have proposed that
CMBs are commonly characterized by a small volume without T2
hyperintensity [19,20]; there were two rats with increased T2
hyperintensity but without any CMBs, Therefore, these ﬁndings
further implied that microbleeding and edema formation had no
direct correlation, and other than using T2 hyperintensity as an
indicator to assess the severity of brain injury, SWI could also
demonstrate the individual difference in brain injury in both
experimental and clinical settings.

4.2. The relation between CMBs and BBB opening
Acute stroke occurs commonly in cases of BBB damage, which
emphasizes the permeability of the vessels. At the time of BBB
opening, the structure and function of the BBB change dramatically.
Active enzymes in the plasma enter the brain parenchyma, leading to
ﬁbrinoid necrosis of the artery walls and an increase in endothelial
permeability, which contributes to the possibility of blood
extravasation of the small vessels.
Previous studies have found that impairment of the BBB in MCAO
accompanies damage to the microvasculature and parenchyma in
the ipsilateral preoptic area, striatum, and cortex [21]. The CMBs
found on SWI were concentrated in the ipsilateral cortex, and no
CMBs were observed in the ipsilateral preoptic area or the striatum.
This ﬁnding conﬁrms that the ischemic cortex is a bleeding-prone
area. Notably, H&E staining showed some smaller CMBs scattered
throughout the regions of the ipsilateral basal ganglia; the loss of
CMB signals on SWI data cannot be ignored. In fact, a 3.0 T MR
scanner is most suitable for human research; in the case of animal
studies, restricted magnetic ﬁeld and signal-to-noise is insufﬁcient
for clear demonstrations of very small lesions such as those induced
in this study. When we observed the CMBs in the rat brains, we
excluded all suspected and atypical signals; these signals may also
include very small CMBs in the ipsilateral basal ganglia. Given the
limitations of the 3.0 T MR scanner, a 7.0 T or 9.4 T MR scanner
should be considered for further research.
On the other hand, the number of CMBs detected in the ischemic
ipsilateral hemisphere was closely related to the duration of the
infarct and the severity of the ischemic injury. In fact, previous
research indicates that the permeability of the BBB does not change
during the initial 4 hours [15]; therefore, the ﬁnding that only 2
CMBs appeared in 1 rat at 4 h is understandable, and it also
suggested that the CMBs might not occur during the earlier phases of
the infarct. However, at 24 h, 2 CMBs that were found at 4 h with a
diameter of 0.3 mm had increased to diameters of 0.4 mm and
0.5 mm, and 2 new CMBs emerged nearby in the same rat.
Furthermore, 9 new CMBs were also found in the other 6 rats. This
result suggested that the CMBs increased when the BBB damage was
aggravated at the time of the second BBB opening. Moreover, the

108

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109

following are the most likely reasons that no CMBs appeared in the
remaining 2 rats. First, there were individual differences in ischemic
evolution. For the ﬁrst rat, the severity of ischemia did not increase
from 4 h to 24 h, and there was no signiﬁcant difference in the ADC
hypointensity presented at 4 h and 24 h. Second, there was a partial
volume effect. For the second rat, the ADC hypointensity increased
from 4 h to 24 h, similar to the other 7 rats; however, no CMBs
emerged in the ischemic lateral cortex, and it was presumed that the
CMBs may have been affected by the tissue thickness because the
diameter of a CMB was smaller than the 1-mm slice thickness in this
SWI examination.
The SWI data displayed a distinct thick vessel in the ischemic
hemisphere, which was not found in the corresponding region of the
contralateral hemisphere. Collateral circulation and the formation of
new blood vessels through angiogenesis after an ischemic stroke are
most likely responsible for the thickening of the vessel. Coyle and
Heistad [22] reported that sudden occlusion of the MCA in
normotensive rats increased blood ﬂow by anastomosing branches
into the territory of the occluded artery. Although it is impossible to
completely avoid the ischemic infarction in the core regions, the full
anastomosis compensation can prevent the progression of penumbra regions into infarcts. In this experiment, a nylon intraluminal
suture was inserted from the ICA to embolize the PCA and MCA, and
although it did not reach the ACA, it seriously affected its blood
supply. Therefore, with some potential for collateral formation
caused by focal cerebral ischemia, the blood ﬂow increases quickly.
On the other hand, after cerebral ischemia, the formation of new
blood vessels can occur, which was observed based on the
appearance of increased MVD in penumbra of the cortex of ischemic
rats [23,24]. The outcome of the shorter thick blood vessels at the
region of ipsilateral basal ganglia and increased microvessel density
(MVD) in the ipsilateral hemisphere on H&E sections (Fig. 4F)
suggest the possibility of increased blood ﬂow. Because the vessel on
the SWI mIP image is the projection of 8 slices, it is understandable
that it is longer than the vessel presented on the H&E section. At 4 h
after MCAO, a thick vessel that was not associated with the CMBs in
the ischemic hemisphere of 6 rats, and only the third thick vessel
associated with 2 CMBs, was observed in the ischemic hemisphere of
one rat, indicating that widening of the vessels could occur earlier
than CMB. It should be noted that based on visual assessment, 1 thick
vessel at 4 h disappeared at 24 h. Based on the nuclear apoptosis on
the H&E sections, this result may be inﬂuenced by the aggravation of
the ischemia at 24 h, which induced ischemic structural and
functional failure, and poor collateral circulation led to the persistent
decline in blood ﬂow as a result of MCAO. Of the 13 CMBs, 5 were not
close to the thick vessels, so it was not possible that they represented
blood extravasation of the thick vessels; this implies that the
ischemic brain tissues around the thick vessels had a high potential
for microbleeding. Overall, SWI took advantage of ﬂow compensation and blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) effects [25–27],
validating its ability to detect the CMBs and nearby thick vessels.
5. Conclusions
SWI demonstrated the occurrence of CMBs at the time of BBB
opening in an MCAO model of cerebral ischemia in rats. The SWI
sequence has been conﬁrmed to be a sensitive practical approach for
small CMB detection in the animal brain because of the susceptibility
differences between hemosiderin and the background tissues. At
24 h, which was presumed to correspond to the second BBB opening,
the number and size of CMBs increased compared with those
detected at 4 h after MCAO, indicating that the occurrence of CMBs
was related to the duration of BBB opening, and it increased with
ischemia severity. Overall, the CMBs and thick vessels in the rats
with MCAO-induced stroke were successfully detected using SWI,

suggesting that SWI measurement of CMBs can complement the
prognosis and treatment of ischemic stroke with conventional MRI.
In the future, additional studies should be conducted with larger
numbers of MCAO rats at additional time points, as well as in other
models of stroke, such as a reperfusion-based animal model of stroke,
to obtain additional information regarding the pathophysiology
of stroke.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the 12th Five-Year Plan supporting
project of Ministry of Science and Technology of the People's Republic
of China (grant no. 2013BAI10B03), an Open Foundation of Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance, East China Normal University,
and in part by China National Nature Science Foundation grants (grant
no. 81471734 and grant no. 81471651).

References
[1] Liu PF, Cui YZ, Na J, Gao PY. Cerebral microbleeds — prevalence, distribution and
risk factors in northeast population without preceding large-area stroke. Chin
Med J 2010;123(3):286–90.
[2] Ovbiagele B, Saver JL, Sanossian N, Salamon N, Villablanca P, Alger JR, et al.
Predictors of cerebral microbleeds in acute ischemic stroke and TIA patients.
Cerebrovasc Dis 2006;22:378–83.
[3] Dichgans M, Holtmannspötter M, Herzog J, Peters N, Bergmann M, Yousry TA.
Cerebral microbleeds in CADASIL: a gradient-echo magnetic resonance imaging
and autopsy study. Stroke 2002;33:67–71.
[4] Benbassat J, Baumal R, Herishanu Y. Treatment of acute ischemic stroke in
patients with cerebral microbleeds: a decision analysis. Q J Med 2011;104:
73–82.
[5] Kidwell CS, Saver JL, Starkman S, Duckwiler G, Jahan R, Vespa P, et al. Late
secondary ischemic injury in patients receiving intraarterial thrombolysis. Ann
Neurol 2002;52:698–703.
[6] Pillai DR, Dittmar MS, Baldaranov D, Heidemann RM, Henning EC, Schuierer G,
et al. Cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury in rats—a 3 T MRI study on biphasic
blood–brain barrier opening and the dynamics of edema formation. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2009;29:1846–55.
[7] Hiroyuki K, Masahiro I, Kimiaki I, Akira T, Yasuto I. Silent cerebral microbleeds on
T2*-weighted MRI correlation with stroke subtype, stroke recurrence, and
leukoaraiosis. Stroke 2002;33:1536–40.
[8] Kidwell CS, Saver JL, Villablanca JP, Duckwiler G, Fredieu A, Gough K, et al.
Magnetic resonance imaging detection of microbleeds before thrombolysis: an
emerging application. Stroke 2002;33:95–8.
[9] Viswanathan A, Chabriat H. Cerebral microhemorrhage. Stroke 2006;37:550–5.
[10] Muhammad A, Alexander SB, Haacke EM, Wolff M, Kirsch, Daniel KK. Imaging
cerebral microbleeds using susceptibility weighted imaging: one step toward
detecting vascular dementia. J Magn Reson Imaging 2010;31(1):142–8.
[11] Santhosh K, Kesavadas C, Thomas B, Gupta AK, Thamburaj K, Kapilamoorthy TR.
Susceptibility weighted imaging: a new tool in magnetic resonance imaging of
stroke. Clin Radiol 2009;64:74–83.
[12] Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle cerebral artery
occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 1989;20:84–91.
[13] George P, Charles W. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates. 6th ed. London:
Elsevier Inc.; 2009 LXIII.
[14] Sotak CH. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurement of the apparent
diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC) of tissue water and its relationship to cell volume
changes in pathological states. Neurochem Int 2004;45:569–82.
[15] Benveniste H, Hedlund LW, Johnson GA. Mechanism of detection of acute
cerebral ischemia in rats by diffusion- weighted magnetic resonance microscopy. Stroke 1992;23:746–54.
[16] Liu KF, Li F, Tatlisumak T, Garcia JH, Sotak CH, Fisher M, et al. Regional variations
in the apparent diffusion coefﬁcient and the intracellular distribution of water in
rat brain during acute focal ischemia. Stroke 2001;32:1897–905.
[17] Verheul HB, Berkelbach van der Sprenkel JW, Tulleken CA, Tamminga KS, Nicolay
K. Temporal evolution of focal cerebral ischemia in the rat assessed by T2weighted and diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Brain Topogr
1992;5:171–6.
[18] Wan YD, Zhang YT, Liu SL. Different MRI examination on early cerebral ischemia
in rats. Chin J Med Imaging Technol 2004;20(6):841–3.
[19] Tanaka A, Ueno Y, Nakayama Y, Takano K, Takebayashi S. Small chronic
hemorrhages and ischemic lesions in association with spon-taneous intracerebral hematomas. Stroke 1999;30:1637–42.
[20] Zhang L, Qi JP, Zhu WZ, Wang CY. MR susceptibility weighted imaging in the
diagnosis of cerebral microbleeding. Radiol Pract 2009;24(1):19–21.
[21] Zhang Z, Zhang RL, Jiang Q, Raman SB, Cantwell L, Chopp M. A new rat model of
thrombotic focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1997;17:123–35.

Y. Jiang et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 102–109
[22] Coyle P, Heistad DD. Development of collaterals in the cerebral circulation. Blood
Vessels 1991;28:183–9.
[23] Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Tsang W, Soltanian-Zadeh H, Morris D, Zhang R, et al.
Correlation of VEGF and angiopoietin expression with disruption of blood–brain
barrier and angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2002;22:379–92.
[24] Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q, Zhang R, Davies K, Powers C, et al. VEGF enhances
angiogenesis and promotes blood-brain barrier leakage in the ischemic brain.
J Clin Invest 2000;106:829–38.

109

[25] Ding G, Jiang Q, Li L, Zhang L, Zhang ZG, Ledbetter KA, et al. Angiogenesis
detected after embolic stroke in rat brain using magnetic resonance T2*WI.
Stroke 2008;39:1563–8.
[26] Reichenbach JR, Venkatesan R, Schillinger DJ, Kido DK, Haacke ME. Small-vessels
in the human brain: MR venography with deoxyhemoglobin as an intrinsic
contrast agent. Radiology 1997;204:272–7.
[27] Jiang Q, Zhang ZG, Ding GL, Zhang L, Ewing JR, Wang L, et al. Investigation of
neural progenitor cell induced angiogenesis after embolic stroke in rat using
MRI. Neuroimage 2005;28:698–707.

