brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

www.elsevier.com/locate/brainres

Research Report

Nop2 is expressed during proliferation of neural
stem cells and in adult mouse and human brain
Nina Kosia, Ivan Alića,b, Matea Kolačevića, Nina Vrsaljkoa,
Nataša Jovanov Miloševićc, Margarita Sobold, Anatoly Philimonenkod,
Pavel Hozákd, Srećko Gajovića,e, Roland Pocheta,e,f, Dinko Mitrečića,e,n
a

Laboratory for Stem Cells, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb,
10 000 Zagreb, Croatia
b
Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb,
10 000 Zagreb, Croatia
c
Laboratory for Immunohistochemistry, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb,
10 000 Zagreb, Croatia
d
Department of Biology of the Cell Nucleus, Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic
e
Laboratory for Neurogenetics and Genetics of Development, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine,
University of Zagreb, 10 000 Zagreb, Croatia
f
Laboratory of Histology, Neuroanatomy and Neuropathology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 1070 Bruxelles,
Belgium

art i cle i nfo

ab st rac t

Article history:

The nucleolar protein 2 gene encodes a protein speciﬁc for the nucleolus. It is assumed that

Accepted 19 November 2014

it plays a role in the synthesis of ribosomes and regulation of the cell cycle. Due to its link

Available online 4 December 2014

to cell proliferation, higher expression of Nop2 indicates a worse tumor prognosis. In this

Keywords:

work we used Nop2gt1gaj gene trap mouse strain. While lethality of homozygous animals

Nop2

suggested a vital role of this gene, heterozygous animals allowed the detection of

Brain

expression of Nop2 in various tissues, including mouse brain. Histochemistry, immuno-

Stem cells

histochemistry and immunoelectron microscopy techniques, applied to a mature mouse

Stroke

brain, human brain and on mouse neural stem cells revealed expression of Nop2 in

Nucleolus

differentiating cells, including astrocytes, as well as in mature neurons. Nop2 was detected

Cell cycle

in various regions of mouse and human brain, mostly in large pyramidal neurons. In the
human, Nop2 was strongly expressed in supragranular and infragranular layers of the
somatosensory cortex and in layer III of the cingulate cortex. Also, Nop2 was detected in
CA1 and the subiculum of the hippocampus. Subcellular analyses revealed predominant
location of Nop2 within the dense ﬁbrillar component of the nucleolus. To test if Nop2

n
Corresponding author at: Laboratory for Stem Cells, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, 10
000 Zagreb, Croatia. Fax.: þ385 1 4596 942.
E-mail addresses: ninakosi@hiim.hr (N. Kosi), ialic@vef.hr (I. Alić), matea00@gmail.com (M. Kolačević),
nvrsaljko@yahoo.com (N. Vrsaljko), njovanov@hiim.hr (N. Jovanov Milošević), Margarita.Sobol@img.cas.cz (M. Sobol),
Anatoly.Philimonenko@img.cas.cz (A. Philimonenko), Pavel.Hozak@img.cas.cz (P. Hozák), srecko.gajovic@cmj.hr (S. Gajović),
rpochet@ulb.ac.be (R. Pochet), dinko.mitrecic@mef.hr (D. Mitrečić).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2014.11.040
0006-8993/& 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

66

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

expression correlates to cell proliferation occurring during tissue regeneration, we induced
strokes in mice by middle cerebral artery occlusion. Two weeks after stroke, the number of
Nop2/nestin double positive cells in the region affected by ischemia and the periventricular
zone substantially increased. Our ﬁndings suggest a newly discovered role of Nop2 in both
mature neurons and in cells possibly involved in the regeneration of nervous tissue.
& 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1.

Introduction

The nucleolar protein 2 (Nop2, Nol1, p120) gene encodes a
protein speciﬁc for the nucleolus with moderately strong
ribosomal RNA methyl transferase activity (Freeman et al.,
1988). In addition to the presumed role in the synthesis of
ribosomes, expression of Nop2 depends on the phase of the
cell cycle. The highest Nop2 activity is observed in late G1 and
S phase, which corresponds with the synthesis of DNA and
cell division (Fonagy et al., 1993). The fact that the gene is
expressed in malignant tumors is used in the histopathologic
diagnosis of neoplasms (Saijo et al., 2001). Stronger expression of Nop2 indicates a more rapidly proliferating tumor,
which is a sign of poor prognosis (Bantis et al., 2004). Nop2
has so far been used as a marker in a number of tumors, such
as breast and lung carcinomas (Liu et al., 2009; Talvinen et al.,
2010). Despite these ﬁndings and its prognostic application,
the exact role of Nop2 is still unknown.
In the brain, glial cell populations are the only cell types
which can multiply. Mature neurons are in a permanent G0
phase and as such cannot divide. However, in some limited
areas of the mammalian brain, neurogenesis continues
throughout life: the subependymal zone of the lateral ventricle in humans and the supragranular zone of the hippocampal dentate gyrus and olfactory region in some animals
exhibit constant mitosis of neuronal precursors (Altman and
Das, 1965; Bernardino et al., 2012; Christie and Turnley, 2013).
An attractive approach to elucidate brain regenerative
potential is to analyse neurogenesis as a response to brain
diseases (e.g. stroke, neurodegeneration, injury). It is known
that some cells can exit from their remnant state and
contribute to cell regeneration (Kirby et al., 2013). Thus
discovery and elucidation of genes involved in cellular
responses to diseases of or damage to the brain represent
an attractive goal for furthering understanding of cellular
processes taking place in normal nervous tissue as well as
nervous tissue affected by disease.
In this work we used a unique Nop2gt1gaj gene trap mouse
strain previously designed and constructed by our group
(Mitrečić et al., 2008). While homozygous embryos die during
early embryo development, suggesting a signiﬁcant importance of this gene, heterozygous animals appear normal and
allow the detection of Nop2 expression through lacZ activity
(Mitrečić et al., 2008). In this work we conﬁrmed our hypothesis that Nop2 should be expressed during the proliferation of
neural stem cells in vitro. Furthermore, we clearly showed
that after the onset of stroke, the number of Nop2 expressing
cells in the mouse brain markedly increased. In addition and
unexpectedly, we found that this protein is expressed in

mature neurons of the somatosensory and cingulate cortex
and in the hippocampus, in both mouse and human brain.
This suggests a new, so far unknown role of this gene in
postmitotic cells.

2.

Results

2.1.
β-Galactosidase staining revealed the presence of
Nop2 expression in adult mouse brain
Adult mice heterozygous for wild type Nop2 were used in
order to examine whether there is expression of Nop2 in the
adult mouse brain. 60 mm thick sections of Nop2gt1gaj heterozygotes showed a clearly visible green signal in some cells in
the brain of the adult mouse. The greatest density of these
cells was found in the cortex (Fig. 1), while a less pronounced
signal was found in the hippocampus and the cerebellum.
Higher magniﬁcation of these sections revealed that the
signal was mainly located in and around the nucleus. In
many sections we found cells with the morphology, shape
and size of neurons (Fig. 1B). The same method applied in
other tissues, such as heart muscle (Fig. 1C) and the control
WT (C57Bl/6) mice (Fig. 1D) did not reveal the presence of this
protein.

2.2.
Nop2 expression in mature mouse brain was
conﬁrmed by immunohistochemical staining for βgalactosidase and Nop2
Immunohistochemical staining on β-galactosidase conﬁrmed the
ﬁndings obtained by histochemical staining on β-galactosidase
(Supporting information, Fig. 1A and B). Although the antibody
showed the presence of small amounts of a constant background
staining, the number and the shape of cells that were positive for
the presence of the Nop2/β-galactosidase construct were comparable to the results obtained using the histochemical reaction.
Nop2 immunohistochemistry in the brains of adult mice
conﬁrmed the ﬁndings found by histochemical staining and
immunohistochemical conﬁrmation on the β-galactosidase.
We found a large number of positive cells in the cerebral
cortex of adult mice, most of which morphologically resemble
neurons (Supporting information, Fig. 1C and D).
As an additional control of our results, we performed immunohistochemistry with Nop2 antibody using control C57Bl/6
mice. The number, shape and arrangement of positive cells
was the same as in Nop2 heterozygotes (not shown).
Control immunohistochemistry on liver, kidney and lungs
did not show any Nop2 positive cells (not shown).

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

2.3.

Nop2 expression in mature human brain

Immunohistochemical staining of post mortem sections of
different areas of human brain from healthy adults demonstrated expression of Nop2 protein in different populations of
neurons. Overall staining of Nop2 in the cortical neurons was

67

not uniform, showing different levels of protein expression
between pyramidal neurons of same population, with the most
pronounced expression being in the largest pyramids. Strong
expression was found in the somatosensory cortex, in both
supragranular and infragranular pyramidal neurons and in
the pyramids of precingulate layers III and Vb. The posterior

Fig. 1 – Beta galactosidase positive staining was detected in the adult brain of Nop2 heterozygous mouse. Histochemical
reaction to beta galactosidase in the brain of Nop2 heterozygous (A and B), heart muscle Nop2 heterozygous (C) and brain
control C57Bl/6 mouse (D). In (A) a large number of cells is shown in the cortex containing Nop2 protein and at higher
magniﬁcation, a neuron with a labelled nucleus is visible (B). (C) shows the absence of positive cells in the heart muscle of
Nop2 heterozygotes, while the D negative control was performed using a control C57Bl/6 mouse. Magniﬁcation bar: (A, C and
D): 1 mm, (B): 100 lm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web
version of this article.)

Fig. 2 – Expression of Nop2 was found in neurons of the adult human brain cortex and hippocampus. In (A)
immunohistochemical staining of the expression of Nop2 protein in the neurons of the posterior cingulate cortex of the
human brain is shown. There is a strong expression in some cells visible in the layers II–IV. (B) Shows expression of Nop2
protein in the pyramidal layer of the human brain, hippocampal formation. While the subiculum and CA1 exhibit a strong
expression of Nop2, the dentate gyrus does not express this gene. WM—white matter, I–VI layers of cortex. CA1-Cornu
Ammon’s 1, DG-dentate gyrus. Magniﬁcation bar 250 lm. Inlet Y demonstrates cellular localization of the Nop2 protein in
pyramids. Magniﬁcation bar 75 lm.

68

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

cingulate expressed reactivity in layer III (Fig. 2A, inlet) and
weak sporadic expression in layer V pyramids (Fig. 2A, low
magniﬁcation). Labelled cells displayed pyramidal morphology.
We did not detect expression of Nop2 in the motor cortex.
Cornu Ammon’s gyrus (CA1) and subiculum (SUB) exhibited
moderate to weak expression of Nop2 in the pyramidal layer
(Fig. 2B). Expression of Nop2 protein in proliferating cells in the
subependymal zone or dentate gyrus (DG) was not detected.

2.4.
Nop2/Map2 double immunohistochemical staining
revealed that the majority of Nop2 positive cells were neurons
To determine which cells in the brain of adult mouse expressed
Nop2, double immunohistochemistry was performed with
antibodies against Nop2 and Map2. Approximately 50% of cells
that were positive for Nop2 exhibited the presence of Map2
(Fig. 3, white arrows) demonstrating their neuronal identity. At
the same time, 35% of Map2 positive cells were not Nop2
positive (Fig. 3, blue arrows). Analyses at higher magniﬁcation
revealed that the presence of Nop2 signal was limited to the
nucleus and initial segment of the axon (Fig. 3, inlet).

2.5.
Double immunohistochemical staining using Nop2/
NeuN conﬁrmed that most of the Nop2 positive cells were
neurons
In order to conﬁrm that many neurons in the brain of adult
mice express Nop2 gene, an additional comparison was made
using an antibody to NeuN. Unlike Map2, which is a protein

of neuronal cytoskeleton, NeuN protein is speciﬁc for the
nucleus, and sometimes perikarya of neurons.
Since the number of cells positive for NeuN matched the one
found with Map2, our ﬁnding that a large number of neurons in
the cerebral cortex of adult mice express Nop2 was conﬁrmed
(Fig. 4, white arrows). We also observed NeuN positive neurons
that did not contain protein Nop2 (Fig. 4, blue arrows).

2.6.
Nop2 is present in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum, but
not in its granular layer
Immunohistochemical analysis of the cerebellum with antibodies against NeuN and Nop2 revealed that only Purkinje
nerve cells contained Nop2 protein, while the neurons of
granular layer of the cerebellum were negative for Nop2
(Supporting information, Fig. 2). Also, this ﬁnding indicates
that Nop2 is expressed in one type of neurons, while not in
others, as we have already described in the cortex of adult
mouse. Our ﬁnding that Purkinje cells were negative for NeuN
was already reported in the literature (Mullen et al., 1992).

2.7.
Some of the cells that express Nop2 in the adult
mouse brain are astrocytes
In order to examine if some of the cells that express Nop2 in the
adult mouse brain were astrocytes, we performed Nop2 and
GFAP immunohistochemistry. By using careful examination of
z-stacks we found Nop2 in the bodies of some astrocytes
(Supporting information, Fig. 3).

Fig. 3 – Co-localization of Nop2 and Map2 revealed that the majority of Nop2 positive cells were neurons. Double
immunohistochemical reaction with Nop2 (A and D) and Map2 (B and E) revealed that many Nop2 positive cells in mouse
cortex are also Map2 positive (white arrows). However, we found Map2 positive neurons (blue arrow) that were not Nop2
positive. Magniﬁcation bar: 200 lm. Inlet Y within (F) demonstrates a presence of Nop2 in the neuronal body and in the initial
segment of the axon. Magniﬁcation bar: 100 lm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.)

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

69

Fig. 4 – Presence of Nop2 protein in cortical neurons was conﬁrmed by double Nop2/NeuN immunohistochemical staining.
Double immunohistochemical reaction NeuN (A) and Nop2 (B) revealed that many Nop2 positive cells in the mouse
somatosensory cortex were as well NeuN positive (white arrows). However, we found NeuN positive neurons (blue arrow) that
were Nop2 negative. NeuN immunohistochemistry showed that in addition to the nucleus (reactive to NeuN antibody, blue)
Nop2 was located in the wider area of the perikaryon (C). Magniﬁcation bar: 100 lm. (For interpretation of the references to
color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

2.8.
Nop2 is expressed in neural stem cells and continues
to be present in some neurons during cell differentiation
To gain further insight into the appearance and presence of
Nop2 in cells of nervous system, we used neural stem cell
cultures. Within 24 h after isolation, many, but not all neural
stem cells from the telencephalic wall of 14.5 days old mouse
embryos positive for nestin also expressed Nop2 (Fig. 5A–C). The
signal was almost exclusively present in the perinuclear region
of the cells.
After 3 days of differentiation, correlating to the onset of
Map2 expression, Nop2 signal was present in a majority of cells
(Fig. 5D–F). Nop2 in immature neurons was present mostly in
perinuclear region, the same localization observed in neural
stem cells.
After 9 days of differentiation, the overall strength of the
Nop2 signal decreased. In cells with the morphology of
mature neurons, Nop2 was not only present in perinuclear,
but in the nuclear region as well (Fig. 5G–I).

2.9.
Brain regeneration after stroke correlates to the
appearance of Nop2/nestin positive cells
Because we hypothesized that brain regeneration might be
linked to increased expression of Nop2 we induced strokes in
2 month old C57Bl/6 control mice by occlusion of the middle
cerebral artery (MCAO). Analyses of the brain region affected by
stroke (the corticostriatal border) revealed numerous nestin and
Nop2 double positive cells (Fig. 6A–F). In comparison to the
unaffected half of the brain, and with the brains of control mice
not subjected to MCAO (Fig. 6G–I), the number of nestin positive
cells was much higher, especially in the region affected by
stroke. Moreover, the morphology of nestin positive cells was
different. While in healthy brains nestin positive cells exhibited
an astrocytic shape, this morphology was not present in the
region affected by stroke. In ischemia-affected regions cells were
rounded, with morphology resembling differentiating neuroblasts. Analyses of stroke—affected regions revealed that every
nestin positive cell was also Nop2 positive, which suggests a role

for Nop2 in proliferation of neural stem cells. In the same region,
not every Nop2 positive cell was nestin positive. These Nop2þ/
nestin-cells probably represented the Nop2 population described
on healthy brain tissue. The observation that the majority of
Nop2 positive cells coexpress nestin after stroke suggests that
Nop2 positive cells in the brain exhibit the potential to express
nestin after the onset of brain damage.

2.10.
In vitro cultured neural stem cells and Nop2 positive
cells occurring after stroke revealed high BrdU positivity
Since we hypothesized that Nop2 marks proliferating cells linked
to neural regeneration, we analyzed the presence of BrdU
positive cells in both in vitro culture and in the brain after
stroke. In vitro cultures of neural stem cells revealed that
majority of neural stem cells show positive signal for BrdU,
suggesting their proliferative capacity. Indeed, only a small
portion of cells were BrdU negative and they all exhibited
elongated cell processes, typical for more differentiated cells
(Fig. 7A–C).
Analyses of BrdU in the mouse brain 10 days after stroke
revealed that majority of Nop2 positive cells were also BrdU
positive. This conﬁrmed our hypothesis that Nop2 marks cell
populations with the proliferative capacity needed for brain
regeneration (Fig. 7D–F).
In this region, in a normal brain, the number of Brdu/Nop2
double positive cells was around 16 per 0.5 mm2; after stroke,
this number increased to 289. This suggests that the majority
of newly born Nop2 cells are BrdU positive and that their
number is highly linked to brain damage (Fig. 8).

2.11.
Immunoelectron microscopy revealed that Nop2 is
primarily located in the nucleolar dense ﬁbrillar component of
neural stem cells and neurons
Based on the ﬁnding of Nop2 protein in some neurons,
astrocytes and neural stem cells it was necessary to precisely
deﬁne the subcellular localization of this protein.
For this purpose, we performed immunoelectron microscopy
on neural stem cell cultures and on primary cultures of 8 days

70

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

Fig. 5 – Nop2 protein was detected in cultured neural stem cells as well as differentiating neurons. Double immunohistochemical
reaction against nestin (A) and Nop2 (B) on mouse neural stem cell cultures (day 0: A–C, day 3: D–F, day 9: G–I) revealed that some
neural stem cells express Nop2 (white arrows). Double immunohistochemical reaction against Map2 (D and G) and Nop2 (E and H)
revealed that during differentiation of neural stem cells Nop2 expression was initially visible in the perinuclear region (3 days of
differentiation, (D–F)) and then in nuclear region of neurons (9 days of differentiation, (G–I)). Magniﬁcation bar: 100 lm.

old neurons. By isolation of the cortex of newborn mice and
their cultivation in a medium highly selective for nerve cells, we
obtained a nearly 100% homogeneous culture of neurons that
served as a test for the presence of Nop2 in these cells.
Immunogold electron microscopy on neural stem cells
revealed Nop2 protein in the dense ﬁbrillar component of the
nucleolus, suggesting a potential role of Nop2 in the synthesis of ribosomes (Fig. 9A). Immunoelectron microscopy of
primary neuronal cultures conﬁrmed this ﬁnding (Fig. 9B).

3.

Discussion

Based on its expression linked to the cell cycle, we suspected
that Nop2 might serve as a marker of neural stem cell
proliferation, both in vitro and possibly, in the brain, after
ischemic injury. In this work, we conﬁrmed our hypothesis.

Neural stem cells express Nop2 highly and the expression
decreases during cell differentiation. Moreover, after onset of
ischemic brain damage, many reactive nestin-positive cells
co-express Nop2. These cells are as well BrdU positive.
However, unlike in the majority of adult tissue, such as liver,
lung or kidney, where Nop2 is not expressed, we found that
this gene is active in many post-mitotic cells of the healthy
mature mouse and human brain: these cells were mostly
present in the supragranular and infragranular layers of the
somatosensory cortex, in the cingulum and in the CA1 region
of the hippocampus.
The observation that the majority of Nop2 positive cells are
mature differentiated neurons ﬁts with known role of Nop2 in
the synthesis of ribosomes. Indeed, Nop2 binds the 28S subunit
of the ribosome through its arginine rich domain (Woolford
and Warner, 1991). Our immunoelectron microscopic data

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

71

Fig. 6 – The number of Nop2/nestin double positive cells increased in the adult mouse brain affected by stroke. Double
immunohistochemical reaction against nestin (A and D) and Nop2 (B and E) in the region affected by stroke in the mouse brain
revealed numerous nestin/Nop2 double positive round shaped cells (white arrow). Some Nop2 positive cells were not nestin
positive (blue arrow). In the healthy mouse brain nestin positive cells were spindle shaped (6 G, arrow), resembling astrocyes
(G–I). The majority of these nestin positive cells were not Nop2 positive. Magniﬁcation bar: (A–C and G–I) 100 lm; (D–F) 30 lm.
(For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
further validates this. However, it remains unclear why many
neurons in the same or other areas of the brain are Nop2
negative, and why some cells with intensive synthesis of
ribosomes (e.g. hepatocytes) do not express Nop2.
Our ﬁnding that after stroke, many cells co-express Nop2
and nestin, a marker of neural stem cells, and are simultaneously BrdU positive, turned our attention towards brain
regeneration and its correlation to the cell cycle. Indeed, Nop2
is linked to the cell cycle regulation (Fonagy et al., 1992, 1993;
Freeman and Busch, 1991), and intensity of its expression is a
reliable indicator of the rate of proliferation of both normal
proliferative and malignant cells, thus indicating a worse
prognosis of tumors. This has been shown for tumors of the
prostate, breast, lung and oral cavity (Bantis et al., 2004;
Fonagy et al., 1994; Uchiyama et al., 1997; Ventura et al.,

1999). Accordingly, it was proposed to block Nop2 with a goal
to slow down tumor growth (Busch et al., 1991). Our ﬁnding
that a complete lack of Nop2 is lethal is possibly linked to an
inability of cells to multiply in its absence.
Nop2 expression in mature neurons, given that other
postmitotic cells are apparently devoid of the protein, may
indicate a new, so far unknown role for Nop2, exclusively
linked to the central nervous system. The emergence of new
cells (neurogenesis) in the brain of mammals is still a topic
under investigation. So far, neurogenesis in most mammals
has been found within the subventricular zone, the olfactory
bulb and the hippocampus, with the phenomenon generally
less robust in humans. In the human brain, there is reliable
proof of neurogenesis only in a very limited region next to the
ventricles (Curtis et al., 2012). On the other hand, very little is

72

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

Fig. 7 – The majority of Nop2 positive cells in both in vitro cultures and in the mouse brain after stroke were BrdU positive.
Double immunohistochemical reaction against BrdU (A and D) and Nop2 (B and E) in in vitro cultures (A–C) and in the mouse
brain region affected by stroke (D–F) revealed that more than 90% Nop2 positive cells were, simultaneously, BrdU positive. The
only cells which were Nop2þ/BrDU—resembled neurons at a higher stage of differentiation with elongated processes.
Magniﬁcation bar: 100 lm.

Fig. 8 – Number of Nop2/BrdU positive cells in the brain
affected by stroke increased by a factor of 18 as compared to
the healthy mouse brain.

known about processes occurring during disease or brain
injury: there are suggestions that a pathological condition
might bring reactivation of expression of certain genes that
are normally speciﬁc for neural stem cells during embryonic
development (Garcia et al., 2004).
Taking into account the role of Nop2 in the cell cycle, our
ﬁnding that only some neurons and some astrocytes express
Nop2 may indicate either different levels of expression between
individual cells or the presence of speciﬁc subpopulations of cells
dedicated to tissue repair in the case of tissue injury. This is
strongly supported by our ﬁnding that the majority of Nop2
positive cells after stroke express nestin and are BrdU positive.
Similar ﬁndings on the expression of nestin after onset of stroke
was recently published (Shin et al., 2013).

In conclusion, histochemical and immunohistochemical
analysis, double checked by several markers for neurons and
astrocytes in the mature mouse and human brain has convincingly demonstrated that Nop2 is expressed and its protein is
present in some neurons and astrocytes of the cerebral cortex,
thalamus and hippocampus and in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. We did not detect any oligodendrocytes or microglia
positive for Nop2. Light and electron microscopy revealed that
Nop2 in the adult mouse brain is located mainly in the nucleus
and nucleoli, and to a smaller extent in the perikarya of neurons
and in the initial segment of the axon. Furthermore, after the
onset of brain damage, the number of Nop2 cells strikingly
increased. The majority of those Nop2 positive cells in the region
affected by stroke also expressed nestin, which suggested a
possible link between Nop2 expression and the regenerative
potential of the brain tissue. Based on the proven role of Nop2 in
the transition from the inactive to the active phase of the cell
cycle and the synthesis of ribosomes, and based on our own
discovery of expression of Nop2 during the proliferation and
differentiation of neural stem cells, both in normal and pathological conditions, we suggest that Nop2 should be further
explored as a marker of proliferative and regenerative potential
of the cells within nervous tissue.

4.

Experimental procedures

4.1.

Nop2 transgenic mouse strain (Nop2gt1gaj)

A transgenic mouse strain with a modiﬁcation in the Nop2
gene (Nop2gt1gaj) was obtained by gene trap. The method
involves the insertion of a non-homologous DNA vector which

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

73

Fig. 9 – Immunogold labelling revealed the presence of Nop2 in the nucleolus and nucleoplasm of cultured neural stem cells.
Immunoelectron microscopy image of a cultured neural stem cell (0 day) labelled with anti-Nop2 antibody shows the location
of Nop2 protein (red dots) both in the dense ﬁbrillar component (arrows) of the nucleolus (NL) and in the nucleoplasm (A).
Nop2 protein is present in cultured 8 day old neurons mainly in the dense ﬁbrillar component of the nucleolus (B). N—
nucleus, NE—nuclear envelope; the asterisk points out the ﬁbrillar center. Magniﬁcation bar: 500 nm. (For interpretation of the
references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

carries a selector (NeoR) and marker (lacZ) in embryonic stem
cells. The altered Nop2 gene is marked by the lacZ gene and its
expression can be monitored via lacZ activity (Mitrečić et al.,
2008).
All experiments on both transgenic and wild type animals
described in this work received approval of the Internal Review
Board of the Ethical Committee of the School of Medicine,
University of Zagreb. All experiments were carried out in
accordance with the EU Directive 2010/63/EU on the protection
of animals used for scientiﬁc purposes.

4.2.

Genotyping Nop2 strain

In order to genotype the mice, two pairs of primers were used
(common primer for both Wt and mutant sequence: 50 TCT
GCC TGC CTT GTT TCT T30 , transgene sequence primer:
50 CGC CAT ACA GTC CTC TTC AC30 and wt primer: 50 GGA
CAG GAC CCT CCT TAG A30 ). The length of the ampliﬁed DNA
segment of the ﬁrst pair, speciﬁc for transgenic construct is
370 bp. The length of the ampliﬁed DNA segment of the
second pair, speciﬁc for the wild type construct, is 400 bp.

4.3.
Animal sacriﬁce, perfusion, ﬁxation and isolation of
the brain
Ten male transgenic mice (Nop2gt1gaj) and two wild type males
(C57Bl/6, Charles River) were anesthetised via intraperitoneal
injection of 2.5% tribromethanol (Avertin). Systemic circulation was ﬁrst washed with 50 ml phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) followed by ﬁxation. Mice designated for β-galactosidase
histochemical staining (ﬁve mice of the Nop2 strain and two
mice of the C57Bl/6 strain) were ﬁxed with 30 ml of ﬁxative
consisting of 2% formaldehyde and 0.2% glutaraldehyde. Mice
designated for immunohistochemical staining (ﬁve mice of
the Nop2 strain and two mice of the C57Bl/6 strain) were ﬁxed
with 20 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde. Brain, heart, kidney and
liver were isolated. After isolation of organs, tissue was
further left in a ﬁxative overnight. In order to isolate neural

stem cells, 14.5 day pregnant females were used. These
animals were sacriﬁced by cervical dislocation.

4.4.

Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)

Ischemic brain injury was induced by transient left middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in adult C57Bl/6 mice, age 2
months and weight 20 to 25 g. Animals were anesthetized with
2% isoﬂurane in 100% O2. During surgery, animal body temperature was maintained with a heating pad. Following a ventral
midline incision, the common carotid artery (CCA), external
carotid artery (ECA) and internal carotid artery (ICA) were
exposed and dissected. An intraluminal monoﬁlament (Doccol
Corporation) was inserted through the ECA into the ICA and
advanced to the origin of middle cerebral artery where it was left
in place for 60 min. After 60 min the intraluminal monoﬁlament
was withdrawn and perfusion was restored. After surgery mice
were kept in heated cages for 24 h.

4.5.

X-gal staining

After 2% formaldehyde and 0.2% glutaraldehyde ﬁxation, the
brain and other tissues (liver, kidney, lungs) designated for Xgal staining were quickly frozen at 80 1C and embedded in
Tissue-Tek O.C.T. compound (Sakura Finetek). Sections were
cut at 60 mm with a Leica cryostat and mounted on Superfrost
slides (Fischer Scientiﬁc). Mounted sections were washed in
PBS and placed at 37 1C overnight in a hybridization oven in a
solution containing X-gal as a substrate for β-galactosidase
(0.5 mg/ml X-gal, 2 mm MgCl2, 10 mm K4Fe(CN)6, 10 mm K3Fe
(CN)6 in PBS).

4.6.

BrdU administration

Ten adult C57Bl/6 mice (ﬁve MCAO mice and ﬁve control mice)
were used for the BrdU experiment. BrdU solution (SigmaAldrich, 5-Bromo-20 -deoxyuridine (BrdU) Z99% (HPLC), Cat. no.
B5002-1G) was prepared in sterile PBS, concentration 2 mg/ml.
Twenty four hours after MCAO all animals were intraperitoneally

74

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

injected with 50 mg/g BrdU solution. Animals were injected
every 12 h throughout 10 days. Twenty four hours after the last
injection animals were sacriﬁced and brain sections were
prepared for immunohistochemical staining. Before immunohistochemical staining brain sections were incubated with
10 mM sodium citrate, pH 6.0 at 97 1C/15 min. For immunohistochemical staining we used the primary antibody BrdU
(Bu20a) Mouse mAb (Cell Signaling, CST-5292S-100 ml, Cat.
no. 00011534).
For BrdU labelling in vitro the cells were incubated with
10 mM BrdU solution for 8 h, after which the medium was
aspirated, replaced with fresh medium and cells were placed
on special substrates containing poly-D-lysine and laminin.
After ﬁxation cells were prepared for immunohistochemical
staining.

4.7.

Immunohistochemical staining of mouse tissue

Tissue ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde was ﬁrst passed
through graded sucrose solution 10% and 30%. Afterwards it
was embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT Compound (Sakura Finetek), cut at 20 mm with a Leica cryostat and mounted on
Superfrost slides (Fischer Scientiﬁc). Mounted sections were
then rinsed in PBS, permeabilized in 0.2% Triton and blocked
with a blocking solution (5% goat serum, 0.2% Triton, PBS).
After blocking, sections were incubated with primary antibody solution (2% goat serum, 0.2% Triton, primary antibody,
PBS) overnight at 4 1C. Next day the sections were ﬁrst
washed in PBS and then incubated in secondary antibody
solution for 2.5 h at room temperature. Primary antibodies
used were following: chicken anti-βgal (Abcam, ab9361),
mouse anti-NeuN (Millipore, MAB377), chicken anti-GFAP
(Abcam, ab4674), chicken anti-Map2 (Abcam, ab5392), mouse
anti-nestin (Millipore, MAB353), rabbit anti-Nop2 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, sc-292098) and mouse anti-BrdU (Cell Signaling, CST-5292S-100 ml, Cat. no. 00011534). For secondary antibodies, either Alexa Fluors 488 or 546 antibodies were used,
depending on the primary antibody. Sections were analyzed
and recorded with confocal microscope Zeiss LSM 510 META.

4.8.

Immunohistochemical staining of the human tissue

After dewaxing in alcohol, and rehydrating in PBS, the
sections were pre-treated for 20 min in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in a 3:1 mixture of methanol and re-distilled water,
washed for 10 min in PBS, and immersed for 2 h in the
blocking solution (PBS containing 3% bovine serum albumine,
BSA and 0.5% Triton X-100, all from Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at
room temperature to prevent non-speciﬁc background staining. Sections were then incubated with primary antibody for
18 h at 4 1C, washed again, and further incubated with
secondary biotinylated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit antibodies,
respectively, diluted in blocking solution (1:200) for 1 h at
room temperature (Vectastain ABC kit, Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, USA). Afterward, sections were incubated in
Vectastain ABC reagent (streptavidin-peroxidase complex)
for 1 h at room temperature, rinsed in PBS for 10 min, and
ﬁnally, the peroxidase activity was visualized with Ni-3,3diaminobenzidine (Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Sections were dehydrated in a graded series of alcohol, cleared in xylene, and

cover-slipped with Histamount (National Diagnostic). Negative controls were included in all immunohistochemical
experiments: (i) by replacing the primary antibody with
blocking solution, or preimmune goat or horse serum; or (ii)
by omitting the secondary antibody or replacing it with
an inappropriate secondary antibody. No immunolabeling
was detected in the control sections. Qualitative analysis of
stained sections was performed using an upright microscope
Olympus Provis AX70, and images were captured with a
Nikon DXM1200 digital camera.

4.9.

Immunoelectronic microscopy

The procedure for immunoelectronic microscopy involved
ﬁxation in 3% PFA and 0.1% GA in Sörensen’s phosphate
buffer (SB), pH 7.2–7.4) cell medium. After washing in phosphate buffer SB, dehydration was performed in ascending
series of ethanol alcohol with a gradient (30, 50, 70, 90, 96%
ethanol). The cells were embedded in LR White with a gradual
increase in gradient. Finally, the cells were left in 100% LR
White overnight. Polymerization was performed in UV light
for 48 h. After cutting the 70–80 nm thick thin sections,
immunogold labeling was performed by the standard procedure (Sobol et al., 2011). Brieﬂy, rabbit polyclonal anti-NOP2
antibody was used as a primary antibody followed with goat
anti-rabbit IgG (HþL) antibody coupled with 12 nm colloidal
gold particles (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc).
The sections were examined using a FEI Morgagni 268
transmission electron microscope operated at 80 kV, and
the images were captured with Mega View III CCD camera.
Multiple sections of at least three independent immunogold
labeling experiments were analyzed. To facilitate the visualization of the immunolabeling in images, Adobe Photoshop
CS3 was used to identify the geometrical centres of 12 nm
gold particles and cover them with red dots.

4.10.

Culture of stem cells and neurons

In order to verify and compare the expression of Nop2 in
neural stem cells and mature neurons we used both neural
stem cell and primary neuronal cultures. For neural stem cell
isolation pregnant wild-type C57Bl/6 females were sacriﬁced.
On the 14.5th day of pregnancy, embryos were isolated and
parts of the telencephalic wall of 14.5 days old embryos were
dissociated using Accutase (Gibco). After a series of centrifugations and ﬁlter puriﬁcation, large numbers of homogeneous
and equally large round stem cells were obtained, which were
then placed in a speciﬁc proliferation supporting medium
comprising of: DMEM/F12, GlutaMAX (Gibco), the growth
factors EGF and FGF2 (Gibco), factors B27 and N2 (Gibco),
and antibiotics (Penicillin and Streptomycin, PAA). After
cultivation for a few days, neurospheres formed. Dissociated
neurospheres were placed on special substrates containing
poly-D-lysine and laminin (Sigma) to enable differentiation of
neurons. At the same time primary neuronal culture was
obtained from newborn mice cortices. Isolated cells were
cultured in a neuron-speciﬁc media: Neurobasal (Gibco),
factors B27 and N2 (Gibco), glutamine (PAA) and antibiotics
(Penicillin and Streptomycin, PAA), which enabled the growth
of a culture with a high percentage of neurons. In parallel, the

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

isolation of the cortex of newborn mice was performed and
a primary culture established in a neuron-speciﬁc media,
which enabled the growth of a culture of pure neurons.

4.11.

Human brain tissue sources and preparation

Human brain samples were obtained during obligatory autopsy
procedures, approved by the Internal Review Board of the
Ethical Committee of the School of Medicine, University of
Zagreb, in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki 2000,
after written consent of legal representatives of the human
subjects. Human subjects were aged 27 years, 36 years and 39
years, had no neurological, psychiatric or psychological medical records, and had died suddenly in accidents that did not
included brain trauma. The brain tissue was ﬁxed for 24 h in
4% phosphate-buffered paraformaldehyde (0.1 M phosphate
buffer, pH 7.4), and small tissue blocks were embedded in
parafﬁn and cut in 12 mm-thick serial sections in the coronal
plane. To delineate cytoarchitectural boundaries and cellular
compartments of the telencephalic regions, every tenth section
of the series was stained by the Nissl method (not shown).

4.12.

Cell counting

For the purpose of cell quantiﬁcation, we used an approach in
which positive cells were marked using the Photoshop CS5
application in which cells were enumerated and subsequently their number was declared as an absolute count in
0.5 mm2. For this purpose we analyzed 8 brains, surveying a
volume of approx. 5 mm3 for each brain.

Conﬂict of interest
Authors have no conﬂict of interest to declare.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by projects of the Croatian
National Foundation (02.05/40) and Foundation Adris
awarded to D.M., by FP7 Glowbrain project awarded to S.G.,
by Foundation Adris project awarded to N.J.M. and by projects
of Technology Agency of the Czech Republic (TE01020118) and
Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech Republic (FR-TI3/
588). We thank Gabriel Borden for help with the language.

Appendix A.

Supporting information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found
in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.
2014.11.040.

r e f e r e n c e s

Altman, J., Das, G.D., 1965. Post-natal origin of microneurones in
the rat brain. Nature 207, 953–956.

75

Bantis, A., Giannopoulos, A., Gonidi, M., Liossi, A., Aggelonidou, E.,
Petrakakou, E., Athanassiades, P., Athanassiadou, P., 2004.
Expression of p120, Ki-67 and PCNA as proliferation biomarkers
in imprint smears of prostate carcinoma and their prognostic
value. Cytopathology 15, 25–31.
Bernardino, L., Eiriz, M.F., Santos, T., Xapelli, S., Grade, S., Rosa, A.I.,
Cortes, L., Ferreira, R., Bragança, J., Agasse, F., Ferreira, L.,
Malva, J.O., 2012. Histamine stimulates neurogenesis in the
rodent subventricular zone. Stem Cells 30, 773–784.
Busch, H., Busch, R.K., Freeman, J.W., Perlaky, L., 1991. Nucleolar
protein P120 and its targeting for cancer chemotherapy. Boll.
Soc. Ital. Biol. Sper. 67, 739–750.
Christie, K.J., Turnley, A.M., 2013. Regulation of endogenous
neural stem/progenitor cells for neural repair-factors that
promote neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the normal and
damaged brain. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 6, 1–18.
Curtis, M.A., Low, V.F., Faull, R.L.M., 2012. Neurogenesis and
progenitor cells in the adult human brain: a comparison
between hippocampal and subventricular progenitor
proliferation. Dev. Neurobiol. 72, 990–1005.
Fonagy, A., Swiderski, C., Dunn, M., Freeman, J.W., 1992.
Antisense-mediated specific inhibition of P120 protein
expression prevents G1- to S-phase transition. Cancer Res. 52,
5250–5256.
Fonagy, A., Swiderski, C., Wilson, A., Bolton, W., Kenyon, N.,
Freeman, J.W., 1993. Cell cycle regulated expression of
nucleolar antigen P120 in normal and transformed human
fibroblasts. J. Cell. Physiol. 154, 16–27.
Fonagy, A., Swiderski, C., Ostrovsky, A.M., Bolton, W.E., Freeman, J.W.,
1994. Effect of nucleolar P120 expression level on the proliferation
capacity of breast cancer cells. Cancer Res. 54, 1859–1864.
Freeman, J.W., Busch, R.K., Gyorkey, F., Gyorkey, P., Ross, B.E.,
Busch, H., 1988. Identification and characterization of a
human proliferation-associated nucleolar antigen with a
molecular weight of 120,000 expressed in early G1 phase.
Cancer Res. 48, 1244–1251.
Freeman, J.W., Busch, H., 1991. Monoclonal antibodies to human
tumor nucleolar antigens: probes for studying biological
function and determining clinical significance. Hum.
Antibodies Hybridomas 2, 4–10.
Garcia, A.D., Doan, N.B., Imura, T., Bush, T.G., Sofroniew, M.V.,
2004. GFAP-expressing progenitors are the principal source of
constitutive neurogenesis in adult mouse forebrain. Nat.
Neurosci. 7, 1233–1241.
Kirby, E.D., Muroy, S.E., Sun, W.G., Covarrubias, D., Leong, M.J.,
Barchas, L.A., Kaufer, D., 2013. Acute stress enhances adult rat
hippocampal neurogenesis and activation of newborn
neurons via secreted astrocytic FGF2. Elife 2, 1–23.
Liu, Y., Li, Q.C., Miao, Y., Xu, H.T., Dai, S.D., Wei, Q., Dong, Q.Z.,
Dong, X.J., Zhao, Y., Zhao, C., Wang, E.H., 2009. Ablation of
p120-catenin enhances invasion and metastasis of human
lung cancer cells. Cancer Sci. 100, 441–448.
Mitrečić, D., Malnar, T., Gajović, S., 2008. Nucleolar protein 1 (Nol1)
expression in the mouse brain. Coll. Antropol. 32, 123–126.
Mullen, R.J., Buck, C.R., Smith, A.M., 1992. NeuN, a neuronal specific
nuclear protein in vertebrates. Development 116 (201–111).
Saijo, Y., Sato, G., Usui, K., Sato, M., Sagawa, M., Kondo, T.,
Minami, Y., Nukiwa, T., 2001. Expression of nucleolar protein
p120 predicts poor prognosis in patients with stage I lung
adenocarcinoma. Ann. Oncol. 12, 1121–1125.
Shin, Y.J., Kim, H.L., Park, J.M., Cho, J.M., Kim, S.Y., Lee, M.Y., 2013.
Characterization of nestin expression and vessel association
in the ischemic core following focal cerebral ischemia in rats.
Cell Tissue Res. 351, 383–395.
Sobol, M., Nebesářová, J., Hozák, P., 2011. A method for preserving
ultrastructural properties of mitotic cells for subsequent
immunogold labeling using low-temperature embedding in LR
White resin. Histochem. Cell Biol. 135, 103–110.

76

brain research 1597 (2015) 65–76

Talvinen, K., Tuikkala, J., Nykänen, M., Nieminen, A., Anttinen, J.,
Nevalainen, O.S., Hurme, S., Kuopio, T., Kronqvist, P., 2010.
Altered expression of p120catenin predicts poor outcome in
invasive breast cancer. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 136,
1377–13887.
Uchiyama, B., Saijo, Y., Kumano, N., Abe, T., Fujimura, S., Ohkuda, K.,
Handa, M., Satoh, K., Nukiwa, T., 1997. Expression of nucleolar
protein p120 in human lung cancer: difference in histological
types as a marker for proliferation. Clin. Cancer Res. 3,
1873–1877.

Ventura, L., Migaldi, M., Criscuolo, M., Castelli, M., Barbolini, G.,
Ranieri, A., Bifaretti, G., Uboldi, P., Leocata, P., 1999. Nucleolar
protein p120 expression in oral carcinoma. Anticancer Res. 19,
1423–1426.
Woolford, J.L., Warner, J.R., 1991. The ribosome and its synthesis.
In: Broach, J.R., Pringle, J.R., Jones, E.W. (Eds.), The Molecular
Biology and Cellular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Cold Spring Harbor, New York, NY, pp. 587–626.

