Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

RESEARCH

Open Access

Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
neural stem cells survive, migrate, differentiate,
and improve neurologic function in a rat model
of middle cerebral artery occlusion
Ting Yuan1†, Wei Liao3†, Nian-Hua Feng4, Yuan-Lei Lou4, Xin Niu1, Ai-Jun Zhang2, Yang Wang1,4*
and Zhi-Feng Deng2,3*

Abstract
Introduction: Stroke is a major cause of permanent neurologic damage, with few effective treatments available to
restore lost function. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have the potential to generate all cell types in vitro and
can be generated from a stroke patient. Therefore, iPSCs are attractive donor sources of genetically identical
“patient-specific” cells to hold promise in therapy for stroke. In the present study, we established a four-stage
culture system by using serum-free medium and retinoic acid (RA) to differentiate iPSCs into neural stem cells
(NSCs) effectively and stably. Our hypothesis was that iPSC-derived NSCs would survive, migrate, and differentiate
in vivo, and improve neurologic function after transplantation into the brains of rats with ischemic stroke.
Methods: Human iPSCs (iPS-S-01) and human ESCs (HuES17) were used to differentiate into NSCs by using our
four-stage culture system. iPSCs and differentiated NSCs were characterized by immunocytochemistry staining and
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. After establishment of focal cerebral ischemia with
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and cell transplantation, animals were killed at 1 week and 2 weeks
to analyze survival, migration, and differentiation of implanted cells in brain tissue. Animal behavior was evaluated
via rope grabbing, beam walking, and Morris water maze tests.
Results: iPSCs were efficiently induced into NSCs by using a newly established four-stage induction system in vitro.
iPSCs expressed pluripotency-associated genes Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog before NSC differentiation. The iPSC-derived
NSCs spontaneously differentiated into neurons and astrocytes, which highly express β-tubulin and glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP), respectively. On transplantation into the striatum, CM-DiI labeled iPSC-derived NSCs were
found to migrate into the ischemia area at 1 week and 2 weeks, and animal-function recovery was significantly
improved in comparison with control groups at 3 weeks.
Conclusions: The four-stage induction system is stable and effective to culture, differentiate, and induce iPSCs to
NSCs by using serum-free medium combined with retinoic acid (RA). Implanted iPSC-derived NSCs were able to
survive, migrate into the ischemic brain area to differentiate into mature neural cells, and seem to have potential to
restore lost neurologic function from damage due to stroke in a rat model.
Keywords: Induced pluripotent stem cell, Stoke, Neural stem cell, Middle cerebral artery occlusion

* Correspondence: wangy63cn@126.com; dengzf63@126.com
†
Equal contributors
1
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated
Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China
2
Department of Neurosurgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Sixth
People’s Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2013 Yuan et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

Introduction
Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and disability in humans. Currently, no effective treatments can restore lost neurologic function after stroke in the clinic
[1,2]. An increasing number of studies have provided
evidence that cell transplantation can lead to the repair
of damaged brain tissue and functional recovery in preclinical stroke models [3-8], including transplantation of
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) [9,10], neural stem
cells (NSCs) [11,12], and embryonic stem cells (ESCs)
[13,14]. These stem cells can differentiate into neural
lineages to replace lost neurons and partially reconstruct
damaged neuronal circuitry. Nevertheless, disadvantages
such as immune rejection and less differentiation potential of adult stem cells, as well as ethical considerations
of ESCs, now limit their utility in clinical trials.
The establishment of induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) offers new prospects for regenerative medicine
in stroke. iPSCs behave in a manner similar to that of
ESCs with high reproduction ability and pluripotency to
differentiate into various types of cells [15]. Furthermore,
iPSCs can be generated from cells of any part of an adult
patient, avoiding both ethical problems and immune rejection, and have a potential to provide genetically identical “patient-specific” cells for stroke patients.
iPSCs have been shown to differentiate successfully
into neural precursor cells, neurons, hematopoietic cells,
cardiomyocytes, smooth muscle cells, vascular endothelial cells, and so on, in vitro [16-19]. Some in vivo studies
have confirmed that iPSCs transplanted directly into the
cerebral tissue of ischemic stroke rats could differentiate
into neurons and promote functional recovery [20,21],
but only a very small number of implanted cells
exhibited the specific markers of neurons. Furthermore,
a portion of grafted iPSCs formed tumors in implanted
sites [21]. These results indicate that the differentiation
ability of iPSCs into neurons is limited and associated
with unacceptable high rates of tumor formation. Therefore, if iPSCs are induced into NSCs before transplantation in vitro, it is possible to improve the effectiveness
of cell therapy, while reducing the risk of tumor
formation.
Retinoic acid (RA) has been shown to have the potential to improve the differentiation of ESCs into NSCs
[22,23], but the efficiency is low. In recent years, the alternative serum-free induction protocols have been used
widely to differentiate ESCs to NSCs for the advantage
of definite components of culture medium, but this induction process needs a long time [24,25]. We used a
modified protocol (a four-stage culture system) combining RA induction and serum-free medium culture. The
human iPSCs and ESCs were efficiently induced into
neural precursor cells and then differentiated into mature neural cells in this newly established four-stage

Page 2 of 10

culture system. After we induced them from iPSCs to
NSCs, we implanted iPSC-derived NSCs stereotactically
into the striatum of rats with ischemic stroke. To evaluate their therapeutic potential, we observed the differentiation, migration, and distribution of grafted cells after
transplantation, and analyzed the neurologic and functional status. To our knowledge, we are the first to study
the effects of combining RA and serum-free medium to
induce iPSCs into NSCs and observe the direct migration of human iPSC-derived NSCs from implanted sites
to ischemic brain areas to restore lost neurologic function in a rat model.

Materials and methods
Human iPSCs culture

Human iPSCs (iPS-S-01) and human ESCs (HuES17)
were provided by the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in agreement with Liao J and Xiao L [26]. The iPS-S-01 cells
were induced by six transcription factors (Oct4, Sox2,
Nanog, Lin28, C-myc, and Klf4) and resembled the
phenotype and pluripotency of undifferentiated human
ESCs [26]. Both iPSCs and ESCs were maintained on
mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) feeder layer, which
was inactivated by mitomycin. The medium was changed
every day. In general, every 5 to 7 days, when colonies
approached approximately 70% confluence, or greater
than 700 microns, the cultured cells were then passaged
by 1 mg/ml collagenase type IV and mechanical dissociation, and split at a 1:4 to 1:6 ratio. The medium for
iPSCs and ESCs culture consisted of Knockout DMEM
supplemented with 20% Knockout serum replacement,
1% nonessential amino acid, 1 mM L-glutamine, 0.1 mM
β-mercaptoethanol, and 4 ng/ml bFGF (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA).
Neural differentiation

Our protocol for neural differentiation is outlined later
(Figure 1A) and divided into four stages. Colonies of
iPSCs and ESCs were detached and pooled together in
EB (embryoid body) medium (iPSCs medium without
bFGF) in suspension culture in low-attachment Petri
dishes for 4 days and grown as EBs (stage 1), which further were used for neural differentiation. The collected
EBs were divided into three groups randomly: spontaneous differentiation group (EBs were cultured in EB
medium for 11 days), retinoic acid (RA) induction group
(EBs were in adherent culture in EB medium supplied
with 5 × 10-7 M RA for 4 days, and then transferred to
EB medium for 7 days), RA and serum-free medium induction group (EBs were cultured in EB medium supplied
with 5 × 10-7 M RA for 4 days and then transferred to
serum-free medium for 7 days) (stage 2). The serum-free
medium consisted of DMEM/F12 (1:1), EGF (20 ng/ml),

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

Page 3 of 10

Figure 1 Cell culture and induction of NSCs from iPSCs (bar = 50 μm). The stages for neuronal differentiation (A). iPSCs culture and
identification (B through H). iPSCs maintained on a feeder layer tended to form packed clones with a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio (B), displayed a
high level of alkaline phosphatase (C), RT-PCR shows that iPSCs expressed pluripotent genes Oct4, Sox2, Nanog (D). EBs in suspending condition for
4 days and initiated the differentiation program (E), spheres formed neural-tube like rosette structures (F), neural-tube-like rosette structures in the
center of adherent spheres (G), network-like structure formed after the spheres were cultured in a laminin-coated flask for 1 month (H).

bFGF (10 ng/ml), B27 (2%), LIF (10 ng/ml), and heparin
sodium (2 μg/ml) (all from Gibco). When RA-induced aggregates grew in media without RA, some cells detached
from dish bottom and suspended and grew (stage 3).
These suspended cells then formed neural spheres, which
were then plated on poly-1-ornithine (10 mg/ml)/laminin
(5 μg/ml)-coated dishes in the serum-free medium for adherent culture up to 7 days (stage 4). The cells were split
1:3 to 1:4 with a cell-detachment enzyme (Accutase) every
5 to 7 days.
Establishment of focal cerebral ischemia and cell
transplantation

All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee of Jiangxi Province,
China. All experiments on animals were carried out in an
ethical manner. Adult male Sprague–Dawley rats (250 to
300 g) were used to establish the model of middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO), as previously described [27].
Rats were anesthetized, and a 4–0 nylon intraluminal
suture was introduced from the minimal incision of the
external carotid artery into the internal carotid artery at
about a depth of 18 mm to 20 mm until it blocked the
origin of the MCA. After 2-hour temporary MCA occlusion, reperfusion was performed by withdrawal of
the suture. The rats with significant neurologic deficit
of the left forelimb, according to the Longa 5-point
scale [27], were chosen as candidates for cell transplantation. Sham-operated animals underwent the same
surgical procedure without suture insertion.

Two days before cell transplantation, all rats were immunosuppressed with a daily injection of cyclosporin A
(20 mg/kg) and lasting for 1 week [28]. The NSCs were
dissociated with Accutase to single cells, then were collected and labeled with CM-DiI before injection into the
ischemia striatum (Figure 2A) by using a stereotactic
apparatus (Zhenghua Biological Instruments Co., Ltd.
Anhui Province, China). Based on a previously published
article [29], the iPSC-derived NSCs (106 cells in 30 μl
PBS) solution was injected into the striatum site, which
was 0.8 mm behind the anterior fontanel, 3.4 mm left to
the sagittal suture, and the injection depth was 5.8 mm.
The injection was performed immediately once the reperfusion began, the time was controlled within 10 minutes for a constant speed, and the needle was left in for
an additional 5 minutes before removal. The rats were
randomly divided into three groups (each group, n = 5):
sham group, iPSCs-derived NSCs transplantation group,
PBS transplantation group; and the transplantation
group was further divided into two subgroups: transplantation for 7 days, transplantation for 14 days. The
neurologic scores were determined before and after the
cell transplantation. After 7 and 14 days from cell transplant, the rats were killed after deep anesthesia and were
transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde. Dissected whole brains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 2 hours and were dehydrated by using sucrose
density gradient at 20% to 30% for each day. The 8-μm
frozen sections were prepared for immunocytochemistry
staining.

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

Page 4 of 10

Figure 2 Transplanted cells improved the behavioral and sensorimotor function of the models. The NSCs derived from iPSCs cultured in
RA and serum-free medium for 1 month were transplanted into the striatum of the animal brains (A); rope-grabbing experiment (B), beamwalking (C), and Morris water maze (D) score. (Compared with the sham and PBS groups).

Immunocytochemistry staining

Cells and rat brains were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes. Nonspecific sites were blocked with
1% BSA/PBS (for extracellular epitopes) or 1% BSA/
PBS/0.5% triton X-100 (for intracellular epitopes) for
30 minutes at 37°C. Then the specimens were incubated
with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. The redundant
primary antibodies were removed by washing with PBS for
5 minutes and repeated 3 times the next day. Second
antibodies labeled with FITC were used. Nuclei were
stained with 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, 0.5 μg/
ml, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA). The following
antibodies were used: Anti-Nestin (monoclonal, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), Anti-Sox2
(monoclonal, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), Anti-β
-Tubulin (monoclonal, Chemicon, Billerica, MA, USA),
Anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP, monoclonal,
Santa Cruz Biotechnology), Anti-Oct3/4 (monoclonal,
Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA). Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 1% BSA (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) at 1:100 and 1:200, respectively.
Fluorescence was observed under a fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan), and photos were taken
with a DP70 digital camera system (Olympus). Positive
cells in brain tissue were counted blindly in five coronal
sections per animal.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis

Total RNA was extracted from cultured cells by using
Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). 1 μg of total RNA from the
cells was used for the synthesis of the first-strand cDNA
with a Revert Aid first-strand cDNA synthesis kit
(Fermentas, Life Sciences, Burlington, ON, Canada) in a

total volume of 20 μl. For quantitative PCR, SYBR Green
supermix was used, and standard curves for each primer
set were generated to confirm that only one amplicon
was generated at the same efficiency as the reference
gene GAPDH. PCR was performed by using the following thermal profile: 10 minutes at 95°C; denature at 95°C
for 15 seconds, annealing for 30 seconds at 60°C, elongation at 72°C for 30 seconds, for 40 cycles; extension for
10 minutes at 72°C, and finally paused at 4°C. Relative
expression was calculated by using the comparative Ct
method (2-△△Ct). 2-△△Ct >3 or <1/3 was deemed statistically significant. The PCR primers special to each transcript were as follows (Table 1). (All primers were
designed by using the Primer Designer software).
Neurobehavioral evaluation

Neurobehavioral evaluation was performed according to
the previously published studies [30-32]. The rats were
subjected to behavioral testing 1, 2, and 3 weeks after
MCAO modeling, by using the rope-grabbing experiment
Table 1 Primers used for reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis
Genes

Forward (5’–3’)

Reverse (5’–3’)

GAPDH

GGCATGGACTGTGGTCATGAG

TGCACCACCAACTGCTTAGC

Oct4

CGA AGAGAAAGCGAACCA
GTATC

AGAACCACACTCGGACCACA
TC

Sox2

CCCC CGG CGGCAATAGCA

TCGGCGCCGGGG AGATACAT

Nestin

GCCCTGACCACTCCAGTTTAG

CCCTCTATGGCTGTTTCTTTC
TCTAC

GFAP

GAAGCTCCAGGATGAAACCA

ACCTCCTCCTCGTGGATCTT

β-tubulin CTGGTGGAGAACACGGATGAG GCGGAAGCAGATGTCGTAGAG

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

for assaying the myodynamics of the model, beam walking
and Morris water maze for testing the spatial, working
memory of the models.
Statistical analysis

Outcome measurement for each experiment was reported
as mean ± SEM. All data were analyzed by using SPSS
17.0. Significance of intergroup differences and nerveassessment data were analyzed with repeated measures of
analysis of variance (ANOVA), and the unpaired Student t test. A P value of less than 0.05 was considered
to be statistically significant.

Results
IPSCs efficiently induced into NSCs with RA and serumfree medium

iPS-S-01 and HuES17 tended to form packed clones
with a high nucleus/cytoplasm ratio (Figure 1B) and
displayed a high level of alkaline phosphatase (Figure 1C).
To make sure of the undifferentiated state of the cells,
pluripotency-associated genes Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog
were detected with qRT-PCR before the NSC differentiation. The results showed that those cells expressed high
levels of pluripotency-associated genes (Figure 1D).

Page 5 of 10

A four-stage induction protocol was used for iPS-S-01
and HuES17 differentiation into the NSC. iPS-S-01 and
HuES17 clones were cultured in suspension condition
for 4 days and formed embryonic bodies (EB) (Figure 1E).
Then these EBs were transferred to serum-free medium
supplied with 5 × 10-7 M RA for another 4 days of induction, which promoted the neutralization program.
Neural-tube-like rosette structures appeared on the third
day (Figure 1F), with the more culture days, the more
rosette structures. These spheres expressed uniformly
for Nestin and Sox2 (Figure 3A,B) with immunocytochemistry staining. When plated on poly-L-ornithine
and laminin precoated flasks and cultured in serum-free
medium, iPSC-derived NSCs could also form neuraltube-like rosette structures (Figure 1G). The network-like
structures formed after the spheres were cultured in a
laminin-coated flask for 1 month (Figure 1H). Accutase
was used for the passage of those cells. Immunocytochemistry staining showed that those cells could express Nestin
and Sox2 as highly as before (Figure 3E,F). Whereas the
iPSCs-derived NSCs were cultured in medium supplement with fetal bovine serum, iPSCs-derived NSCs spontaneously differentiated to neurons and astrocytes,
which highly express β-tubulin and GFAP, respectively
(Figure 3C,D,G,H). The qRT-PCR results demonstrated

Figure 3 The expression of pluripotent potent and neural markers during the induction process of the iPSCs to NSCs.
Immunocytochemistry staining shows that the spheres expressed the neural precursor markers Nestin (A), Sox2 (B) induced by RA and serum-free
medium, and after culture, in serum medium; those spheres expressed the neuron marker β-tubulin (C) and astrocyte marker GFAP (D). The
adherent cells expressed the neural precursor markers Nestin (E), Sox2 (F), and differentiated into neurons and astrocytes in the same conditions
(G, H). The expression of pluripotent genes Sox2 and Oct4 during the induction process in the iPSCs and ESCs (I); the iPSC-derived NSCs
expressed high levels of Nestin, β-tubulin, and GFAP during the induction process and showed a similar tendency to the ESC-derived NSCs
(J, *compared with ESCs; P < 0.05).

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

that the pluripotent stem cell gene Sox2 expression was
increased, and Oct4 expression was decreased during the
induction process (Figure 3I). Both the iPSC-derived
NSCs and the ESC-derived NSCs expressed high levels of
Nestin, β-tubulin, and GFAP (Figure 3J).
To test whether iPSCs cultured in serum-free medium
combined with RA could be efficiently differentiated into
NSCs, we chose three groups to compare: RA induction
group, RA and serum-free medium induction group, and
spontaneous differentiation group. The cells were collected on days 7. The qRT-PCR results indicated that
the expression levels of Nestin in RA induction group as
well as RA and serum-free medium induction group
were significantly higher than the spontaneous differentiation group. The fold changes were 3.71 ± 0.63 and
7.14 ± 1.96, respectively (Figure 4A). Additionally, the
immunostaining results showed that Nestin-positive cell
rates were 23.77% ± 2.96%, 53.25% ± 4.52%, and 87.54% ±
3.67% (Figure 4B) in the spontaneous-differentiation
group, RA-induction group, and RA plus serum-free
medium-induction group, respectively. Significant differences were found between groups. It means that the iPSCs
can be induced into NSCs highly efficiently with RA and
serum-free medium.

Page 6 of 10

cells expressed the β-tubulin (25.7% ± 12.3%; Figure 5B)
for the 1-week transplantation group. The 2-week transplantation group (51.4% ± 7.5% Figure 5C) expressed
Nestin, and more grafted differentiated into the neuron
(44.3% ± 2.5% expressed β-tubulin Figure 5D) and astrocytes (11.2% ± 1.4% expressed GFAP; Figure 5E). These results suggested that the NSCs derived from iPSCs could
survive in the models of MCAO and differentiate into the
neurons and astrocytes. We did not observe the tumorigenesis during the transplantation process.
Transplanted cells improved the behavioral and
sensorimotor function of the rats

Transplanted cells survived and migrated into the strokedamaged host tissue

Animal behavior was evaluated with the rope-grabbing,
beam-walking, and Morris water-maze tests 0 days, 1, 2,
and 3 weeks after MCAO models were prepared. No obvious differences among the groups were found before
the MCAO or transplantation. It was found that no obvious sensorimotor and functional differences among the
three groups at 0 days and the first and second weeks
(P > 0.05); but at the third week, the transplantation
group showed greater function recovery than did those
of the other groups (PBS and sham groups, P < 0.05)
(Figure 2B through D). These results demonstrate that
the NSCs derived from iPSCs improved the behavioral
and sensorimotor functions in a rat model of MCAO
through transplanting cells in the striatum.

The brain tissues from weeks 1 and 2 processed for immunocytochemistry staining showed that: amounts of
CM-DiI-labeled NSCs derived from iPSCs were found
besides the striatum after the cells were transplanted.
One week later, the CM-DiI-labeled cells (68.2 ± 2.3
count/field) were found in the models’ brains, particularly around the striatum, but less (11.6 ± 1.8 count/field)
in the other areas, which demonstrated that the
transplanted cells could survive in the models. Two
weeks after transplantation, the majority of cells (37.2 ±
3.5 count/field) migrated into the ischemia area. The immunocytochemistry staining showed that the grafted cells
expressed the Nestin (68.5% ± 2.8%, Figure 5A), and a few

Discussion
In recent years, with the development of regenerative
medicine, stem cell transplantation for the treatment of
central nervous system disease is considered to be a way
of great potential. NSCs derived from iPSCs seem to be
the ideal seed cells for transplantation therapy for neurologic diseases. Because iPSCs share similar characteristics and potential with ESCs, we may study iPSCs by
applying the same protocols that had been previously
developed in ES cells.
Various culture protocols for the generation of NSCs
from iPSCs have been reported in many studies, and the

Figure 4 The expression of Nestin during the induction process among the three groups. The quantity of mRNA of Nestin in RA plus serumfree medium group was the highest among the three groups (A). During the induction process, Nestin-positive cell rate was the highest in RA plus
serum-free-medium group (B) (*compared with the spontaneous-differentiation group, P < 0.05; #compared with the RA-induction group, P < 0.05).

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

Page 7 of 10

Figure 5 Transplanted cells survived and migrated into the stroke-damaged host tissue (bar = 100 μm). The NSCs derived from iPSCs
differentiated into neural cells, which were immunopositive for Nestin (A, C) and β-tubulin (B, D) (A, B: group of transplantation for 7 days;
C, D: group of transplantation for 14 days). Two weeks after transplantation, some of the transplanted cells were immunopositive with GFAP (E).

main methods are the following: RA-mediated induction
[33], stromal cell coculture, conditioned medium induction, and serum-free-medium induction [25]. RA has
been demonstrated to induce significant neural differentiation of ESCs [33-35]. In 1995, Bain [34] used RA to
induce mouse ESCs into nerve cells successfully, and
these cells had the electrophysiological properties and
functions of nerve cells. Later, Zhou and Bahrvand
[36,37] reported that the use of RA could promote human ESCs differentiation into neural stem cells, but efficiency was low, and the survival capacity of RA-induced
neuronal cells was limited [38]. Stromal cell coculture
and conditioned-medium induction are also able to induce ESCs to differentiate into neural cells, but the two
methods have a common shortcoming, in that the
medium composition is complex, and this complicates
the study of its mechanism.
In recent years, induction protocols using cytokines
and serum-free medium have been established. Koch
[24] successfully used serum-free medium to induce human ESCs into NSCs. The serum-free medium contains
N2, insulin, FGF, and B27, and the data showed that
FGF was able to stimulate proliferation and differentiation of a variety of cell types originated from

multigerminal layers. A study [39] showed that neuroepithelial precursor cells differentiated from ESCs proliferate in the presence of basic fibroblast growth factor
(bFGF), and differentiate into both neurons and glia
after withdrawal of bFGF. Daadi [25] successfully induced ESCs into NSCs by using serum-free medium
containing bFGF, leukemia inhibitory growth factor
(LIF), and EGF. These factors are known to stimulate
the proliferation of NSCs, and LIF has the potential to
maintain the pluripotency of NSCs and to prevent NSCs
from differentiating into neurons. Definite components
of serum-free medium are beneficial to study the relation between cell growth and medium components.
In the present study, we established a modified fourstage culture system to induce iPSCs to NSCs by taking
the advantages of previously developed protocols, by
using RA combined with serum-free medium containing
bFGF, EGF, LIF, B27, and heparin sodium to induce
iPSCs to NSCs in adherent culture. The results showed
that this system was stable and effective to induce neural
differentiation of iPSCs. Induced cells expressed high
levels of NSC markers, Nestin and Sox2, and have been
amplified and passaged in vitro for more than 35 cell
generations.

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

In addition, NSCs can be expanded and differentiated
in both suspension and adherent cultures. However, it is
difficult to control the quality and quantity of cells in
the process of suspension culture, because ESC-derived
neurosphere cells will lose the potential of self-renewal
and differentiation gradually during the long suspension
culture, and the types of neurosphere cells are very diverse [40-42]. The adherent culture may avoid these
shortcomings.
After implantation into the brain in a rat model of
stroke, iPSC-derived NSCs were able to survive and express NSC makers. One week after implantation, implanted cells expressed mainly β-tubulin in addition to
Nestin; after 2 weeks, besides continuing to express
Nestin and β-tubulin, a few implanted cells expressed
GFAP (maker of astrocytes). These results show that
grafted NSCs have the potential to differentiate into
neurons and glia, and create the possibility of repairing
brain injury or other neurologic defects through a neural
cell-replacement strategy.
Tumorigenesis is a big challenge in stem cellreplacement therapy. Some animal studies demonstrated
that direct implantation of ESCs or iPSCs led to tumor
formation [21,43]. In this study, two rats survived for
more than 3 months, and no abnormal proliferation of
cells was observed (data not shown). It implied that the
implanted cells were not susceptible to tumorigenesis.
Although we did not observe tumor formation in this
study, it could be that a short period of observation lasting for only 2 weeks was not long enough for tumor development and formation. Therefore, the long-term
safety of iPSC-derived NSCs implantation is still a serious problem.
Grafted stem cells have the potential to migrate
in vivo. A number of studies [44,45] observed migration
of various implanted stem cells into lesions of the brain,
and indicated that possibly stem cells are targeted by inflammatory chemotactic factors and cytokines extracted
from ischemic brain tissue. This feature of chemotaxis is
the pathophysiologic basis of repairing brain injury by
cell-implantation therapy. In this study, implanted NSCs
were observed migrating from the striatum toward the
ischemic boundary at 2 weeks after implantation.
In our study, we observed a significant increase of
neurologic scores 3 weeks after transplantation compared with the control groups, demonstrating a positive
effect of repairing ischemic brain with iPSC-derived
NSCs. Although 3 weeks is long enough for differentiation of implanted NSCs into neurons, it is not enough
for implanted cells to replace dead neurons and function. As a result, some scholars [46,47] believe that early
recovery of function with stem cell transplantation is
due to neurologic protection of growth factor release,
not new neural cells replacement. Therefore, restoration

Page 8 of 10

of neurologic function in this study after cell implantation may be more relevant to a neuroprotective effect.
Note that PBS injection also improved the behavior of
rats at 2 weeks (Figure 2B through D). One reason is
that collateral circulation has been formed in brain tissue, and the function of impaired cells may be recovered
in 2 weeks, which contributes to the improved behavior
of rats. Moreover, the improvement of behavior in this
rat model may be partly owing to functional compensation after brain injury.

Conclusions
This study established a stable and effective culture system for cell expansion, differentiation, and induction of
iPSCs to NSCs in vitro by using serum-free medium
combined with RA. After stereotactic implantation of
iPSC-derived NSCs into the brain in a rat-stroke model,
implanted cells were able to survive, migrate into ischemic brain areas, and differentiate into mature neural
cells. Furthermore, this cell-implantation therapy seemed
to restore lost neurologic function to a certain extent in
a rat stroke model.
Abbreviations
bFGF: Basic fibroblast growth factor; BMSC: Bone marrow stromal cell;
BSA: Bovine serum albumin; DAPI: 4, 6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole;
DMEM: Dulbecco modified Eagle medium; EB: Embryoid body;
EGF: Epidermal growth factor; ESC: Embryonic stem cell; FITC: Fluorescein
isothiocyanate; GFAP: Glial fibrillary acidic protein; iPSC: Induced pluripotent
stem cell; LIF: Leukemia inhibitory factor; MCAO: Middle cerebral artery
occlusion; MEF: Mouse embryonic fibroblast; NSC: Neural stem cell;
PBS: Phosphate-buffered saline; RA: Retinoic acid; RT-PCR: Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
ZFD and YW conceived the idea and designed the experiments, TY and WL
performed animal experiments, data analysis, and manuscript preparation.
NHF, YLL, and XN are responsible for cell-culture experiments and the
collection and assembly of data. AJZ contributed to animal experiments and
neurologic-function analysis. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National S&T Major Special Project on Major
New Drug Innovation (2011ZX09102-010-01), National Nature Science
Foundation Grants (81160154,81271270), Nature Science Foundation of
Jiangxi Province (2010GZY0256), and the innovation team construction plan
of Jiangxi Province (20113BCB24018).
Author details
1
Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated
Sixth People’s Hospital, Shanghai 200233, China. 2Department of
Neurosurgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital,
Shanghai 200233, China. 3Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, China. 4Institute of
Urology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang
330006, China.
Received: 1 April 2013 Revised: 1 April 2013
Accepted: 10 June 2013 Published: 14 June 2013

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

References
1. Zhu Y, Wan S, Zhan RY: Inducible pluripotent stem cells for the treatment
of ischemic stroke: current status and problems. Rev Neurosci 2012,
23:393–402.
2. Savitz SI: Stem cells and stroke: are we further away than anyone is
willing to admit? Int J Stroke 2012, 7:34–35.
3. Peterson DA: Umbilical cord blood cells and brain stroke injury: bringing
in fresh blood to address an old problem. J Clin Invest 2004, 114:312–314.
4. Cui X, Chopp M, Zacharek A, Dai J, Zhang C, Yan T, Ning R, Roberts C,
Shehadah A, Kuzmin-Nichols N, Sanberg CD, Chen J: Combination
treatment of stroke with sub-therapeutic doses of Simvastatin and
human umbilical cord blood cells enhances vascular remodeling and
improves functional outcome. Neuroscience 2012, 227:223–231.
5. Bhasin A, Padma Srivastava MV, Mohanty S, Bhatia R, Kumaran SS, Bose S:
Stem cell therapy: a clinical trial of stroke. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 2012,
115:1003–1008.
6. Ikegame Y, Yamashita K, Hayashi S, Mizuno H, Tawada M, You F, Yamada K,
Tanaka Y, Egashira Y, Nakashima S, Yoshimura S, Iwama T: Comparison of
mesenchymal stem cells from adipose tissue and bone marrow for
ischemic stroke therapy. Cytotherapy 2011, 13:675–685.
7. Smith HK, Gavins FN: The potential of stem cell therapy for stroke: is
PISCES the sign? FASEB J 2012, 26:2239–2252.
8. Banerjee S, Williamson DA, Habib N, Chataway J: The potential benefit of
stem cell therapy after stroke: an update. Vasc Health Risk Manag 2012,
8:569–580.
9. Guo F, Lv S, Lou Y, Tu W, Liao W, Wang Y, Deng Z: Bone marrow stromal
cells enhance the angiogenesis in ischaemic cortex after stroke:
involvement of notch signalling. Cell Biol Int 2012, 36:997–1004.
10. Liu Z, Li Y, Zhang RL, Cui Y, Chopp M: Bone marrow stromal cells promote
skilled motor recovery and enhance contralesional axonal connections
after ischemic stroke in adult mice. Stroke 2011, 42:740–744.
11. Chu K, Kim M, Jeong SW, Kim SU, Yoon BW: Human neural stem cells can
migrate, differentiate, and integrate after intravenous transplantation in
adult rats with transient forebrain ischemia. Neurosci Lett 2003,
343:129–133.
12. Jeong SW, Chu K, Jung KH, Kim SU, Kim M, Roh JK: Human neural stem
cell transplantation promotes functional recovery in rats with
experimental intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke 2003, 34:2258–2263.
13. Bjorklund LM, Sanchez-Pernaute R, Chung S, Andersson T, Chen IY,
McNaught KS, Brownell AL, Jenkins BG, Wahlestedt C, Kim KS, Isacson O:
Embryonic stem cells develop into functional dopaminergic neurons
after transplantation in a Parkinson rat model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2002, 99:2344–2349.
14. Hicks AU, Lappalainen RS, Narkilahti S, Suuronen R, Corbett D, Sivenius J,
Hovatta O, Jolkkonen J: Transplantation of human embryonic stem cellderived neural precursor cells and enriched environment after cortical
stroke in rats: cell survival and functional recovery. Eur J Neurosci 2009,
29:562–574.
15. Takahashi K, Yamanaka S: Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 2006,
126:663–676.
16. Hanna J, Markoulaki S, Schorderet P, Carey BW, Beard C, Wernig M,
Creyghton MP, Steine EJ, Cassady JP, Foreman R, Lengner CJ, Dausman JA,
Jaenisch R: Direct reprogramming of terminally differentiated mature B
lymphocytes to pluripotency. Cell 2008, 133:250–264.
17. Schenke-Layland K, Rhodes KE, Angelis E, Butylkova Y, Heydarkhan-Hagvall S,
Gekas C, Zhang R, Goldhaber JI, Mikkola HK, Plath K, MacLellan WR:
Reprogrammed mouse fibroblasts differentiate into cells of the
cardiovascular and hematopoietic lineages. Stem Cells 2008,
26:1537–1546.
18. Dimos JT, Rodolfa KT, Niakan KK, Weisenthal LM, Mitsumoto H, Chung W,
Croft GF, Saphier G, Leibel R, Goland R, Wichterle H, Henderson CE, Eggan K:
Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from patients with ALS can be
differentiated into motor neurons. Science 2008, 321:1218–1221.
19. Wernig M, Zhao JP, Pruszak J, Hedlund E, Fu D, Soldner F, Broccoli V,
Constantine-Paton M, Isacson O, Jaenisch R: Neurons derived from
reprogrammed fibroblasts functionally integrate into the fetal brain and
improve symptoms of rats with Parkinson’s disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2008, 105:5856–5861.
20. Chen SJ, Chang CM, Tsai SK, Chang YL, Chou SJ, Huang SS, Tai LK, Chen YC,
Ku HH, Li HY, Chiou SH: Functional improvement of focal cerebral

Page 9 of 10

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.
28.

29.
30.

31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.
42.

ischemia injury by subdural transplantation of induced pluripotent stem
cells with fibrin glue. Stem Cells Dev 2010, 19:1757–1767.
Kawai H, Yamashita T, Ohta Y, Deguchi K, Nagotani S, Zhang X, Ikeda Y,
Matsuura T, Abe K: Tridermal tumorigenesis of induced pluripotent stem
cells transplanted in ischemic brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010,
30:1487–1493.
Okada Y, Shimazaki T, Sobue G, Okano H: Retinoic-acid-concentrationdependent acquisition of neural cell identity during in vitro
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. Dev Biol 2004,
275:124–142.
Kim M, Habiba A, Doherty JM, Mills JC, Mercer RW, Huettner JE: Regulation
of mouse embryonic stem cell neural differentiation by retinoic acid. Dev
Biol 2009, 328:456–471.
Koch P, Opitz T, Steinbeck JA, Ladewig J, Brustle O: A rosette-type, selfrenewing human ES cell-derived neural stem cell with potential for
in vitro instruction and synaptic integration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2009, 106:3225–3230.
Daadi MM, Maag AL, Steinberg GK: Adherent self-renewable human
embryonic stem cell-derived neural stem cell line: functional
engraftment in experimental stroke model. PLoS One 2008, 3:e1644.
Liao J, Wu Z, Wang Y, Cheng L, Cui C, Gao Y, Chen T, Rao L, Chen S, Jia N,
Dai H, Xin S, Kang J, Pei G, Xiao L: Enhanced efficiency of generating
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells from human somatic cells by a
combination of six transcription factors. Cell Res 2008, 18:600–603.
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R: Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 1989, 20:84–91.
Willing AE, Lixian J, Milliken M, Poulos S, Zigova T, Song S, Hart C, SanchezRamos J, Sanberg PR: Intravenous versus intrastriatal cord blood
administration in a rodent model of stroke. J Neurosci Res 2003,
73:296–307.
Vozeh F, Rokyta R, Ruzickova A: Stereotaxis of the rat brain in ontogenesis.
Act Nerv Super 1979, 21:5–7.
Veizovic T, Beech JS, Stroemer RP, Watson WP, Hodges H: Resolution of
stroke deficits following contralateral grafts of conditionally immortal
neuroepithelial stem cells. Stroke 2001, 32:1012–1019.
Johansson BB: Functional outcome in rats transferred to an enriched
environment 15 days after focal brain ischemia. Stroke 1996, 27:324–326.
Urakawa S, Hida H, Masuda T, Misumi S, Kim TS, Nishino H: Environmental
enrichment brings a beneficial effect on beam walking and enhances
the migration of doublecortin-positive cells following striatal lesions in
rats. Neuroscience 2007, 144:920–933.
Fraichard A, Chassande O, Bilbaut G, Dehay C, Savatier P, Samarut J: In vitro
differentiation of embryonic stem cells into glial cells and functional
neurons. J Cell Sci 1995, 108:3181–3188.
Bain G, Kitchens D, Yao M, Huettner JE, Gottlieb DI: Embryonic stem cells
express neuronal properties in vitro. Dev Biol 1995, 168:342–357.
Strubing C, Ahnert-Hilger G, Shan J, Wiedenmann B, Hescheler J, Wobus
AM: Differentiation of pluripotent embryonic stem cells into the
neuronal lineage in vitro gives rise to mature inhibitory and excitatory
neurons. Mech Dev 1995, 53:275–287.
Zhou JM, Chu JX, Chen XJ: An improved protocol that induces human
embryonic stem cells to differentiate into neural cells in vitro. Cell Biol Int
2008, 32:80–85.
Baharvand H, Mehrjardi NZ, Hatami M, Kiani S, Rao M, Haghighi MM: Neural
differentiation from human embryonic stem cells in a defined adherent
culture condition. Int J Dev Biol 2007, 51:371–378.
Guan K, Chang H, Rolletschek A, Wobus AM: Embryonic stem cell-derived
neurogenesis: retinoic acid induction and lineage selection of neuronal
cells. Cell Tissue Res 2001, 305:171–176.
Okabe S, Forsberg-Nilsson K, Spiro AC, Segal M, McKay RD: Development of
neuronal precursor cells and functional postmitotic neurons from
embryonic stem cells in vitro. Mech Dev 1996, 59:89–102.
Ostenfeld T, Caldwell MA, Prowse KR, Linskens MH, Jauniaux E, Svendsen
CN: Human neural precursor cells express low levels of telomerase
in vitro and show diminishing cell proliferation with extensive axonal
outgrowth following transplantation. Exp Neurol 2000, 164:215–226.
Reynolds BA, Rietze RL: Neural stem cells and neurospheres: re-evaluating
the relationship. Nat Methods 2005, 2:333–336.
Singec I, Knoth R, Meyer RP, Maciaczyk J, Volk B, Nikkhah G, Frotscher M,
Snyder EY: Defining the actual sensitivity and specificity of the
neurosphere assay in stem cell biology. Nat Methods 2006, 3:801–806.

Yuan et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:73
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

Page 10 of 10

43. Bonnamain V, Neveu I, Naveilhan P: Neural stem/progenitor cells as a
promising candidate for regenerative therapy of the central nervous
system. Front Cell Neurosci 2012, 6:17.
44. Wang L, Li Y, Chen X, Chen J, Gautam SC, Xu Y, Chopp M: MCP-1, MIP-1,
IL-8 and ischemic cerebral tissue enhance human bone marrow stromal
cell migration in interface culture. Hematology 2002, 7:113–117.
45. Zhang H, Vutskits L, Pepper MS, Kiss JZ: VEGF is a chemoattractant for
FGF-2-stimulated neural progenitors. J Cell Biol 2003, 163:1375–1384.
46. Zhao LX, Zhang J, Cao F, Meng L, Wang DM, Li YH, Nan X, Jiao WC, Zheng
M, Xu XH, Pei XT: Modification of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor
gene: a portal to transform mesenchymal stem cells into advantageous
engineering cells for neuroregeneration and neuroprotection. Exp Neurol
2004, 190:396–406.
47. Chen J, Zhang ZG, Li Y, Wang L, Xu YX, Gautam SC, Lu M, Zhu Z, Chopp M:
Intravenous administration of human bone marrow stromal cells induces
angiogenesis in the ischemic boundary zone after stroke in rats. Circ Res
2003, 92:692–699.
doi:10.1186/scrt224
Cite this article as: Yuan et al.: Human induced pluripotent stem cellderived neural stem cells survive, migrate, differentiate, and improve
neurologic function in a rat model of middle cerebral artery occlusion.
Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013 4:73.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

