Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 236–239

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
journal homepage: www.mrijournal.com

Dodecaﬂuoropentane emulsion delays and reduces MRI markers of
infarction in a rat stroke model: a preliminary report
R.T. Fitzgerald a,⁎, X. Ou a, J.S. Nix b, M.C. Arthur a, A.T. Brown a, R.D. Skinner c, M.J. Borrelli a, W.C. Culp a
a
b
c

Department of Radiology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, College of Medicine
Department of Neurobiology and Developmental Sciences, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 15 April 2014
Revised 7 October 2014
Accepted 13 October 2014
Keywords:
Ischemic stroke
Acute stroke therapy
Neuroprotection
DDFPe
7T

a b s t r a c t
Background: Dodecaﬂuoropentane emulsion (DDFPe), an oxygen transport agent, has been shown to reduce
infarct volume in animal models of acute ischemic stroke (AIS). Our study assesses the effect of DDFPe on MRI
markers of infarct evolution in the early hours after vascular occlusion in a rat AIS model. We hypothesized that
DDFPe will delay the development of MRI markers of AIS and/or reduce the extent of infarction.
Methods: Permanent, unilateral surgical occlusion of the middle cerebral and common carotid arteries was
performed in control (n = 4) and treatment (n = 10) rats. The treatment group received 1 IV dose of 2% w/v
DDFPe at 0.6 mL/kg at 1 hour post-occlusion versus none. Diffusion-weighted (DWI) and inversion recovery
(IR) MRI sequences were obtained over the 4 hours following occlusion. Infarct extent was quantiﬁed by
number of abnormal MRI slices per sequence for each group and time point. Student's T-test was applied.
Results: DDFPe-treated rats demonstrated reduced infarct extent versus controls over combined time points on IR
at 5.43 ± 0.40 (mean ± standard error) abnormal slices vs. 7.38 ± 0.58 (P = 0.01) and on DWI at 5.21 ± 0.54
vs. 9.00 ± 0.95 (P b 0.01). Development of abnormal MRI signal was delayed in the treatment group.
Conclusions: DDFPe delays and reduces MRI markers of AIS in the early hours following vascular occlusion in a rat
stroke model. Further investigation of DDFPe as a neuroprotectant is warranted.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Stroke is a major cause of morbidity and the 4th leading cause of
mortality in the United States [1]. Current strategies for the treatment
of acute ischemic stroke (AIS) focus on revascularization, either via
pharmacotherapy or catheter-based interventions. Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), the most commonly employed thrombolytic agent,
is FDA approved for use only within 3 hours of symptom onset. Such
time constraints, combined with various contraindications, allow the
use of tPA in b 5–10% of patients with AIS [2,3]. Although efﬁcacious,
tPA therapy is not without potential complications, most importantly
post-therapeutic hemorrhage. Given the many challenges of timely
revascularization, many groups have investigated the potential of
neuroprotective agents to support ischemic but not yet infracted
Abbreviations: DDFPe, Dodecaﬂuoropentane emulsion; AIS, acute ischemic stroke;
tPA, tissue plasminogen activator; FDA, food and drug administration; PFC,
perﬂuorocarbon; STAIR I, Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable I; GABA,
γ-Aminobutyric acid; MCA, middle cerebral artery; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate;
AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Neuroradiology Division, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Department of Radiology, Slot 556, 4301 W. Markham St., Little
Rock, AR 72205. Tel.: +1 501 526 7501; fax: +1 501 526 6436.
E-mail address: ﬁtzgeraldryant@uams.edu (RT. Fitzgerald).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mri.2014.10.012
0730-725X/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

parenchyma, thus prolonging the time window for revascularization.
Although at least a dozen agents have progressed to phase III clinical
trial, none have been shown to improve outcomes [4].
Our group has previously demonstrated that DDFPe (dodecaﬂuoropentane emulsion) (NuvOx Pharma, Tucson, Arizona) reduces infarct
volume in a rabbit embolic stroke model [5,6]. DDFP, a perﬂuorocarbon
(PFC), boasts high oxygen dissolving capacity, hydrophobic and
lipophobic properties, and extreme inertness, making it an ideal
candidate neuroprotectant [7]. Initially utilized as a sonographic
contrast agent, the human in vivo half-life of DDFPe ranging from 1.8
to 2.5 min facilitates complete removal of typical doses through
normal respiration at approximately 2 hours without long-term
retention in the body [8]. Such half-life estimates are congruent with
data obtained in a rabbit model demonstrating a blood half life of
1.45 ± 0.17 minutes after a single 0.6 ml/kg dose [6]. Although not
currently available for clinical use due to inadequate demand for
sonographic contrast agents, no signiﬁcant adverse affects have been
reported in prior human use [8].
Among PFC's, DDFP emulsion consisting of nano-droplets ranging
from 250 to 300 nm in diameter is unique in that this form of the
molecule transitions to the gaseous state at 29 °C and exists as a gas
at body temperature. Such properties allow DDFPe to carry and
deliver many times the oxygen content of liquid PFC's [9]. In vivo,

R.T. Fitzgerald et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 236–239

237

DDFPe nano-droplets expand only slightly due to intravascular
pressure, thus facilitating oxygen delivery to tissues that can no
longer be supplied by erythrocytes (6.2–8.2 μm) due to macrovascular occlusion. As such, DDFPe may reach penumbral tissue
beyond such occlusions through intra-thrombus ﬁssures or defects,
microvasculature, collateral vessels, or via diffusion gradients.
In a rabbit embolic anterior circulation infarction model, DDFPe
(0.6 mL/kg) decreases ﬁnal infarct volume at 4 hours whether
administered as a pre-treatment, at the time of ictus, or up to
3 hours after embolization [5]. When carried out to 7 hours, animals
treated at 1 hour but not at 6 hours showed a decreased infarct
volume relative to controls [5]. At 24 hours, animals treated at
60 minutes post-embolization and thereafter at 90-minute intervals
with DDFPe doses ranging from 0.1 mg/kg to 0.6 mg/kg all showed
statistically signiﬁcant reductions of ﬁnal infarct volume [6].
2. Aims and hypothesis
Based on promising prior data from our group and others, we aim
to evaluate the in vivo effects of DDFPe in a rat stroke model with
high-ﬁeld strength (7 Telsa) MR imaging in the early hours following
arterial occlusion. We hypothesize that DDFPe administered 1 hour
after occlusion will delay and/or reduce the MR imaging signs of
acute infarction.
3. Methods
3.1. Stroke model
Approval for this study was obtained through our Institutional
Animal Care of Use Committee. Male Sprague Dawley (SD) (n = 11)
and spontaneously hypertensive (SHR) (n = 3) rats weighing 400–
450 g were anesthetized using isoﬂuorane to effect. AIS was induced
by surgical occlusion of the common carotid and middle cerebral
arteries using an established model [10]. The middle cerebral artery
was occluded at the distal M1 segment beyond the lenticulostriate
arteries and proximal to the bifurcation. The treatment group (n =
10; 7 SD and 3 SHR animals) received 1 intravenous dose of 2% w/v
DDFPe at 0.6 mL/kg at 1 hour post-occlusion, and the control group
(n = 4; all SD animals) received none.

Fig. 1. Extent of infarction (y-axis) assessed by the number of abnormal slices per IR
exam at each measured time point (x-axis). Control animals are displayed in blue and
treatment animals in red.

standard deviation and P-values for each time point as well as
comparison of the treatment and control cohorts.
4. Results
Infarct extent, as determined by the number of DWI or IR-positive
image slices per study, was reduced in DDFPe-treated animals versus
controls. Over combined time points on IR scans, mean abnormal
slices for treated animals totaled 5.43 ± 0.40 standard error versus
7.38 ± 0.58 (P = 0.01) for controls. On DWI, the mean of 5.21 ±
0.54 for DDFPe-treated animals was signiﬁcantly lower than that of
controls 9.00 ± 0.95 at (P b 0.01). Graphical representation of mean
abnormal slices as a measure of infarct extent versus time is
displayed in Figs. 1 and 2. Although our primary assessment focused
on the number of DWI/IR positive images slices per study, qualitative
evaluation of comparable DWI slices from serial scans in individual
subjects revealed attenuation of infarct growth over time in DDFPetreated animals relative to controls, which show a gradual, step-wise
expansion of infarction over time (Fig. 3).
5. Discussion

3.2. Imaging methods
Rats were imaged on a Bruker PharmaScan 7Telsa MRI (Bruker,
Ettlingen, Germany) housed in the UAMS Molecular Imaging Core at
1-hour intervals beginning 1 hour post-occlusion out to 4 hours. During
imaging, anesthesia was provided with isoﬂurane adjusted to maintain
a breathing rate at 40–55 breaths per minute. Parameters of the
diffusion-weighted sequence were as follows: b-value 1000 s/mm2;
TR 10,000 ms; TE 22 ms; section thickness 0.8 mm; ﬁeld of view
4 × 4 cm; matrix size 128 × 128. IR images were obtained using a
RARE (rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement) IR sequence as
follows: TR 20,567 ms; TE 30 ms; section thickness 0.8 mm; ﬁeld of
view 4 × 4 cm; matrix 256 × 256; ﬂip angle 180°.

The concept of neuroprotection in AIS entails any therapy that
confers increased survivability of ischemic brain tissue. Although the
primary goal of AIS treatment has been revascularization, therapies

3.3. Data analysis
MR images were reviewed by two board-certiﬁed, blinded
radiologists, and the number of positive image slices per sequence
was scored for each animal, image sequence (DWI and IR), and time
point as a measure of infarct extent. Image slices showing
hyperintense signal within the MCA territory ipsilateral to occlusion
were scored as positive. In the analysis, imaging time points were
rounded to the nearest hour. Student's t test with a two-tailed
distribution with two sample unequal variance was used to generate

Fig. 2. Extent of infarction (y-axis) assessed by the number of abnormal slices per DWI
exam at each measured time point (x-axis). Control animals are displayed in blue and
treatment animals in red.

238

R.T. Fitzgerald et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 236–239

Fig. 3. Diffusion-weighted images at 2-hours (top), 3-hours (middle), and 4-hours
(bottom) in a DDFPe-treated animal (column A) versus control (column B) show the
relatively stable volume of signal abnormality over time with DDFPe treatment
compared to increasing extent of abnormal DWI signal in the control subject over time.

that can prolong the viability of ischemic but not yet infracted tissue
until revascularization can be achieved have the potential to
dramatically improve stroke outcomes. Although the ﬁeld of
neuroprotection has received much attention in recent years, with
no fewer than a dozen agents advancing to stage III clinical trial, no
such treatments have entered standard clinical use to date. In
addition to therapies based on hyperbaric oxygen, hypothermia, and
hemoglobin-based blood substitutes, various pharmacologic strategies have been examined including agents targeting glutamatemediated excitotoxicity through antagonism of NMDA and AMPA
receptors, calcium channel blockers, anti-inﬂammatory agents,
antioxidants, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists, opioid antagonists, and uric acid [3,4,11]. The failure of late stage trials of
neuroprotective strategies to provide convincing evidence of beneﬁt
is multi-factorial and may involve inadequate or poorly designed
pre-clinical and clinical studies, lack of biologically relevant endpoints
such as functional and/or behavioral outcomes, and the inherent
heterogeneity of study candidates [4,12]. Conﬁrmatory studies
employing hypothermia and uric acid in the setting of AIS are ongoing.
Herein, we present pre-clinical data demonstrating the ability of
DDFPe to delay and reduce the MR imaging markers of AIS following
permanent MCA occlusion in a rat model. Such validation of
neuroprotective efﬁcacy in a second animal model of AIS, in addition
to the positive ﬁndings previously published by our group in a rabbit
model, represents an important step on the path toward the initiation
of human trials of DDFPe in AIS [5,6]. Our group continues to pursue
other aspects of the pre-clinical evaluation as put forth by the Stroke
Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR) criteria including
assessment of DDFPe in a temporary occlusion or reperfusion AIS
model and incorporation of functional outcomes [4,13,14].
Several factors speak to the potential of DDFPe as a clinical
neuroprotectant—DDFPe's superior oxygen carrying capacity among
other PFC's, small particle size in vivo allowing delivery of oxygen

into vasculature beyond macrovascular occlusions, previous human
use as a sonographic contrast agent during which no adverse events
were encountered, and pre-clinical data now in two animal models
showing the ability of DDFPe to decrease infarct volumes in AIS. In
addition to our study showing efﬁcacy of DDFPe administered 1 hour
after occlusion, prior work by our group has shown beneﬁt with
administration up to 3 hours after arterial occlusion [5]. Thus, we
posit that DDFPe may be utilized as a “bridge” to revascularization,
sustaining penumbral tissue until restoration of arterial supply can
be achieved. Beyond applications in AIS, the neuroprotective effects
of DDFPe could be beneﬁcial on a prophylactic basis prior to certain
high risk cardiac or endovascular procedures, in acute blood loss
patients, or even in the setting of cardiac arrest, in which case such
an agent could be given during the early stages of resuscitation in
order to preserve neuronal viability.
Limitations of this study include the use of a surrogate measure of
stroke extent (number of abnormal MRI slices) rather than
quantitative measurement. Due to the use of an open craniotomy
occlusion model with resultant hemorrhage and gas adjacent to the
region of infarction combined with the ultra-high ﬁeld strength 7 T
MRI environment, determination of exact infarct volume was
impaired in many of the subjects. For this preliminary report, we
used the number of abnormal image slices to measure the rostalcaudal extend of MR signal abnormality. Future experiments will use
a ﬁlament occlusion model to avoid such artifacts and thus allow
precise measurement of infarct volume in cubic millimeters. Another
important component of future work will include variation in the
timing of DDFPe administration including dosing at later time points
than the 1-hour post occlusion schedule used in this study as well as
repeated dosing. Although prior work in other animals has suggested
that a single DDFPe dose may remain effective for up to 2 hours [15],
further investigation of the potential beneﬁts and possible risks of
repeated dosing is required.
In conclusion, DDFPe delays the development of MRI markers of AIS
and reduces eventual infarct extent in the early hours following arterial
occlusion in a rat AIS model. Considered in conjunction with prior work
demonstrating reduction of infarct volumes in a rabbit model of AIS,
demonstration of efﬁcacy in a second animal model represents an
important step in the progress of DDFPe toward clinical trial.
References
[1] Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ, et al. Heart
Disease and Stroke Statistics–2014 Update: a report from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 2014;129:e28–92.
[2] Lyerly MJ, Albright KC, Boehme AK, Shahripour RB, Houston JT, Rawal PV, et al.
Safety of protocol violations in acute stroke tPA administration. J Stroke
Cerebrovasc Dis 2013:1–6.
[3] Turner RC, Dodson SC, Rosen CL, Huber JD. The science of cerebral ischemia and
the quest for neuroprotection: navigating past failure to future success.
J Neurosurg 2013;118:1072–85.
[4] Savitz SI, Fisher M. Future of neuroprotection for acute stroke: in the aftermath
of the SAINT trials. Ann Neurol 2007;61:396–402.
[5] Culp WC, Woods SD, Skinner RD, Brown AT, Lowery JD, Johnson JLH, et al.
Dodecaﬂuoropentane emulsion decreases infarct volume in a rabbit ischemic
stroke model. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2012;23:116–21.
[6] Woods SD, Skinner RD, Ricca AM, Brown AT, Lowery JD, Borrelli MJ, et al.
Progress in Dodecaﬂuoropentane emulsion as a neuroprotective agent in a rabbit
stroke model. Mol Neurobiol 2013;48:363–7.
[7] Riess JG. Understanding the fundamentals of Perﬂuorocarbons and Perﬂuorocarbon emulsions relevant to in vivo oxygen delivery. Artif Cells Blood Substit
Immobil Biotechnol 2005;33:47–63.
[8] Correas JM, Meuter AR, Singlas E, Kessler DR, Worah D, Quay SC. Human
pharmacokinetics of a perﬂuorocarbon ultrasound contrast agent evaluated with
gas chromatography. Ultrasound Med Biol 2001;27:565–70.
[9] Johnson JLH, Dolezal MC, Kerschen A, Matsunaga TO, Unger EC. In vitro
comparison of Dodecaﬂuoropentane (DDFP), Perﬂuorodecalin (PFD), and
Perﬂuoroctylbromide (PFOB) in the facilitation of oxygen exchange. Artif Cells
Blood Substit Immobil Biotechnol 2009;37:156–62.
[10] Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski H. Rat middle
cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model and development of a
neurologic examination. Stroke 1986;17:472–6.

R.T. Fitzgerald et al. / Magnetic Resonance Imaging 33 (2015) 236–239
[11] Proctor PH. Uric acid and neuroprotection. Stroke 2008;39:e126.
[12] Sutherland BA, Minnerup J, Balami JS, Arba F, Buchan AM, Kleinschnitz C.
Neuroprotection for ischaemic stroke: translation from the bench to the bedside.
Int J Stroke 2012;7:407–18.
[13] Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR). Recommendations for
standards regarding preclinical neuroprotective and restorative drug development. Stroke 1999;30:2752–8.

239

[14] Albers GW, Goldstein LB, Hess DC, Wechsler LR, Furie KL, Gorelick PB, et al. Stroke
Treatment Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR) recommendations for maximizing
the use of intravenous thrombolytics and expanding treatment options with intraarterial and neuroprotective therapies. Stroke 2011;42:2645–50.
[15] Lundgren C, Bergoe G, Olszowka A, Tyssebotn I. Tissue nitrogen elimination in
oxygen-breathing pigs is enhanced by ﬂuorocarbon-derived intravascular
micro-bubbles. Undersea Hyperb Med 2005;32:215–26.

