Research
Comparison of quantitative estimation of intracerebral
hemorrhage and infarct volumes after
thromboembolism in an embolic stroke model
Nina Eriksen1*†, Rune S. Rasmussen2†, Karsten Overgaard3, Flemming F. Johansen4,
and Bente Pakkenberg1

Background Strokes have both ischemic and hemorrhagic
components, but most studies of experimental stroke only
address the ischemic component. This is likely because investigations of hemorrhagic transformation are hindered by the
lack of methods based on unbiased principles for volume
estimation.
Aims We evaluated different methods for estimating the
volume of infarcts, hemorrhages, after embolic middle cerebral artery occlusion with or without thrombolysis.
Methods An experimental thromboembolytic rat model was
used in this study. The rats underwent surgery and were
placed in two groups. Group 1 was treated with saline, and
group 2 was treated with 20 mg/kg recombinant tissue plasminogen activator to promote intracerebral hemorrhages.
Stereology, semiautomated computer estimation, and
manual erythrocyte counting were used to test the precision
and efficiency of determining the size of the infarct and
intracerebral hemorrhage.
Results No differences were observed in the infarct volume
or amount of bleeding when comparing the three methods
of volume estimation. Although semiautomated computer

Correspondence: Nina Eriksen*, Research Laboratory for Stereology
and Neuroscience, Bispebjerg Hospital, University Hospital of
Copenhagen, Bispebjerg Bakke 23, entrance 11B, 2, 2400 Copenhagen
NV, Denmark.
E-mail: forsklab@bbh.regionh.dk
1
Research Laboratory for Stereology and Neuroscience, Bispebjerg
Hospital, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
2
Copenhagen Experimental Stroke Unit, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark
3
Stroke Unit, Gentofte Hospital, University Hospital of Copenhagen,
Hellerup, Denmark
4
Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
†

These authors contributed equally to the investigation.

Received: 22 November 2011; Accepted: 2 February 2012; Published
online 29 August 2012
Conflict of interest: None declared.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00870.x

802

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

estimation and manual erythrocyte counting provided
similar results as the stereological measurements, the stereological method was the most efficient and advantageous.
Conclusions We found that stereology was the superior
method for quantification of hemorrhagic volume, especially
for rodent petechial bleeding, which is otherwise difficult to
measure. Our results suggest the possibility of measuring
both the ischemic and the hemorrhagic components of
stroke, two parameters that may be differentially regulated
when therapeutic regimens are tested.

Key words: acute stroke therapy, brain, cerebral hemorrhage,
cerebral infarction, stroke, tPA

Introduction
Anti-thrombotic agents are often used to treat ischemic
stroke, despite safety concerns regarding their association
with increased rates of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH)
(1–5). Because of the high mortality associated with ICH, it
is important to establish reliable animal models of the bleeding complications that can occur following thrombolytic
treatment. The primary problem with establishing a model
of ICH using normal rats is the lack of major bleeding complications after embolic stroke with or without recombinant
tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA) treatment. Seemingly
small and insignificant intracerebral bleeding in rats may
correlate with larger bleeding events in humans (6). Thus, an
important issue in translational ICH research is to show how
minor ICH in rats corresponds with and translates to larger
bleeding events in humans. To test these hypotheses, it is
important to establish methods to efficiently quantify the
amount of bleeding. Previous quantitative studies in stroke
models have relied on conventional methods based on nonuniform sampling or other assumptions that are influenced by
tissue processing and histological procedures, which leave
data difficult to interpret. The amount of bleeding is widely
debated, due in large part to limitations in the methods
used for estimating ICH. The most widely used methods
are hemorrhagic transformation scoring (number of brain
sections displaying visible hemorrhage), spectrophometric

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

Research

N. Eriksen et al.

hemoglobin assay (hemoglobin content of whole brain is
found), imaging, semiautomated volume estimation, and
manual erythrocyte counting (6–12). However, most of these
methods are semiquantitative and could potentially introduce experimental bias. Other studies of ICHs in animal
models have used a hemoglobin assay to quantify hematoma
volumes (8,13,14). Compared with the methods described in
our present study, the sensitivity of the spectrophotometric
hemoglobin assay has been characterized by other investigators as markedly decreased by the addition of brain homogenate. Thus, using a hemoglobin assay, it may be difficult to
measure the amount of bleeding in brains with a tiny hemorrhage as in our present investigation. By the use of stereology, brain sections are preserved including regional
information, and the brain tissue is available for further
investigations.
Stereology is designed to describe quantitative parameters
without assumptions about the size and shape of the object.
This method is based on systematic uniform random sampling (SURS) (15), i.e. sampling with a random start, followed
by systematic sampling. This leads to potentially unbiased
estimate of volume. Established procedures are superior in
precision compared with results obtained with independent
sampling (15). Further, the investigator determines the precision of the estimates. The methods are easy to implement and
are efficient in terms of workload and precision. The sampling
is adjusted to the most efficient level of precision and effort
with the object intercepted by a series of SURS parallel sections and the corresponding cross-sectional areas estimated by
point counting (16). Although stereological volume estimation is not a new tool (15), it is underutilized in experimental
stroke models (17). Stroke encompasses ischemic and hemorrhagic components, but in most experimental studies, only
ischemia, as represented by the size of the infarct, is investigated. This is likely because investigations of hemorrhagic
transformation are hindered by a lack of experimental
methods based on unbiased principles for volume estimation.

Aims
To address the abovementioned problems with quantification
of different regions of interest in a rat model, we evaluated
different volumetric estimations of ICH and infarction caused
by an embolic occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
(MCAO) with or without thrombolysis with rt-PA treatment
in rats.

Methods
This study was approved and conducted according to Danish
legislation and was approved by the Animal Experiments
Inspectorate under the Danish Ministry of Justice (J. no. 2006/
561-1263) and by the Animal Research Committee of Copenhagen University.

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

Animal model
Thirty male Sprague-Dawley rats (400 ⫾ 2·0 g) were used in
this study. The animal model used was first described by Overgaard, Sereghy, Bojsen, Pedersen, Hoyer, Diemer (18) and
Overgaard, Sereghy, Boysen, Pedersen Diemer (19), and more
recently by Overgaard, Rasmussen, Johansen (20). The rats
were anesthetized by subcutaneous (SC) injection of a mixture
of fluanisone (3 mg/kg) and fentanyl (hypnorm; fluanisone
28·056 mmol/l and fentanyl 0·936 mmol/l; Janssen-Cilag,
Buckinghamshire, UK) followed by SC injection of 0·015 mg
atropine and an intraperitoneal injection of 2·5 g/kg diazepam
(Apozepam 17·562 mmol/l; Apothekernes Laboratorium,
Oslo, Norway). The right common carotid artery and the right
external carotid artery (ECA) were exposed, and the extracranial branches of the internal carotid artery (ICA) and ECA
were ligated. Clotting of the ECA was avoided by continuous
infusion (0·5 ml/h) of heparinized saline (5 IU/ml).
Embolization was performed by aspirating blood from the
ECA and mixing it with human thrombin (2·5 IU/ml) for
1–3 mins, which caused microclots to aggregate into a
large macroclot (0·22–0·33 mm3). The embolus was then
injected via an ECA catheter to establish an occlusion of
the ICA at the origin of the MCA or in the distal branches.
The catheter was then flushed gently for 30 s with 0·25 ml
isotonic saline. After embolization, occlusions were verified by
angiography using bolus injection of 0·20 ml heparinized
iohexol (5 IU/ml) (Omnipaque, 365·347 mmol I/l; Nycomed,
Roskilde, Denmark) through the ECA catheter. Only animals
with occlusion grades from 1·5 (distal MCAO) to 3·5 (proximal ICA occlusion at the origin of the MCA) (3) were
included in the experiment, and animals were re-embolized if
necessary. The femoral and neck wounds were closed, and the
animals received 3·5 ml isotonic saline. Anesthesia was
reversed by a SC injection of 0·3 mg/kg naloxone (Narcanti
1·222 mmol/l; DuPont Pharma, Letchworth, UK).
To ensure stable blood glucose, pH, and arterial blood gas
(PaO2 and PaCO2) values, blood samples were drawn from the
ECA before embolization. Mean arterial pressure was measured before embolization, and body temperature was monitored continuously.
To increase bleeding in normal rats, prolonged MCAO
combined with late, high-dose 20 mg/kg rt-PA was used.
Saline or rt-PA compound treatments were initiated using a
femoral vein catheter with a 10% bolus injection given
180 mins after embolization and 90% given as continuous
infusion during the following 45 mins.
Thirty rats underwent surgery, and three animals were
excluded due to unforeseen complications during surgery.
Twenty-seven rats were blindly randomized into two groups,
both of which were embolized:
1. Control group (Group 1): Thirteen animals treated with
saline (10 survived, three died prematurely) received embolic
material and 4 ml saline infusion, with 0·4 ml saline given
immediately and 3·6 ml infused by continuous intravenous

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

803

Research

N. Eriksen et al.

Fig. 1 Examples of hemorrhages. (b) (scale bar: 100 mm) and (d) (scale bar: 20 mm) are magnifications of parts of (a) (scale bar: 1 mm) and (c) (scale bar:
50 mm), respectively, illustrating the possibility of counting individual erythrocytes (images taken from a control animal).

(IV) administration over 45 mins, beginning three-hours
after embolization.
2. Recombinant tissue plasminogen activator group (Group
2): Fourteen animals (nine survived, five died prematurely)
received 20 mg/kg rt-PA (Actilyse, Boehringer Ingelheim,
Ingelheim, Germany) in a 4-ml solution. An immediate bolus
of 0·4 ml was administered to each animal, and 3·6 ml was
given as a continuous IV infusion over 45 mins, beginning
three-hours after embolization (a total of 8 mg rt-PA per
animal).

Estimation of infarcts and hemorrhages
Examples of hemorrhages are shown at different magnifications in Fig. 1. Estimation of the infarct size was performed
using two different methods: stereology and computerfacilitated serial planimetry. Hemorrhagic quantification was
performed using stereology and manual counting of erythrocytes to validate the methods. An infarct was defined regardless of whether it was pan-necrotic or consisted of selective
neuronal necrosis. Edema was present around the border
zones of an infarct and included in the infarct volume as it also
classifies as damaged tissue.

Preparation of brain tissue
Forty-eight hours after surgery, animals were anesthetised
with halothane and perfused transcardially with 4%
phosphate-buffered formalin (pH 7·2). Brains were removed
and fixed in a 4% phosphate-buffered formalin solution, dehydrated, and embedded in paraffin. Sections were cut 3 mm
thick, 800 mm apart, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin.

804

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

Stereology
The most straightforward and basic stereological principle is
the Cavalieri theorem of systematic sampling in combination
with point counting (15). A volumetric estimate of an
arbitrarily shaped object may be obtained efficiently and precisely if the object is intercepted by a series of SURS parallel

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

N. Eriksen et al.

Research

Fig. 2 The Cavalieri principle. (a) The cerebellum and brain stem were removed from the rat brain before (b) the brain was embedded in paraffin. (c) With
a random start, the brain was cut on a microtome in 3-mm coronal sections. (d) From a predetermined fraction (800 mm apart), sections were systematically
collected and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. (e) The volume of the region of interest was estimated using a point counting grid with a known
distance between points [area per point a(p)].

sections (sampling with a random start, followed by systematic sampling), and the corresponding cross-sectional areas
are estimated by point counting. The Cavalieri method is conceptionally simple, rapid in execution, and readily applied (see
Fig. 2). A counting grid was placed over each brain section at
random in a subsampled set of sections (see Fig. 3a and b),
with approximately 10 sections per specimen. Volumes of
unaffected tissue, infarct, and hemorrhage were estimated
with Cavalieri’s principle [described by Gundersen and
Jensen(15), modified in Gundersen, Jensen, Kiêv, Nielsen
(21)]:

V = t ⋅ a ( p) ⋅ ∑ P
where V is the total volume of each region of interest, t is the
distance between sections, a(p) is equal to a predetermined,
known, and constant area per point (distance between
points) (mm2), and ∑ P is the total number of points hitting
the different regions. In combination with an Olympus
BX50 microscope (Olympus, Ballerup, Denmark), cast-grid
software (Visopharm, Hørsholm, Denmark) was used. Counting was performed at magnifications of ¥2 (Fig. 3a) and ¥10
(Fig. 3d). Point-counting grids and magnification can be
changed among regions and animals to optimize the design. In
this case, optimal and efficient sampling was obtained when
using a sampling scheme of 150–200 points in an average of 10
sections (22).

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

Semiautomated volume estimation
The histology of the affected hemisphere and infarct was
examined by a blinded observer using a Leica M3Z stereomicroscope (Leica Microsystems, Ballerup, Denmark) (¥10 and
¥40 magnifications). The border of the infarcted area was
determined and delineated using a fine felt pen (Fig. 3c), and
the delineated sections were scanned using a flat-bed scanner
(HP ScanJet 4P, Hewlett-Packard, Copenhagen, Denmark)
linked to a specially designed image analysis and planimetric
program (Sidney Data, Copenhagen, Denmark). The computer program detected the circumference of the brain and the
delineated borders in each section determined the volumes of
hemispheres and infarcts. The spatial resolution on the brain
digitized images was set to 81 dots/mm2 for area calculations.
Adjustment and verification of the different areas were performed manually using enlarged digitized computer images.
The volumes were calculated as respective area multiplied by
the distance between sections as a percent of the ipsilateral
hemisphere (right hemisphere).

Manual counting of erythrocytes
All sections from each animal were examined to estimate the
total number of erythrocytes in the brain tissue using a Leica
M3Z stereomicroscope at ¥40 magnification (Fig. 3d). In
healthy rats, there are no erythrocytes in the brain because the
blood in the vessels is washed out during the perfusion fixation. The numbers of blood cells from 15 to 18 brain slices

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

805

Research

N. Eriksen et al.

Fig. 3 Different volume estimation methods. (a) Point counting ad modem Cavalieri, (a) infarct (scale bar: 1 mm). (b) hemorrhage (scale bar: 50 mm).
(c) The infarcts were manually drawn on the slide and scanned in a computer that estimated volume. (d) Erythrocytes were manually counted (scale bar:
20 mm).

belonging to a particular animal were added to estimate the
total number.

Statistical analysis of emboli groups
Because the normality test failed, Mann–Whitney’s U-test was
used for comparisons of two groups (unpaired observations),
and Spearman’s rank-order correlation test was used for
ranked pairs. Fisher’s exact probability test was used for
mortality comparisons. P-values less than 0·05 were considered statistically significant. Mean results are displayed with
error bars depicting the standard error of the mean.

Error prediction
The quantitative results obtained by design-based stereological
methods are not exact measurements but estimates; therefore,
the results will vary if the same estimate is independently

806

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

repeated. The variability of a stereological method and precision of the volume estimate is presented as the coefficient of
error (CE). An advantage in using stereology for quantitative
biology is that CE can be predicted. Because stereology is based
on dependent sampling, the CE calculations must take the
dependency into account (15). The CE for point counting can
be predicted for an ordered set of estimates with a prediction
formula, where CE is the sum of the SURS variance and ‘noise
effect,’ which is also known as the point counting variance (18):

VARnoise = 0⋅0724 ⋅

b
⋅ n⋅∑P
a

b
is the average shape profile
a
(determined by estimating the nomogram in Gundersen and
Jensen (15)), n is the number of sections, and ∑ P is the total
where 0·0724 is a constant,

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

Research

N. Eriksen et al.

Table 1 Volume of infarct and ICH in control and rt-PA-treated animals
Stereology

Semiautomated

Mean

CV(CE)

Mean

CV

77·1
79·6
77·4

0·93 (0·05)
0·96 (0·05)
0·97 (0·04)

% of ipsilateral hemisphere
14·6
14·5
12·0

% of ipsilateral hemisphere
14·8
12·1
17·8

0·83
0·88
0·78

0·26
0·21
0·32

1·76 (0·07)
1·09 (0·06)
1·99 (0·08)

0·06
0·04
0·08

3

Infarct volume, mm
All
Saline
Treated
Hemorrhage volume, mm3
All
Saline
Treated

Erythrocytic count
Mean

CV

Number of cells
1850
1600
2128

1·35
1·42
1·29

ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage; rt-PA, recombinant tissue plasminogen activator; CV, coefficient of variation; coefficient of error.

number of points hitting the area of interest. VARSURS is the
uncertainty of sampling between sections, because repeated
estimates based on different sections may vary. It is calculated
from:

VARSURS =

3 (∑ Pi ⋅ Pi − Noise ) − 4 (∑ Pi ⋅ Pi +1 ) + ∑ Pi ⋅ Pi + 2
240

where Pi is the number of points counted on one section, and
Pi+1 is the number of points counted on the next section (15).
The total sampling variance, CE(V), is estimated from

CE (V ) =

VARNOISE + VARSURS
∑P

As a measurement of the variability of estimates within a
group, the observed interindividual coefficient of variation
(CV = standard deviation/mean) is calculated. By comparing
CE with the observed CV, the precision of each type of estimate and thereby the study design can be evaluated. The fundamental relationship between these entities is expressed as
2
2
CVobs
= CVbio
+ CE 2

The CE should be low enough to ensure that over half of the
observed variance is due to the biological variance. The sampling is considered optimal when CE is about half or less than
the CV:

CE 2
≤ 0⋅5
2
CVobs
In this way, the biological variability (biological CV2) contributes most to the observed relative variance (22).

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

Results
Mortality
The mortality of saline-treated control animals [mortality = 23% (3/13 animals)] did not differ significantly from the
group treated with 20 mg/kg rt-PA [mortality = 36% (5/14
animals), P > 0·05].

Physiological parameters
Blood samples were drawn from the ECA for analysis of pH,
PaO2, PaCO2, and O2 saturation before embolization. No statistically significant differences were observed in these physiological parameters during surgery. The time to perform
surgery and the number of embolizations were similar in the
control and treated groups.

Infarct and ICH volumes
Results are shown in Table 1 and Figs 4 and 5. Table 1 shows
results from the three different quantification methods. Stereology results are shown as the mean estimated volume of the
infarct and hemorrhage and as the mean percentage volume of
the ipsilateral hemisphere. Results from the semiautomated
computer method are shown as the mean percentage volume
of the ipsilateral hemisphere, and data from the manual erythrocyte count are shown as mean numbers. The CE for the
stereological estimation was between 4% and 8%. The CV in
each group was very high (up to 200%) due to very high
variation in damaged areas (infarct and hemorrhage).
Intracerebral hemorrhage was observed in both control and
rt-PA-treated animals (Fig. 4). The mean hemorrhagic volume
in the total, right, and left hemispheres in control and treated
animals was determined with stereology (Fig. 4a). We
observed the highest amount of bleeding in the right embolized hemisphere. Figure 4b shows manually counted erythrocytes in control and treated animals. No statistically significant

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

807

Research

N. Eriksen et al.

Fig. 4 Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) estimates. (a) Combined mean numbers showing the stereologically measured volume of blood (right, left, and total
blood volume) in saline- and recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA)-treated animals (P > 0·05, not significant). Although only the right
hemisphere was embolized, a small ICH was seen in the left hemisphere as well. (b) Mean numbers showing the estimated number of erythrocytes
counted from ICHs in saline- and rt-PA-treated animals (P > 0·05, not significant). Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

Fig. 5 Infarction volume. (a) Mean numbers showing the stereologically estimated volume of the infarction (right, left, and total infarction volume) in
saline- and recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA)-treated animals. Although only the right hemisphere was embolized, a small infarct was seen
in the left hemisphere as well. (b) Mean numbers showing infarction as a percent of the ipsilateral hemisphere in saline- and rt-PA-treated animals with
stereology (P > 0·71) and semiautomated estimation (P > 0·24). Error bars show the standard error of the mean.

differences in the amount of bleeding were observed with
either method (stereology: P = 0·54, manual count of erythrocytes: P = 0·22).
Because medical treatment (either rt-PA or saline) was
postponed until three-hours after embolization, profound
brain damage was seen in animals from both groups (Table 1
and Fig. 5). Infarcts were observed in animals from both
groups (Fig. 5). Figure 5a shows the stereologically estimated
mean infarct volume of the total, right, and left hemispheres
in control and treated animals. Again, the largest infarct was
observed in the right embolized hemisphere. Figure 5b shows
the semiautomated computer estimates and the stereologically estimated infarct volume as a percent of the ipsilateral

808

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

hemisphere in control and treated animals. There were no
statistically significant differences between the two methods
for either the control group (P = 0·38) or the rt-PA-treated
animals (P = 0·15), although there was a tendency for larger
infarction volumes with semiautomated estimation of rt-PAtreated animals. In addition, there were no statistically significant differences in infarct volume when comparing both
groups and methods (stereology: P = 0·97, semiautomated
estimation: P = 0·24).
The amount of edema (which is an important part of
ischemia and hemorrhage) followed the volume of infarct,
while the volume of hemorrhage did not follow the volume of
infarct and varied substantially in both groups.

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

Research

N. Eriksen et al.

Discussion
Intracerebral hemorrhage accounts for up to 20% of all
strokes in Western populations (23), and this number
increases to approximately 25–30% in Asia (24). Treatment
with rt-PA improves the outcome of ischemic stroke by recanalizing the occluded brain vessels, but increases the risk of
brain damage and ICH (25). Therefore, to improve the efficacy
of translational stroke research, it is important to establish
reliable animal models of ICH with bleeding that can be efficiently quantified in an unbiased manner. This study shows
that semiautomated estimation, manual erythrocyte counting,
and stereological estimation resulted in the same trends in
volume estimation of infarcts and hemorrhages. However, the
semiautomated method showed higher infarction in treated
animals (although not significantly higher than control
animals) than did stereology. Using stereology, we were able to
estimate the actual volume of infarcts and hemorrhages of
both the right and left hemispheres of the brain. Semiautomated estimation did not provide actual volumes, merely the
infarcts as a percent of the right hemisphere. Also, this method
requires standardization of the brains, and damaged brains are
usually not homogeneous (23). Manual erythrocyte counting
is subjective and time consuming and may not provide a true
estimate as erythrocytes in only a limited number of brain
slices were actually counted and summed to estimate total
numbers. Therefore, this method only creates a rough estimate
of the total number of blood cells.
The hemorrhagic transformations measured in our current
investigation were observed in addition to infarct development due to artery occlusion by an embolus, and in general
these transformations must be considered too small and too
varied to be detected in behavioral outcome measurements. In
a previous investigation we did use a similar embolization
method resulting in similar infarct sizes when comparing
saline control animals, and animals were generally impaired
regarding fine and gross motor performances lasting at least
two-weeks (26).
Another widely used method for estimating the amount of
bleeding is hemorrhagic transformation scoring, or counting
the number of brain sections displaying a visible hemorrhage.
This method is useful if the bleeding is severe and easily
observed. However, rat experimental stroke models generally
lack major bleeding complications with or without rt-PA
treatment (6), and therefore, true quantitative methods are
much more useful. Imaging is a very reliable method for
observing in vivo blood volume, and moreover, it is possible to
use stereology when imaging brain hemorrhages (27).
However, when differences between pathologic and physiologic conditions are discrete, estimators based on unbiased
principles (28) are required. Stereological methods provide
precise and reliable estimates of brain volume (17,29,30). The
advantages of stereological tools include adjustment of the
precision required for each specific study, which limits
the workload to a necessary minimum. The method is easy

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

to implement, and the measurements obtained can be tested
and evaluated by the investigators. Hence, the stereological
approach provides a much more efficient and precise estimation of infarct and hemorrhage volumes than other methods
and is recommended by the authors. Of note, although the
stereological estimates are based on unbiased principles, biases
may be introduced during histological handling, staining, or
fixation. These factors should always be measured and corrected for if possible.
Stereology emphasizes sampling and is less concerned with
estimation, as compared with other methods. However, the
sampling workload can be adjusted to the most efficient level
with respect to precision while still providing reliable, quantitative information about the entire structure of interest.
Because of the relatively small group sizes in this study (~10
animals per treatment condition) and the large variation in
both infarction [this was also observed in Kelsen, Larsen,
Sørensen, Møller, Nielsen, Nyengaard, Mikkelsen, Rønn (17)]
and ICH volume among animals in each group, the bleeding
differences between groups were not statistically significant.
Increasing the group size would decrease CV as CE was relatively small (recall CV2 = biological CV2 + estimated CE2).
However, a large number of animals would be required in each
group to decrease the CV to an acceptable level.
In conclusion, we provide a systematic evaluation of the
hemorrhagic aspect of stroke, an aspect that has previously
been neglected due to lack of useful, unbiased methods. We
show that it is possible to derive unbiased estimates of hemorrhagic and infarct volumes with stereological methods and
that stereology may represent an improvement over currently
used methods.

References
1 The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS)
rt-PA Study Group. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med 1995; 333:1581–7.
2 The NINDS t-PA Stroke Study Group. Intracerebral hemorrhage after
intravenous t-PA therapy for ischemic stroke. Stroke 1997; 28:2109–18.
3 Dubinsky R, Lai SM. Mortality of stroke patients treated with thrombolysis: analysis of nationwide inpatient sample. Neurology 2006;
66:1742–4.
4 Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E et al. Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to
4·5 hours after acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 2008; 359:1317–29.
5 Lees KR, Bluhmki E, von Kummer R et al. Time to treatment with
intravenous alteplase and outcome in stroke: an updated pooled
analysis of ECASS, ATLANTIS, NINDS, and EPITHET trials. Lancet
2010; 375:1695–703.
6 Rasmussen RS, Overgaard K, Meden P, Boysen G. Thrombolytic and
anticoagulation treatment in a rat embolic stroke model. Acta Neurol
Scand 2003; 108:185–92.
7 Bowes MP, Zivin JA, Thomas GR, Thibodeaux H, Fagan SC. Acute
hypertension, but not thrombolysis, increases the incidence and severity of hemorrhagic transformation following experimental stroke in
rabbits. Exp Neurol 1996; 141:40–6.
8 Choudhri TF, Hoh BL, Solomon RA, Connolly ES Jr, Pinsky DJ. Use of
a spectrophotometric hemoglobin assay to objectively quantify intracerebral hemorrhage in mice. Stroke 1997; 28:2296–302.

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

809

Research
9 Kothari RU, Brott T, Broderick JP et al. The ABCs of measuring intracerebral hemorrhage volumes. Stroke 1996; 27:1304–5.
10 Fagan SC, Bowes MP, Lyden PD, Zovin JA. Acute hypertension promotes hemorrhagic transformation in a rabbit embolic stoke model:
effect of labetol. Exp Neurol 1998; 150:153–8.
11 Knight RA, Barker PB, Fagan SC, Jacobs MA, Welch KM. Prediction of
impending hemorrhagic transformation in ischemic stroke using
magnetic resonance imaging in rats. Stroke 1998; 29:144–51.
12 Tejima E, Katayama Y, Suzuki Y, Kano T, Lo EH. Hemorrhagic transformation after fibrinolysis with tissue plasminogen activator: evaluation of role of hypertension with rat thromboembolic stroke model.
Stroke 2001; 32:1336–40.
13 Terai K, Suzuki M, Sasamata M, Miyata K. Amount of bleeding and
hematoma size in the collagenase-induced intracerebral hemorrhage
rat model. Neurochem Res 2003; 28:779–85.
14 Tang J, Liu J, Zhou C, Alexander JS, Nanda A, Granger DN, Zhang JH.
MMP-9 deficiency enhances collagenase-induced intracerebral hemorrhage and brain injury in mutant mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2004; 24:1133–45.
15 Gundersen HJG, Jensen EB. The efficiency of systematic sampling in
stereology and its prediction. J Microsc 1987; 147:229–63.
16 Gundersen HJG. The smooth fractionator. J Microsc 2002; 207:191–
210.
17 Kelsen J, Larsen MH, Sørensen JC et al. Neuronal precursor cell proliferation in the hippocampus after transient cerebral ischemia: a comparative study of two rat strains using stereological tools. Exp Trans
Stroke Med 2010; 2:1–16.
18 Overgaard K, Sereghy T, Boysen G, Pedersen H, Hoyer S, Diemer NH.
A rat model of reproducible cerebral infarction using thrombotic
blood clot emboli. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1992; 12:484–90.
19 Overgaard K, Sereghy T, Boysen G, Pedersen H, Diemer NH. Reduction of infarct volume and mortality by thrombolysis in a rat embolic
stroke model. Stroke 1992; 23:1167–73.

810

Vol 9, August 2014, 802–810

N. Eriksen et al.

20 Overgaard K, Rasumssen RS, Johansen FF. The site of embolization
related to infarct size, oedema and clinical outcome in a rat stroke
model – further translational stroke research. Exp Transl Stroke Med
2010; 2:17.
21 Gundersen HJG, Jensen EB, Kiêv K, Nielsen J. The efficiency of systematic sampling in stereology – reconsidered. J Microsc 1999;
193:199–211.
22 West MJ. Stereological methods for estimating the total number of
neurons and synapses: issues of precision and bias. Trends Neurosci
1999; 22:51–61.
23 Paul SL, Srikanth VK, Thrift AG. The large and growing burden of
stroke. Curr Drug Targets 2007; 8:786–93.
24 Kitamura A, Nakagawa Y, Sato M et al. Proportions of stroke subtypes
among men and women > or = 40 years of age in an urban Japanese
city in 1992, 1997, and 2002. Stroke 2006; 37:1374–6.
25 Suzuki Y. Role of tissue-type plasminogen activator in ischemic stroke.
J Pharmacol Sci 2010; 113:203–7.
26 Rasmussen RS, Overgaard K, Pakola S, Boysen G. Effects of microplasmin on recovery in a rat embolic stroke model. Neurol Res 2008;
30:75–81.
27 Eriksen N, Rostrup E, Andersen K et al. Application of stereological
estimates in patients with severe head injuries using CT and MR
scanning images. Br J Radiol 2010; 83:307–17.
28 Schmitz C, Hoff PR. Design-based stereology in neuroscience. Neuroscience 2005; 130:813–31.
29 Gundersen HJG. Stereology of arbitrary particles. A review of unbiased number and size estimators and presentation of some new ones.
J Microsc 1986; 143:3–45.
30 Pakkenberg B, Gundersen HJG. Total number of neurons and glial
cells in human brain nuclei estimated by the disector and the fractionator. J Microsc 1988; 150:1–20.

© 2012 The Authors.
International Journal of Stroke © 2012 World Stroke Organization

