Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neurochemistry International
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nci

Invited review

Role of hydrogen sulﬁde in secondary neuronal injury
Jun-Feng Wang, Yu Li, Jin-Ning Song ⇑, Hong-Gang Pang
Department of Neurosurgery, The First Afﬁliated Hospital of the Medical College of Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710061, PR China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 22 May 2013
Received in revised form 10 October 2013
Accepted 5 November 2013
Available online 14 November 2013
Keywords:
Hydrogen sulﬁde
Secondary neuronal injury
Role
Acute neuronal insult event
Mechanism
Neuromodulator

a b s t r a c t
In acute neuronal insult events, such as stroke, traumatic brain injury, and spinal cord injury, pathological
processes of secondary neuronal injury play a key role in the severity of insult and clinical prognosis.
Along with nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) is regarded as the third
gasotransmitter and endogenous neuromodulator and plays multiple roles in the central nervous system
under physiological and pathological states, especially in secondary neuronal injury. The endogenous
level of H2S in the brain is signiﬁcantly higher than that in peripheral tissues, and is mainly formed by
cystathionine b-synthase (CBS) in astrocytes and released in response to neuronal excitation. The mechanism of secondary neuronal injury exacerbating the damage caused by the initial insult includes microcirculation failure, glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, inﬂammatory responses,
neuronal apoptosis and calcium overload. H2S dilates cerebral vessels by activating smooth muscle cell
plasma membrane ATP-sensitive K channels (KATP channels). This modiﬁcation occurs on speciﬁc cysteine
residues of the KATP channel proteins which are S-sulfhydrated. H2S counteracts glutamate-mediated
excitotoxicity by inducing astrocytes to intake more glutamate from the extracellular space and thus
increasing glutathione in neurons. In addition, H2S protects neurons from secondary neuronal injury
by functioning as an anti-oxidant, anti-inﬂammatory and anti-apoptotic mediator. However, there are
still some reports suggest that H2S elevates neuronal Ca2+ concentration and may contribute to the formation of calcium overload in secondary neuronal injury. H2S also elicits calcium waves in primary cultures of astrocytes and may mediate signals between neurons and glia. Consequently, further exploration
of the molecular mechanisms of H2S in secondary neuronal injury will provide important insights into its
potential therapeutic uses for the treatment of acute neuronal insult events.
Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
The three most serious life-threatening pathological conditions
of the central nervous system (CNS) are stroke, traumatic brain injury (TBI), and spinal cord injury (SCI), which are associated with
signiﬁcant ﬁnancial and personal burdens. Although these acute
neuronal insult events have different etiologies, they all involve
both primary and secondary neuronal injury (Struffert et al.,
2003). The initial injury is usually mechanical and secondary
neuronal injury is triggered by an initial insult and occurs a few

hours, several days or weeks following the initial insult (Borgens
and Liu-Snyder, 2012). During secondary neuronal injury, healthy
neurons around the injury site progressively degenerate, and
eventually leading to more serious clinical symptoms. Therefore,
secondary neuronal injury plays a key role in the severity of insult
and subsequent clinical prognosis.
Along with nitric oxide (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO), hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S) is regarded as an important gasotransmitter
(Wang, 2002) and endogenous neuromodulator, drawing increasing attention in the literature. Traditional neurotransmitters bind

Abbreviations: AC, adenylate cyclase; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; AMPA, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid; AOAA, aminooxyacetate; cAMP,
cyclic adenosine monophosphate; CBS, cystathionine b-synthase; CNS, central nervous system; CSE, cystathionine c-lyase; ERK1/2, extracellular signal-regulated kinasel1/2;
GluTs, glutamate transporters; H2S, hydrogen sulﬁde; HA, hydroxylamine; Hcy, homocysteine; HSP 90, heat shock protein 90; IAPs, inhibitor-of-apoptosis proteins; IL-1b,
interleukin-1b; IP3, ryanodine and inositol triphosphate; KATP channels, ATP-sensitive K channels; LTP, long term potentiation; MACO, occlusion of the middle cerebral artery;
MCP-1, monocyte chemotactic protein-1; MPP+, 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion; NaHS, sodium hydrosulﬁde; NF-rB, nuclear factor kappa B; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate;
NO, nitric oxide; p38MAPK, p38 mitogen activated protein kinase; PKA, protein kinase A; PKC, protein kinase C; PLC, phospholipase C; PLP, pyridoxal 50 -phosphate; PPG,
D,L-propargylglycine; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SAM, S-adenosyl methionine; SCI, spinal cord injury; SUR2B, sulfonylurea receptor 2B; TBI, traumatic brain injury; TNF-a,
tumor necrosis factor-a; c-GCS, c-glutamylcysteine synthetase.
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 02985323983; fax: +86 02985324363.
E-mail addresses: jinningsong@126.com, jinnings@126.com (J.-N. Song).
0197-0186/$ - see front matter Ó 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2013.11.002

38

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

and activate membrane receptors, while gasotransmitters can
freely diffuse to adjacent cells and directly bind to their target proteins to modify biological functions. Similar to NO which S-nitrosylates a diverse array of proteins, H2S physiologically regulates
protein functions by S-sulfhydration. However, S-nitrosylation typically inhibits enzymes, while S-sulfhydration activates them.
Therefore, H2S is a physiologic gasotransmitter as important as
NO and CO (Gadalla and Snyder, 2010). In the past decade, increasing evidence shows that H2S plays multiple roles in the CNS under
physiological and pathological states. An examination of secondary
neuronal injury has revealed a greater complexity of molecular
processes than anticipated, and a further understanding of their
relationships may provide insight into effective treatments
(Fig. 1). Therefore, this article illustrates the role of H2S in secondary neuronal injury in the context of cerebrovascular regulation,
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, inﬂammation,
apoptosis and calcium concentrations (Fig. 2).

2. The synthesis and regulation of H2S in the brain
H2S is a small molecule that can freely pass through cell membranes. The concentration of endogenous H2S in the rat brain
reaches up to 50–160 lmol/L (Warenycia et al., 1989), signiﬁcantly
higher than peripheral blood (0–46 lmol/L) (Zhao et al., 2003),
suggesting that H2S may play an important physiological role in
the brain.
However, recent studies have suggested that this may not be
the case. Assuming that H2S levels in the brain are maintained at
the relative high tissue concentration of 50–160 lmol/L, the perfusion of blood with only 40 lmol/L H2S would result in large ﬂuctuations in H2S levels. Catabolism of H2S by mouse brain
homogenates exceeds the rate of enzymatic release of H2S, thus
the whole tissue and blood concentrations of free H2S are orders
of magnitude less than conventionally accepted values (Furne
et al., 2008; Ishigami et al., 2009).
H2S can be formed from cysteine by pyridoxal-50 -phosphate
(PLP)-dependent enzymes, including cystathionine b-synthase
(CBS) and cystathionine c-lyase (CSE). However, CBS and CSE have
different tissue distributions. CSE plays a major role in generating
H2S in the cardiovascular system (Hosoki et al., 1997) while the
production of H2S in the brain is suppressed by CBS inhibitors
and enhanced by CBS activators (Abe and Kimura, 1996). The
amount of H2S in the brain of CBS gene knockout mice is signiﬁcantly decreased compared to wild type mice (Eto and Kimura,
2002). These data suggest that CBS contributes to the production
of endogenous H2S in the brain (Fig. 2). In addition to the major
PLP-dependent enzymes in the brain, H2S can also be produced
from cysteine by 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (3MST) in
combination with cysteine aminotransferase (CAT) (Mikami et al.,
2011; Shibuya et al., 2009, 2013).
The expression of CBS is mainly localised to astrocytes (Enokido
et al., 2005; Ichinohe et al., 2005) and microglia (Hu et al., 2007),
while 3MST is produced in neurons. By comparing the H2S synthesis in different cell lines, Lee et al. found that the amount of H2S
produced by astrocytes was 7.9 times higher than microglia, 9.7
times higher than NT-2 cells and 11.5 times higher than SH-SY5Y
cells, illustrating that astrocytes are the main cells that generate
H2S (Lee et al., 2009) (Fig. 2).
The synthesis of H2S is regulated by changing CBS activity. The
human CBS gene is localised to chromosome 21 at 21q22.3 (Munke
et al., 1988). CBS exists as a homotetramer with a subunit
molecular weight of 63 kDa. Each subunit can bind the cofactor
PLP, S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) and heme (Banerjee and Zou,
2005; Miles and Kraus, 2004). SAM is an allosteric activator of
CBS and activates CBS approximately 2-fold (Abe and Kimura,

1996; Shan and Kruger, 1998). CO binds to heme with high afﬁnity
and inhibits CBS activity (Dioum et al., 2002).
CBS inhibitors aminooxyacetate (AOAA) and hydroxylamine
(HA) intensively suppress the synthesis of H2S (Abe and Kimura,
1996). While H2S production is greatly enhanced by L-glutamate
and stimulation, the increase of CBS activity is regulated by a pathway involving Ca2+/calmodulin and is enhanced in response to
neuronal excitation (Eto and Kimura, 2002). Furthermore, digoxin
increases H2S concentration in the mouse brain (Wilinski et al.,
2011b), while paracetamol plays the opposite role (Wilinski
et al., 2011a).

3. H2S mediates the dilation of cerebral vessels
In TBI and SCI, the initial mechanical insult and bone fragments
may rupture blood vessels such that the blood supply to the
injured site decreases. In addition, intracranial and intraspinal
hematomas compress the nerve parenchyma and edema may also
increase local pressure such that they prevent blood ﬂow into
tissue and exacerbate ischemia. In stroke, clots or hemorrhages
deprive neurons and supporting cells of oxygen and glucose.
Because of a low oxygen supply, their energy generation switches
from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis leading to a
signiﬁcant reduction in ATP synthesis. ATP depletion appears to
be the beginning of secondary neuronal injury (Fig. 1). In addition,
the destruction of plasma or axonal membranes in TBI and SCI is
the cause of the loss of function of various ion channels and transporters such as the Na+–K+ pump. With the destruction of the these
membranes, ion homeostasis is disrupted and large amounts of Na+
and Ca2+ accumulate, while abundant cytosolic K+ is pumped out.
Such a disruption in ion homeostasis can cause cell edema and
intracellular calcium overload which may induce further lesions
(Fig. 1). Consequently, the brain is particularly vulnerable to
ischemia and these events are more likely to initiate secondary
neuronal injury.
In the peripheral circulation, H2S has been proven to dilate
vessels by activating ATP-sensitive K channels (KATP channels) so
that it triggers a cascade reaction in which intracellular potassium
efﬂuxes, membranes of vascular smooth muscle cells are hyperpolarised and voltage dependent calcium channels are closed. It has
been shown that H2S dilates rat aortic tissues in vitro in a KATP
channel-dependent manner, which directly increases KATP channel
currents and hyperpolarised cell membranes (Zhao et al., 2001).
However, there is little evidence to show indicate the role of
H2S in cerebrovascular regulation. Lefﬂer et al. was the ﬁrst to report that H2S dilated cerebral cortical pial arterioles of newborn
pigs in a concentration-dependent way, a process blocked by KATP
channel inhibitor glibenclamide (Lefﬂer et al., 2011). L-Cysteine increased H2S in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid, coincident with its vasodilation of pial arterioles and this increase can be blocked by the CSE
inhibitor D,L-propargylglycine (PPG) but not by the CBS inhibitor
AOAA. Furthermore, CSE was mainly expressed in cerebral vessels,
while CBS was predominately located in neurons and astrocytes.
These data showed that H2S in the brain was produced by CSE
and led to a decrease in vascular tone (Lefﬂer et al., 2011). Morikawa et al. subsequently found that increased H2S dilated vessels
after cerebral ischemia, while CBS gene knock-out mice displayed
an impaired vascular response due to cerebral ischemia and anoxia
(Morikawa et al., 2012).
Liang et al. further found piglet cerebral arterioles expressed the
inwardly rectifying K+ 6.1 channel and sulfonylurea receptor 2B
(SUR2B, KATP channel subunits). The KATP channel inhibitor glibenclamide can block vasodilation induced by H2S and the vasodilatory effect of H2S was attenuated in the SUR2 gene knockout mice
compared to their wild type controls. Thus, the data indicated that

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

39

Fig. 1. Diagram showing cellular and molecular mechanisms of secondary neuronal injury. Stroke, TBI and SCI are the three most serious life-threatening traumas in CNS. In
stroke, vascular blockage directly results in deprivation of oxygen and glucose in neurons, causing a switch in energy generation from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis
and a large reduction in ATP synthesis. As ATP levels drop, Na+–K+-ATPase function is reduced and intracellular sodium concentration rises. In addition, the mechanical
damage, typical of TBI and SCI, can directly impair ion homeostasis by causing movement of ions down the electrochemical gradient across the damaged plasma/axonal
membranes. The accumulation of intracellular sodium not only causes cell edema, but also potentiates Na+/Ca2+ exchange and causes an inﬂux of extracellular calcium. High
intracellular calcium or calcium overload, induces glutamate discharge and subsequent activation of its receptors, leading to glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity and eventual
neuronal necrosis or apoptosis. Glutamate receptors are classiﬁed into ionotropic and metabotropic. Ionotropic receptors consist of three classes: NMDA, AMPA and Kainate
receptors. The excessive activation of NMDA receptors, in turn, facilitates calcium overload and forms a positive feedback. At the same time, the overactivation of AMPA and
Kainate receptors can amplify the loop by contributing to intracellular Na+ accumulation. Recent research has found that overactivation of group II mGluRs may trigger
neuronal damage by increasing the expression of connexin 36 and neuronal gap junction coupling (Wang et al., 2012). In addition, calcium overload induces the collapse of
the mitochondrial membrane potential, the production of free radicals and lipid peroxidation, which further damages mitochondrial membranes, generates oxytosis and
results in mitochondrial dysfunction. This eventually leads to neuronal necrosis or apoptosis. Mitochondrial dysfunction results in a signiﬁcant reduction in ATP and further
aggravates energy failure. Oxytoxin injury can contribute to calcium overload, impair glutamate uptake and intensify glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. Calcium overload
can directly activate calpain, phospholipase, endonucleases and various caspases, resulting in cytoskeleton destruction and axonal degeneration, ﬁnally leading to neuronal
necrosis or apoptosis. Finally, inﬂammation plays a key role in secondary neuronal injury. All of the traumas to the CNS can directly activate microglia, which produce
signiﬁcant levels of IL-1, IL-6, TNF-a and other cytokines and further activate inﬂammatory cascades, eventually leading to neuronal necrosis or apoptosis.

40

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

Fig. 2. Role of hydrogen sulﬁde in secondary neuronal injury as described in the neurovascular unit. (A) H2S mediates the dilation of cerebral vessels against ischemia and
hypoxia. Promotion of tissue repair by H2S is likely related to its pro-angiogenic effect under hypoxic stress. H2S has been shown to suppress leukocyte adherence to the
vascular endothelium and inﬁltration of leukocytes outside the vessels, as well as reduce the expression of pro-inﬂammatory factors by microglia, such as NO and NF-jB.
Accordingly, H2S acts as an anti-inﬂammatory mediator. (B) By increasing the uptake of glutamate in the synaptic cleft and activating KATP channels hyperpolarisation, H2S
counteracts glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. H2S is also a potent antioxidant in that it elevates the glutathione level, reduces the generation of ROS in mitochondria and
eventually protects neurons from oxytosis and apoptosis. Furthermore, H2S contributes to the induction of hippocampal LTP by enhancing NMDA mediated inward current
and beneﬁts learning and memory recovery after acute nerve injury. The interaction between H2S and NMDA receptors may be involved in the activation of cAMP dependent
protein kinase pathways. However, H2S elevates intracellular Ca2+ concentration and may aggravate calcium overload in neurons. H2S also induces calcium waves in
astrocytes and may mediate signals between neurons and glia. The increase of Ca2+ both in neurons and glia is due to the inﬂux of extracellular Ca2+ and to a lesser extent
release of intracellular Ca2+ stores.

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

H2S dilated cerebral arterioles by activating smooth muscle cell
KATP channels containing SUR2 subunits (Liang et al., 2011).
What is the molecular mechanism for the interaction between
H2S and the KATP channel? Much like NO S-nitrosylates its target
proteins, H2S appears to S-sulfhydrate proteins to regulate their
functions. Compared to S-nitrosylation which typically inhibits enzymes, S-sulfhydration activates them. Approximately 1–2% of NO
target proteins are S-nitrosylated, while S-sulfhydration basally
modiﬁes 10–25% its target proteins (Mustafa et al., 2009). In accordance with this observation, it was found that H2S S-sulfhydrates
Cys6 and Cys26 residues of the extracellular N terminal of rvSUR1
subunit of KATP channel complex (Jiang et al., 2010) (Fig. 2).
In addition to the protective role of H2S through vasodilation
(Fig. 2), Li et al. observed its protective effects in a rat brain
ischemia model by improving spatial learning and memory loss,
enhancing synaptic plasticity, inhibiting the edema around
pyramidal neurons and their nuclear shrink and promoting
growth-associated protein-43 expression in the CA1 region of the
hippocampus (Li et al., 2011). However, using a rat stroke model
dependent upon the permanent occlusion of the middle cerebral
artery (MCAO), Qu et al. reached the opposite conclusion.
Intraperitoneal injection of sodium hydrosulﬁde (NaHS, a H2S donor) signiﬁcantly increased the infarct volume which was blocked
by N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor channel inhibitors. The
increasing infarct volume can be ameliorated by H2S synthesis
inhibitors in a concentration-dose dependent way (Qu et al.,
2006). These observations suggest that H2S plays opposing roles
in these models of brain ischemia and this can be explained, at
least in part, by the different doses of H2S used in these studies.
Using 0.1 mmol/L H2S, Li observed that it played a protective role
in a model of bilateral common carotid artery occlusion, while
Qu reported the detrimental effect of 0.18 mmol/L H2S in the
model of MCAO. Thus, physiological levels of H2S exert neuroprotective effects, whereas high concentrations of H2S may cause
neurotoxicity in part through an enhancement of NMDA
receptor-mediated calcium overload. Given the biphasic roles of
high vs. low doses of H2S, Marutani et al. combined an H2S donor
with a NMDAR antagonist (memantine) and synthesised a novel
H2S-releasing agent, S-memantine, which was more potent at
preventing ischemic neuronal death and reducing infarct volume
than H2S or memantine, and S-memantine signiﬁcantly improved
neurological dysfunction in the ischemia–reperfusion mouse
model (Marutani et al., 2012).
4. H2S counteracts glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity
Glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter and plays an
important role in neuronal development, synaptic plasticity, learning and memory in the CNS under physiological states (Suzuki
et al., 2006). Improper production/transport of glutamate may
result in neuronal excitotoxicity or even neuronal death. The
concept of excitotoxicity was ﬁrst proposed by (Olney, 1969) and
the excitotoxicity was involved in secondary neuronal injury of
various neurological disorders such as cerebral ischemia, TBI and
neurodegenerative disease.
Glutamate concentration in the synaptic cleft can increase to a
neurotoxic level by either excessive calcium-mediated vesicular
release inside the neurons or impaired uptake by astrocytes. Toxic
concentrations of glutamate can over-activate its receptors and
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity is generated by disruption of
ionic homeostasis or impairment of mitochondrial function due
to oxytosis (Nicholls, 2004). Receptors for glutamate are classiﬁed
into ionotropic and metabotropic and ionotropic receptors consist
of three classes: NMDA, alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) and Kainate receptors. The excessive
activation of NMDA receptors, in turn, facilitates calcium overload

41

and is mostly linked to necrosis and the over-activation of AMPA
and Kainate receptors may contribute to intracellular Na+ accumulation and induce apoptosis (Park et al., 2003). Recent research has
found that over-activation of group II mGluRs may trigger neuronal
damage by increasing the expression of connexin 36 and neuronal
gap junction coupling (Wang et al., 2012) (Fig. 1). In addition, glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity also can trigger the formation of
autophagy in the hippocampus (Shacka et al., 2007; Zhang et al.,
2009). Therefore, through disruptions of ionic homeostasis and
ampliﬁcations of the loop of cellular and molecular mechanisms
(Fig. 1), glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity appears to play a major
role in secondary neuronal injury.
Astrocytes absorb glutamate from the extracellular space via
glutamate transporters (GluTs) and cysteine/glutamate antiporters
(Fig. 2). GLT-1 is the main and widely distributed astrocytic GluTs
and its function is inhibited by reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Allen
et al., 2001). Lu et al. conﬁrmed that the protective effect of H2S on
astrocytes is mediated by up-regulation of GLT-1 expression,
increasing the uptake of glutamate and reducing the generation
of ROS. This facilitates ATP synthesis, inhibits ERK1/2 activation
and eventually protects astrocytes from H2O2-induced damage
(Lu et al., 2008) (Fig. 2).
As mentioned earlier, H2S is an activator of KATP channels. Sun
et al. found that KATP channel activators expressed by astrocytes
can up-regulate glutamate transporters and promote the uptake
of extracellular glutamate by astrocytes (Sun et al., 2008). These
data suggest that H2S may up-regulate the expression of GLT-1
through activation of KATP channels. In addition to being sensitive
to glutamate regulation through GLT-1, neurons deﬁcient in the
expression of KATP channels show enhanced glutamate release
(Soundarapandian et al., 2007). KATP channels may be directly
involved in the process of neuronal glutamate release in response
to Ca2+ inﬂux. Activation of KATP channels protects against NMDA
receptor channel opening and counteracts glutamate toxicity
during hypoxic/ischemic insults. Accordingly, as an activator of
KATP channels, H2S may play protective roles in secondary neuronal
injury by imitating KATP channels (Jiang et al., 2013).
Cysteine intake through glutamate–cysteine transporters is the
main source of substrate for glutathione synthesis in neurons. In
the case of high levels of glutamate in the extracellular space, the
glutamate–cystine transporter is suppressed and cystine cannot
be transported into neurons, leading to oxytosis. Kimura et al.
discovered that H2S enhanced the activity of c-glutamylcysteine
synthetase (c-GCS) and up-regulated glutamate–cystine transport,
thus increasing the glutathione level and eventually protecting
neurons from glutamate-mediated oxytosis (Kimura and Kimura,
2004). Kimura et al. further found that the efﬁciency of glutathione
production enhanced 4 times and the diffusion of glutathione from
the cytoplasm to the mitochondria was increased by H2S (Kimura
et al., 2010). In addition to its reducing properties, H2S was reported to protect hippocampus cells from oxytosis by activating
KATP and chloride channels and reducing cell excitability (Kimura
et al., 2006).
5. The antioxidant role of H2S
The CNS is more sensitive to oxidative stress than other tissues
because it requires a continuous ATP supply to maintain a high
metabolic rate. During the process of mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation to synthetise ATP, large amounts of O
2 and
H2O2 by-products are produced. Furthermore, the presence of antioxidants is reduced while metal ions and phospholipids are abundant and generate large quantities of oxidative products.
In stroke and TBI, glycolysis and the accumulation of lactic acid
and acetone decrease pH and cause calcium overload. Increased
cytosolic free Ca2+ can induce the collapse of the mitochondrial

42

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

membrane potential and the production of free radicals and lipid
peroxidation. This leads to further attack on the mitochondrial
membranes, generating oxytosis and resulting in mitochondrial
dysfunction and energy failure. Eventually, this causes neuronal
necrosis or apoptosis (Nicholls, 2004) (Fig. 1). In addition, the oxytoxin injury can contribute to detrimental calcium inﬂux (Henke
et al., 2013), impair glutamate uptake and induce glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. Consequently, in secondary neuronal injury,
oxytosis appears to be cytotoxic through its oxidisation of a variety
of structural proteins or enzymes and may lead to secondary signaling pathways.
Neuronal ischemia and hypoxia are usually accompanied by
oxidative stress, where production of ROS results in the lower
expression of glutamate transporters. In PC12 cells treated with cobalt chloride to induce chemical hypoxic injury, H2S reverses the
reduction of GLT-1 and blocks ROS from activating extracellular
signal-regulated kinasel1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38 mitogen activated
protein kinase (p38MAPK) (Lan et al., 2011). ROS scavengers have
the same therapeutic effect as H2S. Thus, H2S plays an antioxidant
role in ischemic neuronal damage (Xiao et al., 2012). In chemical
hypoxia injury, it was also found that heat shock protein 90 (HSP
90)-mediated cytoprotection was partly mediated through the
antioxidation role of H2S (Meng et al., 2011).
ROS opens the mitochondrial permeability transition pore by
oxidizing the mitochondrial membrane cardiolipin, the mitochondrial transmembrane potential drops, cytochrome C and apoptosisinducing factor is released, caspase-3 is activated and neuronal
apoptosis ensues (Liu et al., 2010a). H2S produced by 3MST, which
is localised to the mitochondria, can directly reduce the generation
of ROS and inhibit the apoptosis of PC12 cells treated by 1methyl-4-phenylpyridinium ion (MPP+) (Yin et al., 2009) (Fig. 2).
The same mechanism was proven to be involved in the process
of homocysteine (Hcy) and formaldehyde-induced neurotoxicity
(Tang et al., 2011, 2012).
Glutathione is a reducing agent which scavenges oxygen free
radicals, hydrogen peroxide and lipid peroxides in the brain. H2S
promotes the synthesis of glutathione and protects neurons from
oxidative stress (Kimura et al., 2010; Kimura and Kimura, 2004)
(Fig. 2). In addition, H2S inhibits both hypochlorous acid and peroxynitrite-mediated oxidative damage (Whiteman et al., 2004, 2005).
Hcy can cause cerebrovascular dysfunction by inducing oxidative stress. Hcy is the precursor of H2S and is formed during methionine metabolism. In cerebral vascular endothelial cells, H2S
reduces the generation of free radicals induced by methionine
and increases the formation of reduced glutathione, catalase and
superoxide dismutase, suggesting the potential therapeutic role
of H2S in methionine-induced oxidative stress (Tyagi et al., 2009).

6. The anti-inﬂammatory role of H2S
Neuroinﬂammation is caused by nerve injury in a process mediated by inﬂammatory cells and cytokines. It can be triggered at the
trauma site over time and aggravate secondary neuronal injury.
Glial cells are the predominant inﬂammatory cells in the CNS
and can generate a variety of pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory factors (Wojtera et al., 2005). In TBI, SCI and stroke, tissue
or vascular damage stimulates microglia to transform into
macrophages which produce cytokines or chemokines and induce
the chemotaxis of neutrophils from the surroundings to the site
of injury. Inﬂammatory responses facilitate the repair and
reconstruction of neural structure. However, the accumulation of
inﬂammatory cells at the trauma site perpetuates cell edema and
induces necrosis or apoptosis of the surrounding tissues (Fig. 1).
For example, macrophages remove cell debris and produce growth
factors to stimulate tissue regeneration, but they also produce

interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) to
facilitate edema and neuronal death.
In peripheral tissues, the role of H2S in the inﬂammatory response is controversial. Some groups have shown that H2S has an
anti-inﬂammatory effect, but others have reported an pro-inﬂammatory role. H2S was reported to act as an anti-inﬂammatory
mediator in a model of hepatic ischemia–reperfusion injury and
irritable bowel syndrome (Kang et al., 2009; Xu et al., 2009). However, H2S played a pro-inﬂammatory role in severe burn injury and
lipopolysaccharide-induced inﬂammation (Li et al., 2005; Zhang
et al., 2010).
In the CNS, a general pattern has recently emerged consistent
with H2S exerting anti-inﬂammatory effects (Fig. 2). Microglia play
a crucial role in the activation of glial cells, which can generate and
release NO, TNF-a and IL-1b and further aggravate tissue injury
and cause cell death (Craft et al., 2005). H2S plays a protective role
in lipopolysaccharide-induced inﬂammation by inhibiting glial cell
production of NO (Hu et al., 2007) (Fig. 2). Possible mechanisms of
this protective effect may be due to the fact that oxidative stress is
an important component of the inﬂammatory process (Pattison
and Winyard, 2008). Endothelial cells lining the cerebral vessels
may be damaged by these oxidative products, such as NO, and
the inﬁltration of leukocytes through endothelial gaps increases
and aggravates inﬂammation. In support of this hypothesis, H2S
has been shown to act as an antioxidant in endothelial cell systems
(Tyagi et al., 2009). Therefore, H2S may play anti-inﬂammatory
roles by suppressing oxidative stress.
Brain H2S synthesis is severely decreased in patients with
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and plasma H2S levels are negatively
correlated with the severity of AD. It has been reported that H2S
also has protective effects, principally as an anti-inﬂammatory
mediator in AD. H2S attenuates neuroinﬂammation in a b-amyloid
rat model of AD (Liu and Bian, 2010; Liu et al., 2011; Xuan et al.,
2012). The neurotoxicity of the senile plaque’s main component,
b-amyloid protein, is involved in the pathological process of AD.
Based on the above analysis, H2S may also play an anti-inﬂammatory role in AD by inhibiting the neurotoxicity of b-amyloid-induced oxidative damage. Furthermore, elevated Hcy may also be
toxic in AD. Compared with wild-type controls, CBS+/ mice develop hyperhomocysteinemia, which may aggravate inﬂammation in
AD by increasing leukocyte adherence, P-selectin expression and
vascular permeability in the brain (Kamath et al., 2006).
H2S may have other anti-inﬂammatory effects. Activation of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-jB) initiates the production of inﬂammatory mediators and profoundly mediates inﬂammatory injury. In a
model of permanent occlusion of the middle cerebral artery, H2S
induces continuous hypothermia, then decreases the expression
of nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-jB) (Florian et al., 2008) (Fig. 2).
H2S reduces pro-inﬂammatory cytokine and chemokine
production, such as TNF-a and monocyte chemotactic protein-1
(MCP-1), while increasing the expression of the anti-inﬂammatory
cytokine IL-10 in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury (Yin et al.,
2013). Furthermore, promotion of tissue repair to reduce inﬂammatory injury by H2S is likely related to its pro-angiogenesis effect
under hypoxic stress (Liu et al., 2010b) (Fig. 2).
7. The anti-apoptotic role of H2S
Apoptosis is normally initiated a few hours after stroke, TBI and
SCI. A small fraction of cells located at the site of injury die quickly
because of the ischemic or mechanical insult. Healthy cells
adjacent to the injured site remain viable for several hours posttrauma, but inevitably become susceptible to the cytoxicity associated with secondary neuronal death. The resultant neuronal death
is therefore divided into the distinct phases of necrosis and
apoptosis and mitochondrial dysfunction plays a crucial role in

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

determining the mechanism of cell death. When the level of mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP is low, cells die by necrosis.
In contrast, when mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP remain close to normal levels, cells undergo apoptosis (Ankarcrona
et al., 1995). In addition, necrosis can be induced by an increase
in intracellular calcium concentration, while a modest increase of
calcium in the cytoplasm may induce apoptosis (Zipfel et al.,
2000). As discussed above, mitochondrial membrane potential initially collapses in stroke, TBI and SCI. Then, ROS induced oxytosis
and mitochondrial dysfunction can induce the apoptotic cascade
reaction (Fig. 1). Finally, the release of cytochrome C through the
outer mitochondrial membrane into the cytosol induces caspasedependent apoptosis (Polster et al., 2001). At the same time, ROS
can directly result in the breakdown of DNA and induce neuronal
apoptosis.
It has been shown that H2S exerts its anti-apoptotic function by
inhibiting oxytosis (Fig. 2). H2S protects hypoxia-induced apoptosis
via inhibition of H2O2-activated calcium signaling pathways in
mouse hippocampal neurons (Luo et al., 2012). In cortical neurons,
H2S also prevents OGD/R-induced apoptosis through suppression
of the ROS-mediated caspase-3 pathway (Luo et al., 2013). H2S is
anti-apoptotic in neurons as well as retinal tissue. The H2S-releasing derivative of aspirin has the same anti-apoptotic function as
glutamate oxidative injury in retinal ganglion cells (Osborne
et al., 2012).
The anti-apoptotic function of H2S through its ability to inhibit
oxytosis was also reported in the pathogenesis of AD. B-amyloid
can induce neuronal apoptosis by contributing to oxidative stress
and interfering with mitochondrial function. H2S was found to
signiﬁcantly reduce the apoptosis of hippocampal CA1 neurons in
a rat model of AD induced by b-amyloid (Xuan et al., 2012). Hcy
is another etiological factor of AD and can also induce oxidative injury. H2S prevents the reduction of Bcl-2 and mitochondrial membrane potential caused by Hcy and inhibits the release of
cytochrome C and the activation of caspase-3, eventually inhibiting
apoptosis in PC12 cells treated with Hcy (Tang et al., 2010, 2011).
H2S also has an anti-apoptotic function by regulating the activity of NF-jB. NF-jB plays complex roles in integrating signaling
between and within neurons and glial cells. Most studies indicate
that NF-jB may aggravate neuronal apoptosis through induction
of iNOS, COX-2, and pro-inﬂammatory cytokines expression and
activation of nitrosative, oxidative, and inﬂammatory damage in
glial cells (Godinez-Rubi et al., 2013). Thus, H2S reduced the
expression of NF-jB and attenuates apoptosis after retinal
ischemia–reperfusion injury (Biermann et al., 2011). However, it
was also reported that NF-jB induced the expression of anti-apoptotic gene products and proteins in neurons, such as Bcl-2 and
inhibitor-of-apoptosis proteins (IAPs) and was an anti-apoptotic
transcription factor (Mattson and Camandola, 2001). Therefore,
H2S generated by CSE plays an anti-apoptotic role by sulfhydrating
the p65 subunit of NF-jB at cysteine-38 and promoting the expression of NF-jB. The anti-apoptotic effect of NF-jB is markedly
diminished in CSE knock-out mice (Sen et al., 2012).
8. H2S elevates intracellular Ca2+ concentration
The toxicity caused by calcium overload participates in secondary neuronal injury of many CNS diseases, such as stroke, TBI, SCI,
AD, multiple sclerosis and mental abnormality (Davis et al., 2003;
Marta et al., 2005; Mattson and Chan, 2003; Micu et al., 2006;
Osteen et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2002). Calcium overload appears
to be at the core of the cellular and molecular network of secondary neuronal injury and is mainly involved in three neurotoxic cascade reactions during the process of neuronal death (Fig. 1). Firstly,
intracellular calcium overload induces glutamate discharge and
glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. Secondly, calcium overload

43

interferes with mitochondrial respiratory chain function, promotes
the production of oxygen free radicals and generates oxytosis.
Lastly, calcium overload can directly activate a diversity of
proteases to degrade axonal or cytoskeletal proteins. All of these
three aspects eventually lead to neuronal necrosis or apoptosis
(Szydlowska and Tymianski, 2010).
The relationship between H2S and calcium in neurons was ﬁrst
proposed by (Garcia-Bereguiain et al., 2008). He discovered that
intracellular Ca2+ concentration increased 2 h after cerebellar
granule neuron cells were exposed to 50–120 lM/L NaHS.
However, he found that it took only 1 h to reach toxic calcium
levels when neurons were exposed to 100–300 lM/L NaHS which
resulted in a 50% loss in cell viability. The function of NaHS can
be inhibited by L-type calcium channel blockers or NMDA receptor
blockers. Yong et al. also showed that H2S increased the intracellular Ca2+ concentration of SH-SY5Y cells in a concentration-dependent way. Furthermore, H2S may regulate calcium via both of the
protein kinase A (PKA) and phospholipase C (PLC)/protein kinase
C (PKC) pathways. Therefore, H2S not only elevated calcium inﬂux
via the plasma membrane but also promoted the release of intracellular calcium stores (Yong et al., 2010) (Fig. 2). It was found that
T-type voltage dependent calcium channels and AMPA, NMDA
receptors, ryanodine and inositol triphosphate (IP3) all contain
phosphorylation sites for PKA. Moreover, H2S was reported to play
biological roles by activating PKA to phosphorylate its target proteins and contribute to the induction of long term potentiation
(LTP, a synaptic model of learning and memory) (Abe and Kimura,
1996; Kimura, 2000). Thus, H2S may promote the formation of
calcium overload through PKA pathways.
Apart from neuronal calcium, H2S also inﬂuences the intracellular calcium level of glial cells and may function as a neurotransmitter. In a manner different from neurons conducting signals by
action potentials, glial cells communicate with each other by
modulating calcium signals and regulate neuronal and vascular
function as a syncytium (Braet et al., 2004). Nagai et al. discovered
that exogenous H2S increases intracellular Ca2+ and induces Ca2+
waves in primary cultures of astrocytes as well as hippocampal
slices. The role of H2S was mimicked by increasing the inﬂux of
Ca2+ and, to a lesser extent, causing its release from intracellular
Ca2+ stores (Nagai et al., 2004) (Fig. 2).
Microglia play important roles in the progression of neuronal
diseases such as AD and Parkinson disease (Kim and Joh, 2006;
Wojtera et al., 2005). Changes in intracellular Ca2+ in microglia
serve as a regulator that controls microglial behavior under resting
and activated conditions (Hoffmann et al., 2003). Exogenous H2S
increases the concentration of microglial intracellular Ca2+ and this
role is dependent on the adenylate cyclase (AC)-cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP)–PKA pathway. Furthermore, inhibitors of
the endogenous H2S synthesis enzyme CSE signiﬁcantly decrease
the concentration of Ca2+ in microglia, suggesting endogenous
H2S has a positive impact on intracellular Ca2+ homeostasis (Lee
et al., 2006). In conclusion, considering that H2S is able to freely
diffuse through cell membranes, it may play an important role in
activating microglia.
The propagation of Ca2+ waves from astrocyte to astrocyte is
proposed to regulate synaptic transmission and neurovascular coupling (Fig. 2). Oscillations in astrocytic internal Ca2+ can trigger the
release of several neuroactive molecules from astrocytes, such as
glutamate, ATP, D-serine and arachidonic acid metabolites.
Glutamate acts on extrasynaptic neuronal NMDA receptors and enhances neuronal excitability, while ATP is hydrolysed to adenosine
extracellularly and has inhibitory actions. D-serine can act on the
glycine-binding site of the NMDA receptor and modulate synaptic
plasticity. Arachidonic acid metabolite prostaglandin E2 induces
arteriole dilation, but 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid induces
arteriole constriction (Haydon and Carmignoto, 2006). Therefore,

44

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

whether astrocytes play the excitatory or inhibitory function is
dependent upon the predominant neurotransmitters released by
the astrocytic Ca2+ signal.
Astrocytes express a diversity of receptors for the above
neurotransmitters, they activate astrocytes to induce Ca2+ waves,
which in turn trigger these neurotransmitters out of astrocytes
(Fellin et al., 2006). H2S functions in a similar manner to these neurotransmitters. Neuronal excitation elevates extracellular K+ and
the intracellular pH of astrocytes and promotes the release of
H2S by astrocytes (Ishigami et al., 2009). Then, more importantly,
H2S can activate Ca2+ channels to induce Ca2+ waves in the
neighboring astrocytes. Therefore, H2S mediates signals between
neurons and glia. It is uncertain whether there are relationships
between astrocytic Ca2+ waves induced by H2S and other neurotransmitters. If such relationships exist, H2S may mediate neuronal
excitability by regulating the release of glutamate and ATP from
astrocytes. In order to understand this process, it will be crucial
to understand the regulation of neuronal integration by H2S. In
addition, when astrocytes are repeatedly treated with different
concentrations of H2S, the changes in intracellular calcium concentration are altered. Repeated applications of high concentrations of
H2S decreases the magnitude of [Ca2+]i and causes desensitisation,
whereas repeated applications of low concentrations of H2S
increase the magnitude of [Ca2+]i and causes sensitisation (Nagai
et al., 2004). That means that low concentrations of H2S may
induce neuronal excitability and that may not occur with high
concentrations of H2S. Therefore, it should be pointed out that
the concentration of H2S required to modulate neuronal activity
is extremely variable.
Apart from elevating intracellular Ca2+ concentration, H2S
inhibits the elevation of Ca2+ in photoreceptor cells and protects
retinal neurons from light-induced degeneration. In retina,
photoreceptor cells and horizontal cells express 3MST and CAT
which produce H2S in a Ca2+-dependent manner. In turn, H2S
suppresses Ca2+ channels in photoreceptor cells by activating vacuolar type H+-ATPase in horizontal cells (Mikami et al., 2011). The
same negative effect that H2S has on L-type Ca2+ channels can also
be seen in the myocardium (Zhang et al., 2012). However, as discussed earlier, H2S enhances L-type Ca2+ channels in the CNS and
the role of H2S in regulating intracellular Ca2+ may depend on
the molecular nature of the calcium channels. This means that
there may be a different molecular proﬁle of Ca2+ channels in the
retina, myocardium and CNS and each will exhibit different
functions.
9. Conclusions and perspectives for the future
Understanding subcellular mechanisms of secondary neuronal
injury is necessary for designing appropriate treatments and
interventions for acute neuronal insult events. Mitigation of the
progression of secondary neuronal injury will likely be through
molecular, genetic and pharmacologic therapies. Yet, to date, there
is no targeted treatment to effectively limit the progression of
secondary neuronal injury. As a neotype neuromodulator, H2S
has been reported to play multiple roles in the cellular and molecular mechanisms of secondary neuronal injury. In this review, we
have discussed how H2S exerts protective roles in cerebrovascular
regulation, glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity, oxidative stress,
inﬂammation and apoptosis. However, H2S may contribute to the
formation of calcium overload in neurons and aggravate secondary
neuronal injury. And H2S also elicits calcium waves in glia and may
mediate signals between neurons and glia.
In terms of the mechanisms of secondary neuronal injury, ischemia and hypoxia decrease the ATP synthesis in mitochondria. Furthermore, glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity or calcium overload
associated with these pathologies induces oxytosis which impairs

mitochondria function and the subsequent drop in mitochondrial
membrane potential triggers neuronal apoptosis. Thus, most of
these mechanisms are relevant to mitochondrial dysfunction
(Fig. 1) which plays a critical role in secondary neuronal injury
and is responsible for the poor neurologic outcome. Moreover,
H2S functions as the O2 sensor in both chemoreceptors and
chromafﬁn cells (Olson et al., 2008; Perry et al., 2009) and has a
direct effect on mitochondrial ATP production (Olson, 2013; Wang,
2012). Oxygen sensors are able to monitor environmental oxygen
and ensure adequate oxygen delivery to tissues. Under hypoxic
conditions, vascular smooth-muscle cells can promote H2S production inside mitochondria to sustain ATP levels (Fu et al., 2012).
Whether H2S acts as an oxygen sensor in neurons is uncertain,
but there is some evidence to suggest that this may be the case.
Firstly, mitochondria in neuro2a cells express the H2S-producing
enzyme 3MST (Kimura et al., 2010). Secondly, H2S is an activator
of KATP channels which are activated by a drop in ATP. They
mediate a persistent hypoxic hyperpolarisation which reduces
the energy consumption of ion pumps and cuts down neuronal
excitability (Kulik et al., 2002). The mitochondrial KATP channel
has been proven to play the role of post-conditioning in cerebral
ischemia (Robin et al., 2011). Consequently, the KATP channel
appears to be an oxygen sensor that plays a protective role in
neuronal ischemia or hypoxia. H2S produced by mitochondria
may activate KATP channels to sustain the appropriate ATP level
for the metabolic demand and act as a neuronal protectant.
There are extensive studies to support the role of H2S in peripheral tissues, yet evidence to suggest that H2S may be important in
the CNS is still in its early stage. There is sufﬁcient evidence to
support the role of H2S as a signaling molecule and increasing data
shows that H2S directly protects neurons and glial cells and
promotes cell survival under pathological conditions. The
purported targets of H2S are signal molecules or ion channels,
suggesting H2S may be the ﬁrst messenger to activate downstream
molecules in the CNS.
However, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
underlie H2S functions in the CNS is poor and there are still many
controversies. Therefore, these areas of H2S experimentation remain the focus of many groups. New improvements in treatment
for patients with neuronal injury can only be achieved when we
have a better understanding of H2S functions in the CNS. First, in
order to identify the biological roles of endogenous and exogenous
H2S, it is important to accurately detect the H2S concentration in
serum, plasma and a variety of tissues and ﬁnally create an accepted standard. Most of older studies show that the plasma or tissue concentration of H2S is more than 30 lM, whereas recent
studies indicate that H2S concentration in the blood is negligible
and in tissues is only 15 nM. Causes of the enormous discrepancy
may be due to the differences in experimental procedure used to
determine the balance between production and catabolism of
H2S in vivo. On the other hand, extraction techniques to remove
H2S from tissues may include both bound and free forms of this
molecule and the H2S-sensitive electrode used in such studies cannot differentiate between these two forms of H2S. Thus, it is essential to explore new and sensitive methods of measuring free H2S
without disturbing cell functions. These methods must be able to
transiently detect the concentration of H2S produced by cells. In
particular, must be able to design an H2S-speciﬁc indicator to visualise H2S at its site of release as well as its movement. Secondly, to
evaluate the role of H2S under physiological and pathological
states, it is necessary to establish a stable genetically modiﬁed animal model. These animal models must be robust enough to allow
for behavior analysis and a variety of methods can therefore be
used to detect the expression levels of neurotransmitters and
synaptic plasticity in CBS or CSE gene knockout mice. Lastly, to
thoroughly understand the mechanisms of H2S in cellular signal

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

transduction, we must investigate the ways in which H2S reduction
and sulfhydration can modify the function of ion channels,
transcription factors and kinases. For example, ion channels or
electrophysiological variations in H2S-mediated functions remain
to be elucidated. Novel H2S-donating drugs have been tested preclinical phase and demonstrate that H2S functions in the CNS are
potential therapeutic targets. In conclusion, since H2S is generated
physiologically in almost every organ, and relatively higher in the
CNS, understanding its mode of action can help us understand its
potential therapeutic beneﬁts.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Project 30471774) and the Program for
New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-05-0831).
References
Abe, K., Kimura, H., 1996. The possible role of hydrogen sulﬁde as an endogenous
neuromodulator. J. Neurosci. 16, 1066–1071.
Allen, J.W., Mutkus, L.A., Aschner, M., 2001. Methylmercury-mediated inhibition of
3H-D-aspartate transport in cultured astrocytes is reversed by the antioxidant
catalase. Brain Res. 902, 92–100.
Ankarcrona, M., Dypbukt, J.M., Bonfoco, E., Zhivotovsky, B., Orrenius, S., Lipton, S.A.,
Nicotera, P., 1995. Glutamate-induced neuronal death: a succession of necrosis
or apoptosis depending on mitochondrial function. Neuron 15, 961–973.
Banerjee, R., Zou, C.G., 2005. Redox regulation and reaction mechanism of human
cystathionine-beta-synthase: a PLP-dependent hemesensor protein. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 433, 144–156.
Biermann, J., Lagreze, W.A., Schallner, N., Schwer, C.I., Goebel, U., 2011. Inhalative
preconditioning with hydrogen sulﬁde attenuated apoptosis after retinal
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Mol. Vision 17, 1275–1286.
Borgens, R.B., Liu-Snyder, P., 2012. Understanding secondary injury. Q. Rev. Biol. 87,
89–127.
Braet, K., Cabooter, L., Paemeleire, K., Leybaert, L., 2004. Calcium signal
communication in the central nervous system. Biol. Cell 96, 79–91.
Craft, J.M., Watterson, D.M., Van Eldik, L.J., 2005. Neuroinﬂammation: a potential
therapeutic target. Expert Opin. Ther. Targets 9, 887–900.
Davis, K.L., Stewart, D.G., Friedman, J.I., Buchsbaum, M., Harvey, P.D., Hof, P.R.,
Buxbaum, J., Haroutunian, V., 2003. White matter changes in schizophrenia:
evidence for myelin-related dysfunction. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 60, 443–456.
Dioum, E.M., Rutter, J., Tuckerman, J.R., Gonzalez, G., Gilles-Gonzalez, M.A.,
McKnight, S.L., 2002. NPAS2: a gas-responsive transcription factor. Science
298, 2385–2387.
Enokido, Y., Suzuki, E., Iwasawa, K., Namekata, K., Okazawa, H., Kimura, H., 2005.
Cystathionine beta-synthase, a key enzyme for homocysteine metabolism, is
preferentially expressed in the radial glia/astrocyte lineage of developing
mouse CNS. FASEB J. 19, 1854–1856.
Eto, K., Kimura, H., 2002. The production of hydrogen sulﬁde is regulated by
testosterone and S-adenosyl-L-methionine in mouse brain. J. Neurochem. 83,
80–86.
Fellin, T., Sul, J.Y., D’Ascenzo, M., Takano, H., Pascual, O., Haydon, P.G., 2006.
Bidirectional astrocyte-neuron communication: the many roles of glutamate
and ATP. Novartis Found. Symp. 276, 208–217, discussion 217–221, 233–237,
275–281.
Florian, B., Vintilescu, R., Balseanu, A.T., Buga, A.M., Grisk, O., Walker, L.C., Kessler, C.,
Popa-Wagner, A., 2008. Long-term hypothermia reduces infarct volume in aged
rats after focal ischemia. Neurosci. Lett. 438, 180–185.
Fu, M., Zhang, W., Wu, L., Yang, G., Li, H., Wang, R., 2012. Hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S)
metabolism in mitochondria and its regulatory role in energy production. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 2943–2948.
Furne, J., Saeed, A., Levitt, M.D., 2008. Whole tissue hydrogen sulﬁde concentrations
are orders of magnitude lower than presently accepted values. Am. J. Physiol.
Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 295, R1479–R1485.
Gadalla, M.M., Snyder, S.H., 2010. Hydrogen sulﬁde as a gasotransmitter. J.
Neurochem. 113, 14–26.
Garcia-Bereguiain, M.A., Samhan-Arias, A.K., Martin-Romero, F.J., Gutierrez-Merino,
C., 2008. Hydrogen sulﬁde raises cytosolic calcium in neurons through
activation of L-type Ca2+ channels. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 10, 31–42.
Godinez-Rubi, M., Rojas-Mayorquin, A.E., Ortuno-Sahagun, D., 2013. Nitric oxide
donors as neuroprotective agents after an ischemic stroke-related inﬂammatory
reaction. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2013, 297357.
Haydon, P.G., Carmignoto, G., 2006. Astrocyte control of synaptic transmission and
neurovascular coupling. Physiol. Rev. 86, 1009–1031.
Henke, N., Albrecht, P., Bouchachia, I., Ryazantseva, M., Knoll, K., Lewerenz, J.,
Kaznacheyeva, E., Maher, P., Methner, A., 2013. The plasma membrane channel
ORAI1 mediates detrimental calcium inﬂux caused by endogenous oxidative
stress. Cell Death Dis. 4, e470.

45

Hoffmann, A., Kann, O., Ohlemeyer, C., Hanisch, U.K., Kettenmann, H., 2003. Elevation
of basal intracellular calcium as a central element in the activation of brain
macrophages (microglia): suppression of receptor-evoked calcium signaling and
control of release function. J. Neurosci. 23, 4410–4419.
Hosoki, R., Matsuki, N., Kimura, H., 1997. The possible role of hydrogen sulﬁde as an
endogenous smooth muscle relaxant in synergy with nitric oxide. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 237, 527–531.
Hu, L.F., Wong, P.T., Moore, P.K., Bian, J.S., 2007. Hydrogen sulﬁde attenuates
lipopolysaccharide-induced inﬂammation by inhibition of p38 mitogenactivated protein kinase in microglia. J. Neurochem. 100, 1121–1128.
Ichinohe, A., Kanaumi, T., Takashima, S., Enokido, Y., Nagai, Y., Kimura, H., 2005.
Cystathionine beta-synthase is enriched in the brains of Down’s patients.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 338, 1547–1550.
Ishigami, M., Hiraki, K., Umemura, K., Ogasawara, Y., Ishii, K., Kimura, H., 2009. A
source of hydrogen sulﬁde and a mechanism of its release in the brain. Antioxid.
Redox Signal. 11, 205–214.
Jiang, B., Tang, G., Cao, K., Wu, L., Wang, R., 2010. Molecular mechanism for H(2)Sinduced activation of K(ATP) channels. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 12, 1167–1178.
Jiang, X., Huang, Y., Lin, W., Gao, D., Fei, Z., 2013. Protective effects of hydrogen
sulﬁde in a rat model of traumatic brain injury via activation of mitochondrial
adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channels and reduction of
oxidative stress. J. Surg. Res. 184, e27–e35.
Kamath, A.F., Chauhan, A.K., Kisucka, J., Dole, V.S., Loscalzo, J., Handy, D.E., Wagner,
D.D., 2006. Elevated levels of homocysteine compromise blood–brain barrier
integrity in mice. Blood 107, 591–593.
Kang, K., Zhao, M., Jiang, H., Tan, G., Pan, S., Sun, X., 2009. Role of hydrogen sulﬁde in
hepatic ischemia–reperfusion-induced injury in rats. Liver Transpl. 15, 1306–
1314.
Kim, Y.S., Joh, T.H., 2006. Microglia, major player in the brain inﬂammation: their
roles in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Mol. Med. 38, 333–347.
Kimura, H., 2000. Hydrogen sulﬁde induces cyclic AMP and modulates the NMDA
receptor. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 267, 129–133.
Kimura, Y., Kimura, H., 2004. Hydrogen sulﬁde protects neurons from oxidative
stress. FASEB J. 18, 1165–1167.
Kimura, Y., Dargusch, R., Schubert, D., Kimura, H., 2006. Hydrogen sulﬁde protects
HT22 neuronal cells from oxidative stress. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 8, 661–670.
Kimura, Y., Goto, Y., Kimura, H., 2010. Hydrogen sulﬁde increases glutathione
production and suppresses oxidative stress in mitochondria. Antioxid. Redox
Signal. 12, 1–13.
Kulik, A., Brockhaus, J., Pedarzani, P., Ballanyi, K., 2002. Chemical anoxia activates
ATP-sensitive and blocks Ca(2+)-dependent K(+) channels in rat dorsal vagal
neurons in situ. Neuroscience 110, 541–554.
Lan, A., Liao, X., Mo, L., Yang, C., Yang, Z., Wang, X., Hu, F., Chen, P., Feng, J., Zheng, D.,
Xiao, L., 2011. Hydrogen sulﬁde protects against chemical hypoxia-induced
injury by inhibiting ROS-activated ERK1/2 and p38MAPK signaling pathways in
PC12 cells. PLoS ONE 6, e25921.
Lee, S.W., Hu, Y.S., Hu, L.F., Lu, Q., Dawe, G.S., Moore, P.K., Wong, P.T., Bian, J.S., 2006.
Hydrogen sulphide regulates calcium homeostasis in microglial cells. Glia 54,
116–124.
Lee, M., Schwab, C., Yu, S., McGeer, E., McGeer, P.L., 2009. Astrocytes produce the
antiinﬂammatory and neuroprotective agent hydrogen sulﬁde. Neurobiol.
Aging 30, 1523–1534.
Lefﬂer, C.W., Parfenova, H., Basuroy, S., Jaggar, J.H., Umstot, E.S., Fedinec, A.L., 2011.
Hydrogen sulﬁde and cerebral microvascular tone in newborn pigs. Am. J.
Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 300, H440–H447.
Li, L., Bhatia, M., Zhu, Y.Z., Zhu, Y.C., Ramnath, R.D., Wang, Z.J., Anuar, F.B.,
Whiteman, M., Salto-Tellez, M., Moore, P.K., 2005. Hydrogen sulﬁde is a novel
mediator of lipopolysaccharide-induced inﬂammation in the mouse. FASEB J.
19, 1196–1198.
Li, Z., Wang, Y., Xie, Y., Yang, Z., Zhang, T., 2011. Protective effects of exogenous
hydrogen sulﬁde on neurons of hippocampus in a rat model of brain ischemia.
Neurochem. Res. 36, 1840–1849.
Liang, G.H., Adebiyi, A., Leo, M.D., McNally, E.M., Lefﬂer, C.W., Jaggar, J.H., 2011.
Hydrogen sulﬁde dilates cerebral arterioles by activating smooth muscle cell
plasma membrane KATP channels. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 300,
H2088–H2095.
Liu, Y.Y., Bian, J.S., 2010. Hydrogen sulﬁde protects amyloid-beta induced cell
toxicity in microglia. J. Alzheimers Dis. 22, 1189–1200.
Liu, W.B., Zhou, J., Qu, Y., Li, X., Lu, C.T., Xie, K.L., Sun, X.L., Fei, Z., 2010a.
Neuroprotective effect of osthole on MPP+-induced cytotoxicity in PC12 cells
via inhibition of mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS production. Neurochem.
Int. 57, 206–215.
Liu, X., Pan, L., Zhuo, Y., Gong, Q., Rose, P., Zhu, Y., 2010b. Hypoxia-inducible factor1alpha is involved in the pro-angiogenic effect of hydrogen sulﬁde under
hypoxic stress. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 33, 1550–1554.
Liu, Y.Y., Sparatore, A., Del Soldato, P., Bian, J.S., 2011. H2S releasing aspirin protects
amyloid beta induced cell toxicity in BV-2 microglial cells. Neuroscience 193,
80–88.
Lu, M., Hu, L.F., Hu, G., Bian, J.S., 2008. Hydrogen sulﬁde protects astrocytes against
H(2)O(2)-induced neural injury via enhancing glutamate uptake. Free Radical
Biol. Med. 45, 1705–1713.
Luo, Y., Liu, X., Zheng, Q., Wan, X., Ouyang, S., Yin, Y., Sui, X., Liu, J., Yang, X., 2012.
Hydrogen sulﬁde prevents hypoxia-induced apoptosis via inhibition of an
H2O2-activated calcium signaling pathway in mouse hippocampal neurons.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 425, 473–477.

46

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47

Luo, Y., Yang, X., Zhao, S., Wei, C., Yin, Y., Liu, T., Jiang, S., Xie, J., Wan, X., Mao, M.,
Wu, J., 2013. Hydrogen sulﬁde prevents OGD/R-induced apoptosis via
improving mitochondrial dysfunction and suppressing an ROS-mediated
caspase-3 pathway in cortical neurons. Neurochem. Int.
Marta, C.B., Montano, M.B., Taylor, C.M., Taylor, A.L., Bansal, R., Pfeiffer, S.E., 2005.
Signaling cascades activated upon antibody cross-linking of myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein: potential implications for multiple sclerosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 280, 8985–8993.
Marutani, E., Kosugi, S., Tokuda, K., Khatri, A., Nguyen, R., Atochin, D.N., Kida, K., Van
Leyen, K., Arai, K., Ichinose, F., 2012. A novel hydrogen sulﬁde-releasing Nmethyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist prevents ischemic neuronal death. J.
Biol. Chem. 287, 32124–32135.
Mattson, M.P., Camandola, S., 2001. NF-kappaB in neuronal plasticity and
neurodegenerative disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 107, 247–254.
Mattson, M.P., Chan, S.L., 2003. Neuronal and glial calcium signaling in Alzheimer’s
disease. Cell Calcium 34, 385–397.
Meng, J.L., Mei, W.Y., Dong, Y.F., Wang, J.H., Zhao, C.M., Lan, A.P., Yang, C.T., Chen,
P.X., Feng, J.Q., Hu, C.H., 2011. Heat shock protein 90 mediates cytoprotection by
H(2)S against chemical hypoxia-induced injury in PC12 cells. Clin. Exp.
Pharmacol. Physiol. 38, 42–49.
Micu, I., Jiang, Q., Coderre, E., Ridsdale, A., Zhang, L., Woulfe, J., Yin, X., Trapp, B.D.,
McRory, J.E., Rehak, R., Zamponi, G.W., Wang, W., Stys, P.K., 2006. NMDA
receptors mediate calcium accumulation in myelin during chemical ischaemia.
Nature 439, 988–992.
Mikami, Y., Shibuya, N., Kimura, Y., Nagahara, N., Yamada, M., Kimura, H., 2011.
Hydrogen sulﬁde protects the retina from light-induced degeneration by the
modulation of Ca2+ inﬂux. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 39379–39386.
Miles, E.W., Kraus, J.P., 2004. Cystathionine beta-synthase: structure, function,
regulation, and location of homocystinuria-causing mutations. J. Biol. Chem.
279, 29871–29874.
Morikawa, T., Kajimura, M., Nakamura, T., Hishiki, T., Nakanishi, T., Yukutake, Y.,
Nagahata, Y., Ishikawa, M., Hattori, K., Takenouchi, T., Takahashi, T., Ishii, I.,
Matsubara, K., Kabe, Y., Uchiyama, S., Nagata, E., Gadalla, M.M., Snyder, S.H.,
Suematsu, M., 2012. Hypoxic regulation of the cerebral microcirculation is
mediated by a carbon monoxide-sensitive hydrogen sulﬁde pathway. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 109, 1293–1298.
Munke, M., Kraus, J.P., Ohura, T., Francke, U., 1988. The gene for cystathionine betasynthase (CBS) maps to the subtelomeric region on human chromosome 21q
and to proximal mouse chromosome 17. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 42, 550–559.
Mustafa, A.K., Gadalla, M.M., Sen, N., Kim, S., Mu, W., Gazi, S.K., Barrow, R.K., Yang,
G., Wang, R., Snyder, S.H., 2009. H2S signals through protein S-sulfhydration. Sci.
Signal. 2, 72.
Nagai, Y., Tsugane, M., Oka, J., Kimura, H., 2004. Hydrogen sulﬁde induces calcium
waves in astrocytes. FASEB J. 18, 557–559.
Nicholls, D.G., 2004. Mitochondrial dysfunction and glutamate excitotoxicity
studied in primary neuronal cultures. Curr. Mol. Med. 4, 149–177.
Olney, J.W., 1969. Brain lesions, obesity, and other disturbances in mice treated
with monosodium glutamate. Science 164, 719–721.
Olson, K.R., 2013. Hydrogen sulﬁde as an oxygen sensor. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 51,
623–632.
Olson, K.R., Healy, M.J., Qin, Z., Skovgaard, N., Vulesevic, B., Duff, D.W., Whitﬁeld,
N.L., Yang, G., Wang, R., Perry, S.F., 2008. Hydrogen sulﬁde as an oxygen sensor
in trout gill chemoreceptors. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 295,
R669–R680.
Osborne, N.N., Ji, D., Majid, A.S., Del Soldata, P., Sparatore, A., 2012. Glutamate
oxidative injury to RGC-5 cells in culture is necrostatin sensitive and blunted by
a hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S)-releasing derivative of aspirin (ACS14). Neurochem.
Int. 60, 365–378.
Osteen, C.L., Giza, C.C., Hovda, D.A., 2004. Injury-induced alterations in N-methyl-Daspartate receptor subunit composition contribute to prolonged 45 calcium
accumulation following lateral ﬂuid percussion. Neuroscience 128, 305–322.
Park, E., Liu, Y., Fehlings, M.G., 2003. Changes in glial cell white matter AMPA
receptor expression after spinal cord injury and relationship to apoptotic cell
death. Exp. Neurol. 182, 35–48.
Pattison, D.J., Winyard, P.G., 2008. Dietary antioxidants in inﬂammatory arthritis:
do they have any role in etiology or therapy? Nat. Clin. Pract. Rheumatol. 4,
590–596.
Perry, S.F., McNeill, B., Elia, E., Nagpal, A., Vulesevic, B., 2009. Hydrogen sulﬁde
stimulates catecholamine secretion in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss).
Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 296, R133–R140.
Polster, B.M., Kinnally, K.W., Fiskum, G., 2001. BH3 death domain peptide induces
cell type-selective mitochondrial outer membrane permeability. J. Biol. Chem.
276, 37887–37894.
Qu, K., Chen, C.P., Halliwell, B., Moore, P.K., Wong, P.T., 2006. Hydrogen sulﬁde is a
mediator of cerebral ischemic damage. Stroke 37, 889–893.
Robin, E., Simerabet, M., Hassoun, S.M., Adamczyk, S., Tavernier, B., Vallet, B., Bordet,
R., Lebuffe, G., 2011. Postconditioning in focal cerebral ischemia: role of the
mitochondrial ATP-dependent potassium channel. Brain Res. 1375, 137–146.
Sen, N., Paul, B.D., Gadalla, M.M., Mustafa, A.K., Sen, T., Xu, R., Kim, S., Snyder, S.H.,
2012. Hydrogen sulﬁde-linked sulfhydration of NF-kappaB mediates its
antiapoptotic actions. Mol. Cell 45, 13–24.
Shacka, J.J., Lu, J., Xie, Z.L., Uchiyama, Y., Roth, K.A., Zhang, J., 2007. Kainic acid
induces early and transient autophagic stress in mouse hippocampus. Neurosci.
Lett. 414, 57–60.
Shan, X., Kruger, W.D., 1998. Correction of disease-causing CBS mutations in yeast.
Nat. Genet. 19, 91–93.

Shibuya, N., Tanaka, M., Yoshida, M., Ogasawara, Y., Togawa, T., Ishii, K.,
Kimura, H., 2009. 3-Mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase produces hydrogen
sulﬁde and bound sulfane sulfur in the brain. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11,
703–714.
Shibuya, N., Koike, S., Tanaka, M., Ishigami-Yuasa, M., Kimura, Y., Ogasawara, Y.,
Fukui, K., Nagahara, N., Kimura, H., 2013. A novel pathway for the production of
hydrogen sulﬁde from D-cysteine in mammalian cells. Nat. Commun. 4, 1366.
Soundarapandian, M.M., Wu, D., Zhong, X., Petralia, R.S., Peng, L., Tu, W., Lu, Y., 2007.
Expression of functional Kir6.1 channels regulates glutamate release at CA3
synapses in generation of epileptic form of seizures. J. Neurochem. 103, 1982–
1988.
Struffert, T., Axmann, C., Reith, W., 2003. Craniocerebral trauma. 2: intra-axial
injuries, secondary injuries. Radiologe 43, 1001–1014, quiz 1015–1016.
Sun, X.L., Zeng, X.N., Zhou, F., Dai, C.P., Ding, J.H., Hu, G., 2008. KATP channel openers
facilitate glutamate uptake by GluTs in rat primary cultured astrocytes.
Neuropsychopharmacology 33, 1336–1342.
Suzuki, M., Nelson, A.D., Eickstaedt, J.B., Wallace, K., Wright, L.S., Svendsen, C.N., 2006.
Glutamate enhances proliferation and neurogenesis in human neural progenitor
cell cultures derived from the fetal cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 24, 645–653.
Szydlowska, K., Tymianski, M., 2010. Calcium, ischemia and excitotoxicity. Cell
Calcium 47, 122–129.
Tang, X.Q., Shen, X.T., Huang, Y.E., Ren, Y.K., Chen, R.Q., Hu, B., He, J.Q., Yin, W.L., Xu,
J.H., Jiang, Z.S., 2010. Hydrogen sulﬁde antagonises homocysteine-induced
neurotoxicity in PC12 cells. Neurosci. Res. 68, 241–249.
Tang, X.Q., Chen, R.Q., Ren, Y.K., Soldato, P.D., Sparatore, A., Zhuang, Y.Y., Fang, H.R.,
Wang, C.Y., 2011. ACS6, a hydrogen sulﬁde-donating derivative of sildenaﬁl,
inhibits homocysteine-induced apoptosis by preservation of mitochondrial
function. Med. Gas Res. 1, 20.
Tang, X.Q., Ren, Y.K., Zhou, C.F., Yang, C.T., Gu, H.F., He, J.Q., Chen, R.Q., Zhuang, Y.Y.,
Fang, H.R., Wang, C.Y., 2012. Hydrogen sulﬁde prevents formaldehyde-induced
neurotoxicity to PC12 cells by attenuation of mitochondrial dysfunction and
pro-apoptotic potential. Neurochem. Int. 61, 16–24.
Tyagi, N., Moshal, K.S., Sen, U., Vacek, T.P., Kumar, M., Hughes Jr., W.M., Kundu, S.,
Tyagi, S.C., 2009. H2S protects against methionine-induced oxidative stress in
brain endothelial cells. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 11, 25–33.
Wang, R., 2002. Two’s company, three’s a crowd: can H2S be the third endogenous
gaseous transmitter? FASEB J. 16, 1792–1798.
Wang, R., 2012. Physiological implications of hydrogen sulﬁde: a whiff exploration
that blossomed. Physiol. Rev. 92, 791–896.
Wang, Y., Song, J.H., Denisova, J.V., Park, W.M., Fontes, J.D., Belousov, A.B., 2012.
Neuronal gap junction coupling is regulated by glutamate and plays critical role
in cell death during neuronal injury. J. Neurosci. 32, 713–725.
Warenycia, M.W., Goodwin, L.R., Benishin, C.G., Reiffenstein, R.J., Francom, D.M.,
Taylor, J.D., Dieken, F.P., 1989. Acute hydrogen sulﬁde poisoning. Demonstration
of selective uptake of sulﬁde by the brainstem by measurement of brain sulﬁde
levels. Biochem. Pharmacol. 38, 973–981.
Whiteman, M., Armstrong, J.S., Chu, S.H., Jia-Ling, S., Wong, B.S., Cheung, N.S.,
Halliwell, B., Moore, P.K., 2004. The novel neuromodulator hydrogen sulﬁde: an
endogenous peroxynitrite ‘scavenger’? J. Neurochem. 90, 765–768.
Whiteman, M., Cheung, N.S., Zhu, Y.Z., Chu, S.H., Siau, J.L., Wong, B.S., Armstrong, J.S.,
Moore, P.K., 2005. Hydrogen sulphide: a novel inhibitor of hypochlorous acidmediated oxidative damage in the brain? Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 326,
794–798.
Wilinski, B., Wilinski, J., Somogyi, E., Goralska, M., Piotrowska, J., 2011a. Paracetamol
(acetaminophen) decreases hydrogen sulﬁde tissue concentration in brain
but increases it in the heart, liver and kidney in mice. Folia Biol. (Krakow) 59,
41–44.
Wilinski, B., Wilinski, J., Somogyi, E., Piotrowska, J., Goralska, M., 2011b. Digoxin
increases hydrogen sulﬁde concentrations in brain, heart and kidney tissues in
mice. Pharmacol. Rep. 63, 1243–1247.
Wojtera, M., Sikorska, B., Sobow, T., Liberski, P.P., 2005. Microglial cells in
neurodegenerative disorders. Folia Neuropathol. 43, 311–321.
Xiao, L., Lan, A., Mo, L., Xu, W., Jiang, N., Hu, F., Feng, J., Zhang, C., 2012. Hydrogen
sulﬁde protects PC12 cells against reactive oxygen species and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2-mediated downregulation of glutamate
transporter-1 expression induced by chemical hypoxia. Int. J. Mol. Med. 30,
1126–1132.
Xu, G.Y., Winston, J.H., Shenoy, M., Zhou, S., Chen, J.D., Pasricha, P.J., 2009. The
endogenous hydrogen sulﬁde producing enzyme cystathionine-beta synthase
contributes to visceral hypersensitivity in a rat model of irritable bowel
syndrome. Mol. Pain 5, 44.
Xuan, A., Long, D., Li, J., Ji, W., Zhang, M., Hong, L., Liu, J., 2012. Hydrogen sulﬁde
attenuates spatial memory impairment and hippocampal neuroinﬂammation in
beta-amyloid rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neuroinﬂammation 9, 202.
Yin, W.L., He, J.Q., Hu, B., Jiang, Z.S., Tang, X.Q., 2009. Hydrogen sulﬁde inhibits
MPP(+)-induced apoptosis in PC12 cells. Life Sci. 85, 269–275.
Yin, J., Tu, C., Zhao, J., Ou, D., Chen, G., Liu, Y., Xiao, X., 2013. Exogenous hydrogen
sulﬁde protects against global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury via its antioxidative, anti-inﬂammatory and anti-apoptotic effects in rats. Brain Res. 1491,
188–196.
Yong, Q.C., Choo, C.H., Tan, B.H., Low, C.M., Bian, J.S., 2010. Effect of hydrogen sulﬁde
on intracellular calcium homeostasis in neuronal cells. Neurochem. Int. 56,
508–515.
Zhang, Y., Hou, S., Wu, Y., 2002. Changes of intracellular calcium and the correlation
with functional damage of the spinal cord after spinal cord injury. Chin. J.
Traumatol. 5, 40–42.

J.-F. Wang et al. / Neurochemistry International 64 (2014) 37–47
Zhang, X.D., Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Han, R., Wu, J.C., Liang, Z.Q., Gu, Z.L., Han, F.,
Fukunaga, K., Qin, Z.H., 2009. P53 mediates mitochondria dysfunction-triggered
autophagy activation and cell death in rat striatum. Autophagy 5, 339–350.
Zhang, J., Sio, S.W., Moochhala, S., Bhatia, M., 2010. Role of hydrogen sulﬁde in
severe burn injury-induced inﬂammation in mice. Mol. Med. 16, 417–424.
Zhang, R., Sun, Y., Tsai, H., Tang, C., Jin, H., Du, J., 2012. Hydrogen sulﬁde inhibits Ltype calcium currents depending upon the protein sulfhydryl state in rat
cardiomyocytes. PLoS ONE 7, e37073.

47

Zhao, W., Zhang, J., Lu, Y., Wang, R., 2001. The vasorelaxant effect of H(2)S as a novel
endogenous gaseous K(ATP) channel opener. EMBO J. 20, 6008–6016.
Zhao, W., Ndisang, J.F., Wang, R., 2003. Modulation of endogenous production of H2S
in rat tissues. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 81, 848–853.
Zipfel, G.J., Babcock, D.J., Lee, J.M., Choi, D.W., 2000. Neuronal apoptosis after CNS
injury: the roles of glutamate and calcium. J. Neurotrauma 17, 857–869.

