bs_bs_banner

Copyright © 2014 International Center for Artificial Organs and Transplantation and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Efficacy of Liposome-Encapsulated Hemoglobin in a Rat
Model of Cerebral Ischemia
Shinichi Kaneda, Takanobu Ishizuka, Arinobu Sekiguchi, Katsumi Morimoto,
and Hiroaki Kasukawa
R&D Headquarters, Terumo Corporation, Nakai, Kanagawa, Japan

Abstract: Use of liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin
(LEH) for oxygen delivery in the treatment of cerebral
ischemia has been studied previously and its expected benefits confirmed. However, the relationship between the
timing of administration and the efficacy of LEH in cerebral ischemia has not been studied in detail. We therefore
investigated the therapeutic time window of LEH by using
a rat model of cerebral ischemia, as well as evaluating the
contribution of oxygen delivery to the efficacy of LEH.
Dose-dependent effects and the therapeutic time window
of LEH were studied using models of transient and permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), respectively, in SD rats. LEH was intravenously administered at
0.5 h after the onset of ischemia in the transient MCAO
model and at 0.5, 2, 4, or 6 h in the permanent MCAO
model. Efficacy of LEH treatment was evaluated using
the infarct volume, which was examined with 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining and estimated by
integrating the unstained areas in serial sections of cerebral

tissue. Effects of oxygen delivery by LEH were examined
immunohistochemically with pimonidazole to stain for
areas of low oxygen tension in the tissue. LEH treatment
dose-dependently reduced the cerebral infarct volume,
which was especially significant in the cortical region at
doses of over 60 mg hemoglobin (Hb)/kg. In rats with
permanent MCAO, LEH administration at a dose of
300 mg Hb/kg at 0.5 h and 2 h after the onset of cerebral
ischemia significantly reduced cerebral infarct volume.
Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining with pimonidazole showed that the areas of cerebral tissue that were
hypoxic and had abnormal histological structure were
reduced after LEH treatment. These results indicated that
LEH is efficacious in the treatment of cerebral infarction
secondary to MCAO and that oxygen delivery to ischemic
cerebral tissues by LEH administered early after the
onset of cerebral ischemia contributes to this effect. Key
Words: Artificial
oxygen
carrier—Hemoglobin—
Liposome—Cerebral ischemia.

Stroke is one of the most prevalent causes of mortality and of morbidity requiring long-term care.
While numerous efforts have been made to develop
novel, efficacious therapies for stroke, treatments still
remain few; those currently in use include therapies
such as thrombolytic agents and thrombus removal
devices. Moreover, the narrow therapeutic time
window of these treatments restricts the number of
patients suitable for such treatments. Therefore, the

development of novel treatment procedures with
wide therapeutic time windows is greatly anticipated.
Not only have artificial oxygen carriers (AOCs) been
studied as red blood cell (RBC) substitutes for blood
transfusions, they have also been investigated as
pharmacological oxygen-delivering agents that can
be used to treat ischemic diseases. While we have
been developing liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin
(LEH) as an AOC, several studies have already demonstrated the efficacy of LEH in the treatment of
cerebral ischemia in animal models (1–5). Some
studies have also shown how LEH can contribute to
oxygen delivery into ischemic regions and demonstrated its distribution properties in ischemic cerebral
tissues (4–6). Furthermore, other reports suggest that
LEH can increase the oxygen tension of ischemic
tissues and improve higher-order brain dysfunction
(7,8). However, there remains little information

doi:10.1111/aor.12358
Received November 2013; revised April 2014.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Mr. Shinichi
Kaneda, R&D Headquarters, Terumo Corporation, 1500
Inokuchi, Nakai-machi, Ashigarakami-gun, Kanagawa 259-0151,
Japan. E-mail: shinichi_kaneda@terumo.co.jp
Presented in part at the 4th International Symposium on Artificial Oxygen Carriers, held September 28, 2013 in Yokohama,
Japan.
Artificial Organs 2014, 38(8):650–655

LEH IN CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA
about the appropriate timing of LEH administration
after the onset of cerebral ischemia. We therefore
studied the relationship between the timing of LEH
administration and its efficacy in a rat model of cerebral ischemia. At the same time, we also studied the
extent to which oxygen delivery by LEH contributes
to its efficacy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin
LEH was prepared by the following procedure: a
purified solution of human hemoglobin (Hb) was
prepared from outdated human RBCs that were
obtained from the Japanese Red Cross Society.
Inositol hexaphosphate was added to the purified Hb
solution as an allosteric effector to control the
oxygen affinity of LEH. The Hb solution was subsequently encapsulated with lipid ingredients (hydrogenated soybean phosphatidylcholine, cholesterol,
and stearic acid) via high-speed emulsification. As
the only modification of the outer surface of the
liposome membrane, polyethyleneglycol-bound
phospholipid was then added to the LEH prepared
using this procedure. Finally, the Hb concentration
of LEH was adjusted to 6 g/dL. Typical physicochemical properties of LEH are shown in Table 1.
The liposomes ranged from 200 to 250 nm in mean
diameter, and they showed oxygen affinities that corresponded to P50O2 values of about 40 to 50 torr.
Animals
Male Sprague Dawley rats were obtained from
Charles River Laboratories Japan (Yokohama,
Japan) and housed in a room with a 12-h light and
dark cycle. Food and water were available ad libitum.
All experiments performed were approved by the
institutional review board of Terumo Corporation.
Pharmacokinetics
Awake rats were administered 300 mg Hb/kg of
LEH via the tail vein. Blood samples were withdrawn
TABLE 1. Typical physicochemical properties of LEH
Property

Value

Osmolar ratio
pH
Hb (g/dL)
Total lipid (g/dL)
Hb/lipid (g/g)
Mean diameter (nm)
Methemoglobin (%)
P50O2 (torr)

1
7.4
6
4
1.5
230
<10
40–50

651

from the aortas of rats anesthetized with ethyl ether
at 1, 3, 5, 24, 72, and 168 h after LEH administration.
The concentration of human Hb, as a surrogate indicator of LEH in the blood of the rats, was determined
by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay that
could specifically detect human Hb with an antihuman-Hb antibody. The methemoglobin content in
each blood sample obtained was determined by the
following procedure: blood samples were centrifuged
(1750 × g, 10 min, 4°C), after which a dextran solution was added to the separated plasma and centrifuged again (19 450 × g, 15 min, 4°C) in order to
concentrate the LEH in the precipitate. A phosphate
buffer was then added to the obtained LEH, which
was followed by freezing and thawing, and finally the
methemoglobin ratio was determined and estimated
by the cyanomethemoglobin method.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion model
and treatment
For the transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) model, rats were first anesthetized and
anesthesia maintained with 2% isoflurane in a 7:3
N2O : O2 mixture, and then an infusion line was
inserted into the femoral vein. The common carotid
artery was isolated, and the area surrounding its bifurcation into the external carotid artery and internal
carotid artery (ICA) was exposed. A silicone-coated
4-0 nylon suture was inserted into the lumen of the
ICA via the carotid artery bifurcation, and the suture
tip was advanced past the origin of the MCA into the
proximal anterior cerebral artery, thus occluding the
origin of the MCA. Two hours after the onset of
MCAO, the suture was removed to allow reperfusion
of cerebral tissues. LEH was administered at 0.5 h
after the induction of MCAO at a dose of 12, 60, 300,
or 600 mg Hb/kg, and after 24 h, neurological scores
and infarct volumes were evaluated. In the case of the
permanent MCAO model, the procedures detailed
above were followed, but the suture was left in place
during the experimental period. LEH was administered at 0.5, 2, 4, or 6 h when the therapeutic time
window was being studied and at 0.5 h when the effect
of LEH on cerebral tissue oxygenation and
histopathology was being assessed.
Cerebral blood flow
Using the transient MCAO rat model, cerebral
blood flow during ischemia was evaluated. A small
cranial window was made at 2 mm posterior and
5 mm lateral to the bregma in the right hemisphere,
and the probe of a laser Doppler blood flow meter
(Omegaflo FLO-N1, Omegawave, Osaka, Japan)
was placed on the dural surface. The blood flow in
Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

652

S. KANEDA ET AL.

the region of the cerebral cortex mainly supplied by
the MCA was then measured.

pallor of the eosinophilic background,
vacuolation (sponginess) of the neuropil.

Neurological symptoms
Neurological symptom severity was determined at
24 h after the onset of MCAO by scoring for the
categories of flexion, rotation, and circling. The total
scores for these categories were then used to evaluate
the efficacy of LEH on neurological functions.

Statistics
For pharmacokinetics, the Hb concentration is
presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD).
Half-life (t1/2) was analyzed with WinNonlin Professional Version 5.2 (Pharsight/CERTARA, St. Louis,
MO, USA).
In both MCAO model studies, each value represents the mean ± standard error (SE) of the mean.
Infarct volumes in the transient MCAO model were
statistically evaluated with the Williams’ test, while
infarct volumes in the permanent MCAO model
were evaluated with the Dunnett’s test. Neurological
symptom scores were evaluated by Fisher’s exact
test. The tissue section data, combining results for
structural change and tissue oxygenation level, were
evaluated with Student’s t-test. In either case, a P
value <0.05 (two-tailed in comparisons between
groups) was considered as significant.

Cerebral infarct volume
After the neurological symptoms were evaluated,
rats were decapitated, and whole brains were
resected. The brains were coronally sectioned every
2 mm from 4 mm rostral to 6 mm caudal of the
bregma. All brain tissue sections obtained were
stained with 1% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
solution (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan) at room
temperature. Photographs of each stained section
were taken, and the infarct area was determined with
imaging analysis software (Adobe Photoshop 3.0J,
Adobe Systems, Tokyo, Japan). Infarct volume was
then estimated by the integration of the infarct area
of each coronal brain section.
Immunohistochemical staining with pimonidazole
In the permanent MCAO rat model, 300 mg Hb/kg
of LEH and 60 mg/kg of pimonidazole hydrochloride
were respectively administered at 0.5 and 1.5 h after
the onset of MCAO. At 3 h after MCAO, rats were
anesthetized with pentobarbital, blood was withdrawn, and systemic perfusion with heparinized saline
(heparin: Mochida Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan;
saline: Otsuka Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan) was
performed. Perfusion fixation was then performed
with a 10% formaldehyde solution, and the whole
brain was resected. Paraffin sections were made from
the fixed brain and used for hematoxylin-and-eosin
(H&E) staining. Immunohistochemical staining was
performed with the Hypoxyprobe-1 Plus Kit
(Hypoxyprobe, Burlington, MA, USA) for the detection of tissue hypoxia (below 10 torr). In each stained
brain section, the area of the tissue with a normal or
abnormal structure as well as the areas of tissue that
was normoxic, hypoxic, or anoxic were evaluated with
imaging analysis software (WinROOF, Mitani Visual,
Fukui, Japan). Volumes of each type of tissue were
estimated by the integration method in the same way
that infarction volume was estimated. Abnormal
structural tissue was distinguished from normal tissue
as reported by Garcia et al. (9). Briefly, it was defined
by alterations in the shape and stainability of both
neuronal perikarya and astrocytic nuclei, diffuse
Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

and

RESULTS
Pharmacokinetics of LEH
Human Hb, the surrogate indicator of LEH levels,
which also reflects the pharmacokinetics of LEH,
exhibited dose-dependent changes; in addition, the
t1/2 of LEH was prolonged in a dose-dependent
manner (Fig. 1). However, the functional Hb concentration (which reflects the actual oxygen transport
efficiency and is estimated using the ratio between
Hb and methemoglobin concentrations) showed a
more rapid decline than LEH, where the t1/2 of functional Hb was 2.6 h and that of LEH was 6.2 h
(Fig. 2).

FIG. 1. Changes in human Hb concentration derived from LEH in
rats after a single-bolus intravenous administration to the rats at
varying doses.

LEH IN CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA

FIG. 2. Functional human Hb concentration and calculated halflife of LEH in rats after a single-bolus intravenous administration
of LEH at a dose of 300 mg Hb/kg.

Efficacy of LEH in transient cerebral ischemia
In the rats with transient MCAO, LEH treatment
dose-dependently reduced the size of the cerebral
infarct volume, which was especially statistically significant in the cortical region when doses were over
60 mg Hb/kg (Fig. 3). Neurological scores also
tended to improve dose-dependently, but the differences were not statistically significant for all administered doses (data not shown). During the period of
transient MCAO, cortical blood flow was drastically
reduced after cerebral ischemia was induced in the
rats and remained at low levels until reperfusion was
allowed (Fig. 4).
Therapeutic time window of LEH in permanent
cerebral ischemia
In the rats with permanent MCAO, LEH administered at a dose of 300 mg Hb/kg at 0.5 h or 2 h after
the induction of cerebral ischemia significantly
reduced cerebral infarct volumes. While the reduc-

FIG. 3. Dose-dependent effect of LEH treatment on infarct
volume in rats subjected to transient MCAO. *P < 0.025 by Williams’ test (vs. saline).

653

FIG. 4. Cortical blood flow, which is mainly supplied via the MCA,
in rats subjected to transient MCAO and treated with LEH.

tion in cerebral infarct volumes when LEH was
administered at 4 h was not statistically significant
compared with the control group (P = 0.0686), there
was still a tendency for LEH to reduce the infarct
volume (Fig. 5)
Effects of LEH on cerebral tissue oxygen tension
and histopathology
H&E staining and immunohistochemical staining
with pimonidazole of cerebral tissues provided information about the condition of tissues, that is, whether
the tissue structure was normal or abnormal and
whether the tissues were normoxic, hypoxic, or
anoxic (Fig. 6). In the cortex, the volume of tissues
with an abnormal structure and negative
pimonidazole staining was smaller in the LEH group
than in the saline group (LEH 44.7 ± 3.2 mm3, saline
74.3 ± 11.9 mm3; P = 0.043). Furthermore, the
volume of tissues with a normal structure and positive pimonidazole staining was larger in the LEH

FIG. 5. Effect of LEH treatment on infarct volume at different
administration times in rats subjected to permanent MCAO.
**P < 0.01 by Dunnett’s test (vs. saline).
Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

654

S. KANEDA ET AL.

FIG. 6. Effect of LEH treatment on tissue
oxygen levels at 3 h after permanent MCAO
in rats. (A) Ratio of changes in structure and
tissue oxygenation. White bar: normal structure and normoxia (PO2 > 10 mm Hg), Light
gray bar: normal structure and hypoxia
(PO2 < 10 mm Hg). Medium gray bar:
abnormal
structure
and
hypoxia
(PO2 < 10 mm Hg). Dark gray bar: abnormal
structure and anoxia. Data given as
mean ± SE (n = 5). *P < 0.05. (B) Representative H&E-stained tissue preparation. (C)
Representative pimonidazole-stained tissue
preparation. Pimo, pimonidazole.

group than in the saline group (LEH 26.0 ± 4.2 mm3,
saline 14.6 ± 2.4 mm3; P = 0.046). The results showed
that LEH administered at a dose of 300 mg Hb/kg
significantly reduced the extent of anoxic regions
with abnormal histological structures and increased
the extent of hypoxic regions with normal structures.
DISCUSSION
Given its physicochemical properties such as a
small diameter and low viscosity, LEH has been
studied not only as a blood substitute but also as a
pharmacological agent for treating ischemic diseases.
Several reports have demonstrated the efficacy of
LEH in rat models (1–3,7,8) of cerebral ischemia and
in nonhuman primates (4,5). Furthermore, results of
studies using imaging techniques in cerebral ischemia
models indicated that LEH could distribute and
deliver oxygen to ischemic tissues (4–6); taken
together, these results encourage the development of
LEH for the treatment of ischemic stroke. However,
because little is known about the therapeutic time
window of LEH in cerebral ischemia, in this study we
examined the relationship between the timing of
LEH administration and its efficacy in cerebral ischemia using a rat model. In addition, we also studied
the mechanism of LEH efficacy from the point of
view of ischemic tissue oxygenation.
LEH treatment reduced cerebral infarct volume in
a dose-dependent manner at doses of 12–600 mg Hb/
kg. This dose-dependency indicates that the effects
on cerebral ischemia were caused by LEH itself. Furthermore, despite reduced cerebral blood flow after
the onset of cerebral ischemia, LEH could still
improve cerebral infarction under these conditions.
One explanation for this result is that LEH, owing to
its physicochemical characteristics, was able to
perfuse and continue to deliver oxygen to ischemic
cerebral tissues during MCAO.
Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

We next studied the effects of timing of LEH
administration on cerebral ischemia in the permanent
MCAO model. LEH significantly reduced the cerebral infarct volume when it was administered at 0.5 or
2 h after the onset of cerebral ischemia. However,
LEH showed a lesser reduction of infarction when
administered at 4 or 6 h. These results suggest that at
least in this model, earlier administration of LEH
would be more suitable for the treatment of ischemic
stroke. The pharmacokinetic study showed that LEH
could maintain its function for a short time while in the
rat circulation. However, we have previously confirmed that large differences in the kinetics of LEH
exist between rats and monkeys (10). In addition, we
have also observed large differences in the level of
methemoglobin formation with the use of LEH in
these animal species in a previous study (11). Furthermore, there is a possibility that therapeutic time
windows are different in different animal species
(12,13). Therefore, any clinical considerations of the
therapeutic time window of LEH in the treatment of
stroke should be undertaken while keeping these
species-dependent differences in mind. Immunohistochemical staining of cerebral tissues, which was performed using pimonidazole to stain tissue areas with
low oxygen tension, revealed the effects of LEH on
cerebral tissue oxygen distribution. Furthermore,
histopathological examinations of cerebral tissue sections stained with H&E and pimonidazole showed
differences in the state of the tissue structure and
tissue oxygenation, respectively. However, we also
observed regions with abnormal structures that had
either negative or positive staining for pimonidazole.
Given that pimonidazole is known to be reductively
activated in hypoxic cells and to form stable adducts,
these observations could be explained as follows. In
the present study, pimonidazole was administered at
1.5 h after MCAO, a time when cells in the regions
with abnormal structure and negative pimonidazole

LEH IN CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA
staining were not able to incorporate or reduce
pimonidazole because of the early infarct progression.
Meanwhile, LEH treatment at a dose of
300 mg Hb/kg reduced the size of anoxic regions with
abnormal histological structures and increased
hypoxic regions with normal structures. It is thought
that the regions with a normal structure and positive
staining for pimonidazole represent those tissues that
were rescued with LEH administration but did not
achieve tissue oxygen tensions over 10 torr. These
results could be explained by the oxygen-supplying
ability of LEH as well as other possible functions, such
as free-radical scavenging effects. This is consistent
with some previous reports, the findings of which also
support the ability of LEH in delivering oxygen to
ischemic cerebral tissues in animal models (4,6). In
addition, some reports have also demonstrated that
LEH can probably suppress the deleterious effects of
free radicals in the ischemic tissues (4,14,15); the significance of this is further exemplified by evidence
that showed the effectiveness of free-radical scavengers in improving animal models of stroke, indicating
the pathological involvement of free radicals in cerebral ischemia (16).
CONCLUSION
The results of our present study indicate that
liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin is efficacious in
reducing cerebral infarction secondary to middle
cerebral artery occlusion and that this is at least partially mediated by oxygen delivery to ischemic cerebral tissues by LEH administered early after the
onset of cerebral ischemia.
Conflict of Interest: The authors have no conflict
of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Kawaguchi AT, Fukumoto D, Haida M, Ogata Y, Yamano M,
Tsukada H. Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin reduces the
size of cerebral infarction in the rat: evaluation with photochemically induced thrombosis of the middle cerebral artery.
Stroke 2007;38:1626–32.

655

2. Kawaguchi AT, Kurita D, Furuya H, Yamano M, Ogata Y,
Haida M. Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin alleviates brain
edema after permanent occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
in rats. Artif Organs 2009;33:153–8.
3. Fukumoto D, Kawaguchi AT, Haida M, Yamano M, Ogata Y,
Tsukada H. Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin reduces the
size of cerebral infarction in rats: effect of oxygen affinity. Artif
Organs 2009;33:159–63.
4. Kawaguchi AT, Haida M, Yamano M, Fukumoto D, Ogata Y,
Tsukada H. Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin ameliorates
ischemic stroke in nonhuman primates: an acute study. J
Pharmacol Exp Ther 2010;332:429–36.
5. Kawaguchi AT, Haida M, Ohba H, Yamano M, Fukumoto D,
Tsukada H. Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin ameliorates
ischemic stroke in nonhuman primates: longitudinal observation. Artif Organs 2013;37:904–12.
6. Urakami T, Kawaguchi AT, Akai S, et al. In vivo distribution
of liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin determined by positron
emission tomography. Artif Organs 2009;33:164–8.
7. Kakehata J, Yamaguchi T, Togashi H, et al. Therapeutic
potentials of an artificial oxygen-carrier, liposomeencapsulated hemoglobin, for ischemia/reperfusion-induced
cerebral dysfunction in rats. J Pharmacol Sci 2010;114:
189–97.
8. Hamadate N, Yamaguchi T, Sugawara A, et al. Liposomeencapsulated hemoglobin ameliorates impairment of fear
memory and hippocampal dysfunction after cerebral ischemia
in rats. J Pharmacol Sci 2010;114:409–19.
9. Garcia JH, et al. Progression from ischemic injury to infarct
following middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat. Am J
Pathol 1993;142:623–35.
10. Kaneda S, Ishizuka T, Goto H, et al. Liposome-encapsulated
hemoglobin, TRM-645: current status of the development and
important issues for clinical application. Artif Organs
2008;33:146–52.
11. Kaneda S, Ishizuka T, Goto H, Kasukawa H. Development
of capsule type artificial oxygen carrier—liposomeencapsulated hemoglobin. Artificial Blood 2013;21:49–59. In
Japanese.
12. Fisher M, Takano K. The penumbra, therapeutic time window
and acute ischemic stroke. Baillieres Clin Neurol 1995;4:279–
95.
13. Braeuninger S, Kleinschniz C. Rodent models of focal cerebral ischemia: procedural pitfall and translational problems.
Exp Transl Stroke Med 2013;1:8–19.
14. Okada M, Kawaguchi AT, Hakuba N, Hyodo J, Hato N, Gyo
K. Liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin alleviates hearing loss
after transient cochlear ischemia: an experimental study in the
gerbil. Neurosci Lett 2013;553:176–80.
15. Shimbo D, Abumiya T, Shichinohe H, Nakayama N,
Kazumata K, Houkin K. Post-ischemic intra-arterial infusion
of liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin can reduce ischemia
reperfusion injury. Brain Res 2014;1554:59–66.
16. Sydserff SG, Borelli AR, Green AR, Cross AJ. Effect of
NXY-059 on infarct volume after transient or permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat: studies on dose,
plasma concentration and therapeutic time window. Br J
Pharmacol 2002;135:103–12.

Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

