Neuroscience Letters 579 (2014) 46–51

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neuroscience Letters
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neulet

Metformin promotes focal angiogenesis and neurogenesis in mice
following middle cerebral artery occlusion
Yanqun Liu a , Guanghui Tang b , Zhijun Zhang b , Yongting Wang b , Guo-Yuan Yang a,b,∗
a

Department of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200025, China
Neuroscience and Neuroengineering Research Center, Med-X Research Institute and School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200030, China
b

h i g h l i g h t s
• Metformin alleviates brain atrophy volume.
• Metformin promotes focal angiogenesis and neurogenesis.
• The protective effect of metformin is via activating AMPK–eNOS pathway.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 8 May 2014
Received in revised form 28 June 2014
Accepted 3 July 2014
Available online 12 July 2014
Keywords:
Angiogenesis
Ischemia
Metformin
Neurogenesis
Recovery

a b s t r a c t
Current studies demonstrated that metformin is not only a hypoglycemic drug, but also a neuro-protective
agent. However, the effect of metformin during ischemic brain injury is unclear. The aim of the present
study is to explore the effect of metformin during ischemic brain injury. Adult male CD1 mice underwent 90 min transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Metformin (200 mg/kg) was given at the time
of reperfusion daily until sacriﬁce. Results showed that metformin treatment signiﬁcantly reduced
ischemia-induced brain atrophy volume compared to the control (p < 0.05). Immunostaining results
showed that the microvessel density in the peri-focal region of metformin treated mice was greatly
increased compared to the control (p < 0.05). Similarly, the numbers of BrdU+/DCX+ and nestin+ cells in
the subventricular zone were increased in metformin treated mice compared to the control (p < 0.05). Furthermore, we demonstrated that metformin treatment activated AMPK signaling pathway and promoted
eNOS phosphorylation. Thus, we concluded that metformin promoted focal angiogenesis and neurogenesis and attenuated ischemia-induced brain injury in mice after middle cerebral artery occlusion,
suggesting that metformin is a potential new drug for ischemic stroke therapy.
© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Ischemic stroke is the second leading cause of death and the ﬁrst
leading cause of disability in adults worldwide [1]. Because most
stroke patients survived with long-term disability, stroke-related
burden has been a tremendous problem for the society [2]. Hence,
searching for effective medical treatment to improve functional
recovery of post-stroke patients is still an urging task.
Clinical stroke studies show that most patients have various
degree of neuro-functional recovery over time [3]. Functional MRI
studies indicated that the ipsilateral hemisphere activity was highly

∗ Corresponding author at: Med-X Research Institute and School of Biomedical
Engineering, 1954 Hua-shan Road, Shanghai 200030, China. Tel.: +86 21 62933291;
fax: +86 21 62932302.
E-mail addresses: gyyang0626@gmail.com, gyyang0626@163.com (G.-Y. Yang).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2014.07.006
0304-3940/© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

dynamic after ischemic brain injury [4]. Mounting reports showed
that after ischemic injury, the production of new neurons increased
and neuroblasts migrate toward the damaged brain tissue as part
of endogenous repair and brains exhibited vascular remodeling as
well [3]. In fact, it is recognized that brain angiogenesis and neurogenesis are a highly coordinated responses after ischemic brain
injury [5]. Molecules such as erythropoietin, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) not
only enhance focal angiogenesis, but also promote neurogenesis in
the injured brain [6–8]. Studies in animals also show that promoting post-ischemic angiogenesis and neurogenesis can improve the
recovery of neurological function [8], indicating it is a promising
therapeutic target for ischemic stroke.
Metformin is a widely used drug for the treatment of type
2 diabetes. Through activating AMP-activated kinase (AMPK),
metformin inhibits hepatic glucose production and increases
peripheral glucose utilization, which effectively controls blood

Y. Liu et al. / Neuroscience Letters 579 (2014) 46–51

glucose level [9]. Recent studies found that the function of metformin was not limited to lower glucose level. Metformin reduced
clinical stroke incidence in diabetes patients and attenuated brain
atrophy volume 24 h of post-stroke treatment in transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) mice [10,11]. In normal mice,
metformin treatment not only promoted neurogenesis via activating protein kinase C (PKC) – CREB-binding protein (CBP) pathway,
but also expanded life-span through alleviating chronic inﬂammation [9,12]. Furthermore, metformin promoted neuro-functional
recovery by promoting focal vascular remodeling in diabetic mice
[13]. These evidences suggest that metformin is a potential agent
for the treatment of ischemic stroke. However, the mechanism
of metformin in promoting angiogenesis and neurogenesis after
stroke is unknown.
AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) is a trimetric enzyme consisting
of a catalytic ␣-subunit and regulatory ␤ and ␥ subunits and is
activated by a alternation in AMP/ATP ratio [9]. In endothelial cells,
AMPK activation promotes eNOS phosphorylation and is related
to the reduction of cardiac injury [14]. Since eNOS is expressed
in endothelial cells and neurons in the brain [7], we hypothesize
that metformin could alleviate ischemic brain injury through an
AMPK–eNOS dependent manner.
Here, we explored the effect of metformin following ischemic
stroke using a mouse model of transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion (tMCAO) and investigated the possible underlying mechanism of metformin.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Experimental design
Animal protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care
and Use Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China. Forty adult CD1 male mice were used in the whole experiment and mice were randomly divided into two groups that were
administrated either metformin (200 mg/kg/day) or equal volume
of sterile saline intraperitoneally until sacriﬁcing animals. Metformin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was dissolved in sterile saline at
a concentration of 30 mg/ml and the dose was chosen according
to previous study [12]. To investigate the effect of metformin on
angiogenesis and neurogenesis in vivo, another subgroup of mice
was treated with metformin or saline and then further received 5bromo-2-deoxyuridine (BrdU) to label dividing cells. BrdU (Sigma)
was intraperitoneally injected at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day at 7 days
after tMCAO for seven consecutive days [15].

2.2. Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) in mice
tMCAO was carried out as previously described [15]. Adult
male CD1 mice weighing 25–30 g were anesthetized with
ketamine/xylazine (100 mg/10 mg/kg body weight, Sigma) through
peritoneal injection. The left common carotid artery, external
carotid artery, and internal carotid artery were isolated; a siliconecoated 6-0 nylon suture (Covidien, Mansﬁeld, MA) was gently
inserted into the internal carotid artery and stopped at the opening
of the middle cerebral artery. Successful occlusion was conformed
by measuring the surface cerebral blood ﬂow using a laser Doppler
ﬂowmetry (Moor Instruments, Devon, UK). If an occlusion surgery
is successful, the surface blood ﬂow of the MCA region is reduced
to 10% of baseline. After 90 min of middle cerebral artery occlusion,
the suture was withdrawn to allow blood ﬂow restoration. Sham
operated mice received the same procedure except for the suture
insertion process. The surgical mortality in our study was less than
5%.

47

2.3. Atrophy volume measurement
Atrophy volume was analyzed by Cresyl Violet (Sigma) staining [16]. Brieﬂy, brains were removed immediately after sacriﬁcing
animals and frozen by −42 ◦ C isopentane. A series of 20-␮mthick coronal sections from anterior commissure to hippocampus
were cut and mounted on slides. The brain sections were then
stained with Cresyl Violet. The area of the contralateral hemisphere and ischemic hemisphere was depicted by image analysis
software (ImageJ, NIH, Bethesda, MD). A sum of brain sections interval 200 ␮m from the frontal to the occipital was analyzed for the
atrophy volume assessment. Atrophy volume between two adjacent
sections was calculated by the formula: 1/3 × h (S1 + S2 +
√
S1 × S2), where S1 and S2 was the atrophy size between two adjacent sections and h was 200 ␮m. Total atrophy volume was the sum
of all atrophy volume between two adjacent sections [17].
2.4. Immunohistological staining
Frozen brain sections were blocked with 10% FBS for 1 h
and then incubated with CD31 (1:200 dilution, R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN) or nestin (1:100 dilution, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 4 ◦ C overnight. After washing, brain sections were
further incubated with the appropriate second antibodies for
1 h. Brain sections were photographed using a ﬂuorescence
microscope (Leica, Solms, Germany). Photographs of interested areas in ipsilateral hemispheres were taken for further
analysis. For CD31 immunostaining, four ﬁelds in the peri-focal
regions were photographed in each section and ﬁve consecutive
sections spaced 200 ␮m were examined in each mouse. The number
of CD31+ vessels was counted blindly. For nestin immunostaining, photomicrographs in the subventricular zone were taken and
ﬁve consecutive sections spaced 200 ␮m were collected for further analysis. Integrated optical density (IOD) from the area of
interest was quantiﬁed using Image Pro Plus 6.0 (Media Cybernetics Rockville, MD). Data were expressed as relative IOD of sham
group.
2.5. BrdU staining
BrdU staining was performed as described previously [15].
Mice were deeply anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine and perfused with saline transcardially, followed by ﬁxation with 4%
paraformaldehyde. The brain was removed and post-ﬁxed in 4%
paraformaldehyde overnight. The brain was further dehydrated in
30% sucrose solution until it sunk. After frozen in −42 ◦ C isopentane,
the brain was cut into a series of 30-␮m-thick coronal sections.
For BrdU double staining, brains were treated with 2 M HCl for
30 min at 37 ◦ C and then incubated with 0.1 M sodium borate for
10 min. Sections were blocked with 10% FBS for 1 h and then incubated with BrdU (1:300 dilution, Santa Cruz Technology, Santa Cruz,
CA) and DCX (1:300 dilution, Santa Cruz Technology), or BrdU and
Lectin (1:200 dilution, Sigma) at 4 ◦ C overnight. After being washed,
brain sections were incubated with appropriate second antibodies for 1 h. Sections were mounted and visualized using a confocal
microscope (Leica) and photomicrographs were taken for further
analysis.
2.6. Western blot analysis
Samples from brain tissues were lysed in RIPA (Millipore, Bedford, MA) supplemented with 1 mmol/L PMSF, protease inhibitor
and phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo, Waltham, MA). For Western
blots analysis, after denaturation, samples with the same amount
of total proteins were loaded onto 10% resolving gel (Promoton, Shanghai, China) for electrophoresis. Proteins were then

48

Y. Liu et al. / Neuroscience Letters 579 (2014) 46–51

transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Whatman, Piscataway, NJ). After being blocked with 5% non-fat milk, the membrane
was incubated with primary antibodies at the following dilution (p-AMPK (1:1000), AMPK (1:1000), p-eNOS (1:1000), eNOS
(1:1000), Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA), ␤-actin (1:1000,
Santa Cruz Technology) at 4 ◦ C overnight, respectively. After
washing, the membrane was incubated with the appropriate
HRP-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature
and then reacted with enhanced chemiluminescence substrate
(Pierce, Rockford). The results were recorded by Quantity One
image software (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) and relative intensity was
calculated using Gel-Pro Analyzer software (Media Cybernetics).

2.7. Statistical analysis
Results were presented as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was
evaluated by Prism 4 software (Graph pad Software, San Diego, CA).
For comparison between two groups, statistical signiﬁcance was
determined through a Student t test. For comparison among multiple groups, statistical signiﬁcance was evaluated using one-way
ANOVA followed by a Student–Newman–Keuls test. A probability
value of p < 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant.

3. Results
3.1. Metformin reduced brain atrophy volume
To explore the effect of metformin on ischemic brain injury,
we used Cresyl Violet staining to evaluate atrophy volume. Result
showed that metformin reduced brain atrophy volume effectively
at 14 days following tMCAO (Fig. 1A and B, p < 0.05).
3.2. Metformin promoted focal angiogenesis in tMCAO mice
CD31 (platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1) is
expressed on endothelial cells and is used to indicate the presence
of endothelial cells in immunostaining, which helps to evaluate
the number of microvessels. To investigate the effect of metformin
on focal angiogenesis during tMCAO in mice, we ﬁrst performed
CD31+ microvessel immunostaining in ischemic perifocal region
to evaluate microvessel density at 14 days following tMCAO.
We found an increase of CD31+ cells in the ischemic perifocal
regions in metformin-treated mice compared to the saline-treated
mice (Fig. 2A, p < 0.05). We further evaluated the effect of metformin on endothelial cell proliferation. Metformin treatment
enhanced the number of lectin and BrdU double-positive cells in the

Fig. 1. Metformin reduced brain atrophy volume 14 days following tMCAO. (A) Photographs showed a series of coronal sections with Cresyl Violet staining following 14 days
of tMCAO in the metformin or the saline-treated mice. (B) Bar graph showed a quantiﬁcation of the atrophy volume from A. N = 9 per group, data are mean ± SD. *p < 0.05,
metformin vs. saline treated group.

Fig. 2. Metformin promoted focal angiogenesis following 14 days of tMCAO in mice. (A) Images showed an immunostaining for CD31 positive microvessels in saline and
metformin treated mice in ischemic penumbra, bar graph was a quantiﬁcation of microvessels. Data were mean ± SD, N = 3 per group. *p < 0.05, metformin vs. saline treated
group. (B) Images showed an immunostaining for lectin (green) and BrdU (red) in ischemic penumbra, bar graph showed a quantiﬁcation of BrdU and lectin double-positive
cells in saline and metformin treated mice. Data were mean ± SD, N = 3 per group. **p < 0.01, metformin vs. saline treated group. (For interpretation of the references to color
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

Y. Liu et al. / Neuroscience Letters 579 (2014) 46–51

49

Fig. 3. Metformin enhanced neurogenesis in SVZ at 14 days following tMCAO. (A) Images showed an immunostaining for nestin+ cells in SVZ in sham, saline and metformin
group following 14 days of tMCAO. Bar graph showed a quantiﬁcation of optical density of nestin+ cells in SVZ in sham, saline and metformin group. Result was expressed as
relative fold change of sham group. Data were mean ± SD, N = 3 per group. **p < 0.01, sham vs. saline group, metformin vs. saline group. (B) Images showed an immunostaining
for BrdU and DCX double-postive cells in SVZ in sham, saline and metformin groups following 14 days of tMCAO. Bar graph showed a quantiﬁcation of BrdU+ /DCX+ cells in
the SVZ. Data were mean ± SD, N = 3 per group. *p < 0.05, metformin vs. saline treated group, **p < 0.01, sham vs. saline treated group.

perifocal regions (Fig. 2B, p < 0.01). Taken together, our results indicated that metformin treatment promoted focal angiogenesis in
ischemic mouse brain.

3.3. Metformin enhanced neurogenesis in subventricular zone
(SVZ)
To further investigate the effect of metformin on neurogenesis,
we examined the presence of neurogenesis in the SVZ. Nestin was
expressed on neuroepithelium cells and could be used to assess
the number of neuronal progenitor cells. We conducted nestin
immunostaining at 14 days after tMCAO. Result showed that the
number of nestin+ cells was increased in the SVZ in the saline
treated mice compared to the control mice (p < 0.01). It was noted
that much more nestin+ cells were detected in the ipsilateral SVZ
in metformin treated mice (Fig. 3A, p < 0.01). DCX (doublecortin),
a microtubule associated protein expressed by neuronal stem cells

and immature neurons, is a marker of migrating neuroblast. We
conﬁrmed the effect of metformin on cell proliferation in the SVZ of
ipsilateral hemisphere using BrdU/DCX double-staining. We found
that the number of BrdU+ /DCX+ cells in the SVZ of ipsilateral hemisphere was greatly increased in metformin treated mice compared
to saline treated mice (Fig. 3B, p < 0.05), suggesting that metformin
promoted neurogenesis in SVZ after tMCAO.

3.4. Metformin promoted AMPK phosphorylation and activated
eNOS following tMCAO
To illustrate the possible mechanism of metformin during cerebral ischemia, we examined AMPK and eNOS phosphorylation in
ischemic brain tissue after metformin treatment. Western blot
analysis showed that there was an increase in AMPK phosphorylation at 14 days following ischemia-reperfusion and metformin
treatment augmented tMCAO induced AMPK phosphorylation

Fig. 4. Metformin activated AMPK at 14 days following tMCAO. (A) p-AMPK and AMPK expression in sham, saline and metformin treated groups at 14 days after tMCAO. (B)
Bar graph showed a quantiﬁcation of p-AMPK/AMPK ratio. Data were mean ± SD, N = 3 per group. **p < 0.01, sham vs. saline group, metformin vs. saline group. (C) p-eNOS
and eNOS expression in sham, saline and metformin treated groups after 14 days of tMCAO. (D) Bar graph showed a quantiﬁcation of p-eNOS/eNOS ratio. Data are mean ± SD,
N = 3 per group. *p < 0.05, sham vs. saline treated group, **p < 0.01, metformin vs. saline treated group.

50

Y. Liu et al. / Neuroscience Letters 579 (2014) 46–51

(Fig. 4A and B, p < 0.01). We also found an increase of eNOS activation after tMCAO and metformin has similar effect on the eNOS
phosphorylation (Fig. 4C and D, p < 0.01).

4. Discussion
In the present study, we showed the beneﬁcial effect of
metformin therapy on the reduction of ischemic brain injury.
Metformin reduced ischemia induced brain atrophy at 14 days following tMCAO and promoted focal angiogenesis and neurogenesis
at the same time. We also found an increase of AMPK phosphorylation and eNOS activation in the ischemic perifocal region, which
suggested that the neuroprotective effect of metformin was probably via enhancing focal eNOS expression.
Metformin has been widely studied in diabetes, but recent years,
it extended to the brain diseases. For example, Miller et al. [12]
reported that metformin could promote neurogenesis and enhance
spatial memory formation in normal adult mice. McCullough
et al. [11] found that metformin has a two-edged sword function during acute or chronic stroke although both through AMPK
signaling pathway. In the present study, we ﬁrst demonstrated
that metformin reduced brain atrophy volume and promoted focal
angiogenesis and neurogenesis during focal cerebral ischemia. In
addition, we also demonstrated that metformin activated AMPK
and eNOS phosphorylation during ischemia. We ﬁrst demonstrated
that administrating metformin immediately after ischemia could
promote angiogenesis and neurogenesis, which identiﬁed a potential candidate for future stroke therapy.
Metformin is the ﬁrst-line drug prescribed for type 2 diabetes [18]. In diabetic patients, metformin treatment reduced the
incidences of stroke [10]. However, this beneﬁcial effect was independent of its anti-hyperglycemic effect. In diabetic rat, metformin
reduced brain atrophy volume and promoted function recovery when giving treatment during the post ischemia reperfusion
period, although the mechanism is unknown [17]. Metformin could
signiﬁcantly reduce atrophy volume when treatment was given at
24 h post stroke [19]. In our study, we demonstrated that metformin
also reduced atrophy volume when metformin was administrated
at the time of reperfusion.
In the normal brain, the occurrence of neurogenesis and angiogenesis usually accompany each other, which is important for the
formation of neurovascular unit. And after ischemic brain injury,
this correlation still exist [3]. Conditions that promote focal angiogenesis and neurogenesis exerted valuable function via promoting
functional recovery [8,17]. We detected an increase in the number
of BrdU+ neuroblasts and microvessels, suggesting that metformin
could promote angiogenesis and neurogenesis during reperfusion
period.
The neuroprotective role of metformin on cerebral ischemia
involves in, at least in part, up-regulating AMPK signaling pathway [9]. We demonstrated that AMPK phosphorylation was greatly
increased in tMCAO mice brain after metformin treatment. It was
noted that overexpression of adiponectin improved neurobehavior outcomes, which was partly through AMPK activation [20]. In
endothelial cells, AMPK phosphorylation promoted eNOS activation [14], which could promote endothelial cells proliferation and
migration [7].
The level of eNOS regulated both angiogenesis and neurogenesis in the brain tissue. Agents that increased NO level induced
endothelial cell proliferation and migration in vivo and in vitro
[21]. eNOS−/− mice decreased neurogenesis in SVZ, which indicated that eNOS played a critical role in nuerogenesis [7]. We
demonstrated that metformin signiﬁcantly increased eNOS phosphorylation. At the same time, we also found an increase in
BrdU+ /DCX+ cells and vascular density after metformin therapy.

Recently, using a 60 min tMCAO model and administrating metformin (50 mg/kg/day) starting 24 h after MCAO, another group
found that metformin might promote angiogenesis and neurogenesis through an AMPK-dependent M2 polarization [22].
In summary, we demonstrated that metformin therapy was
valuable to ischemic stroke, which was through promoting focal
angiogenesis and neurogenesis. At the same time, AMPK–eNOS
signaling pathway is involved in this process. Since metformin is a
widely used agent, this old drug for a new use may be a promising
way to develop an effective therapy for ischemic stroke.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality 13140903500 (G.Y.Y.) and
13ZR1422600 (Z.J.Z.), Shanghai Jiao Tong University Foundation for
technological innovation of major projects 12X190030021 (G.Y.Y.).

References
[1] S. Mendis, Stroke disability and rehabilitation of stroke: World Health Organization perspective, Int. J. Stroke 8 (2013) 3–4.
[2] P. Langhorne, J. Bernhardt, G. Kwakkel, Stroke rehabilitation, Lancet 377 (2011)
1693–1702.
[3] M.A. Moskowitz, E.H. Lo, C. Iadecola, The science of stroke: mechanisms in
search of treatments, Neuron 67 (2010) 181–198.
[4] R.M. Dijkhuizen, A.B. Singhal, J.B. Mandeville, O. Wu, E.F. Halpern, S.P. Finklestein, B.R. Rosen, E.H. Lo, Correlation between brain reorganization, ischemic
damage, and neurologic status after transient focal cerebral ischemia in
rats: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study, J. Neurosci. 23 (2003)
510–517.
[5] K. Arai, G. Jin, D. Navaratna, E.H. Lo, Brain angiogenesis in developmental and
pathological processes: neurovascular injury and angiogenic recovery after
stroke, FEBS J. 276 (2009) 4644–4652.
[6] D.A. Greenberg, K. Jin, Vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGFs) and stroke,
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 70 (2013) 1753–1761.
[7] J. Chen, A. Zacharek, C. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Li, C. Roberts, M. Lu, A. Kapke, M.
Chopp, Endothelial nitric oxide synthase regulates brain-derived neurotrophic
factor expression and neurogenesis after stroke in mice, J. Neurosci. 25 (2005)
2366–2375.
[8] L. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, R. Zhang, M. Chopp, Treatment of stroke with
erythropoietin enhances neurogenesis and angiogenesis and improves neurological function in rats, Stroke 35 (2004) 1732–1737.
[9] A. Martin-Montalvo, E.M. Mercken, S.J. Mitchell, H.H. Palacios, P.L. Mote, M.
Scheibye-Knudsen, A.P. Gomes, T.M. Ward, R.K. Minor, M.J. Blouin, M. Schwab,
M. Pollak, Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, K.G. Becker, V.A. Bohr, D.K. Ingram, D.A. Sinclair, N.S.
Wolf, S.R. Spindler, M. Bernier, R. de Cabo, Metformin improves healthspan and
lifespan in mice, Nat. Commun. 4 (2013) 2192.
[10] Effect of intensive blood-glucose control with metformin on complications in
overweight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). UK Prospective Diabetes
Study (UKPDS) Group, Lancet 352 (1998) 854–865.
[11] J. Li, S.E. Benashski, V.R. Venna, L.D. McCullough, Effects of metformin in experimental stroke, Stroke 41 (2010) 2645–2652.
[12] J. Wang, D. Gallagher, L.M. DeVito, G.I. Cancino, D. Tsui, L. He, G.M. Keller, P.W.
Frankland, D.R. Kaplan, F.D. Miller, Metformin activates an atypical PKC-CBP
pathway to promote neurogenesis and enhance spatial memory formation, Cell
Stem Cell 11 (2012) 23–35.
[13] R. Prakash, W. Li, Z. Qu, M.A. Johnson, S.C. Fagan, A. Ergul, Vascularization pattern after ischemic stroke is different in control versus diabetic rats: relevance
to stroke recovery, Stroke 44 (2013) 2875–2882.
[14] J.W. Calvert, S. Gundewar, S. Jha, J.J. Greer, W.H. Bestermann, R. Tian, D.J. Lefer,
Acute metformin therapy confers cardioprotection against myocardial infarction via AMPK–eNOS-mediated signaling, Diabetes 57 (2008) 696–705.
[15] X. He, Y. Li, H. Lu, Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, G.Y. Yang, Netrin-1 overexpression promotes white matter repairing and remodeling after focal cerebral ischemia in
mice, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33 (2013) 1921–1927.
[16] Q. Li, G. Tang, S. Xue, X. He, P. Miao, Y. Li, J. Wang, L. Xiong, Y. Wang, C. Zhang,
G.Y. Yang, Silica-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles targeting
of EPCs in ischemic brain injury, Biomaterials 34 (2013) 4982–4992.
[17] W. Li, Z. Qu, R. Prakash, C. Chung, H. Ma, M.N. Hoda, S.C. Fagan, A. Ergul,
Comparative analysis of the neurovascular injury and functional outcomes in
experimental stroke models in diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats, Brain Res. 1541
(2013) 106–114.
[18] Global Guideline for Type 2 Diabetes: recommendations for standard, comprehensive, and minimal care, Diabetes Med. 23 (2006) 579–593.
[19] V.R. Venna, J. Li, M.D. Hammond, N.S. Mancini, L.D. McCullough, Chronic
metformin treatment improves post-stroke angiogenesis and recovery after
experimental stroke, Eur. J. Neurosci. 39 (2014) 2129–2138.

Y. Liu et al. / Neuroscience Letters 579 (2014) 46–51
[20] J. Miao, L.H. Shen, Y.H. Tang, Y.T. Wang, M.X. Tao, K.L. Jin, Y.J. Zhao, G.Y. Yang,
Overexpression of adiponectin improves neurobehavioral outcomes after focal
cerebral ischemia in aged mice, CNS Neurosci. Ther. 19 (2013) 969–977.
[21] D.G. Duda, D. Fukumura, R.K. Jain, Role of eNOS in neovascularization: NO for
endothelial progenitor cells, Trends Mol. Med. 10 (2004) 143–145.

51

[22] Q. Jin, J. Cheng, Y. Liu, J. Wu, X. Wang, S. Wei, X. Zhou, Z. Qin, J. Jia, X. Zhen,
Improvement of functional recovery by chronic metformin treatment is associated with enhanced alternative activation of microglia/macrophages and
increased angiogenesis and neurogenesis following experimental stroke, Brain
Behav. Immun. 40 (2014) 131–142.

