INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 36: 1215-1222, 2015

Electro-acupuncture exerts beneficial effects against
cerebral ischemia and promotes the proliferation of
neural progenitor cells in the cortical peri-infarct area
through the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway
BIN CHEN1*, JING TAO1*, YUKUN LIN2, RUHUI LIN3, WEILIN LIU1 and LIDIAN CHEN1
1

College of Rehabilitation Medicine, 2Fujian Rehabilitation Tech Co-innovation Center, and
Academy of Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, P.R. China

3

Received January 23, 2015; Accepted August 21, 2015
DOI: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2334
Abstract. Electro-acupuncture (EA) is a novel therapy based
on combining traditional acupuncture with modern electrotherapy, and it is currently being investigated as a treatment for
ischemic stroke. In the present study, we aimed to investigate
the mechanisms through which EA regulates the proliferation
of neural progenitor cells (NPCs) in the cortical peri‑infarct
area after stroke. The neuroprotective effects of EA on ischemic rats were evaluated by determining the neurological
deficit scores and cerebral infarct volumes. The proliferation
of the NPCs and the activation of the Wnt/β‑catenin signaling
pathway in the cortical peri‑infarct area were examined. Our
results revealed that EA significantly alleviated neurological
deficits, reduced the infarct volume and enhanced NPC proliferation [nestin/glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)‑double
positive] in the cortex of rats subjected to middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO). Moreover, the Wnt1 and β‑catenin
mRNA and protein levels were increased, while glycogen
synthase kinase‑3 (GSK3) transcription was suppressed by EA.
These results suggest that the upregulatory effects of EA on the

Correspondence to: Dr Lidian Chen, College of Rehabilitation
Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
1 Qiuyang Road, Minhou Shangjie, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108,
P.R. China
E‑mail: chelidian@yahoo.com

Abbreviations: EA, electro‑acupuncture; NPCs, neural progenitor
cells; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; SVZ, subventricular
zone; SGZ, subgranular zone; TTC,  2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazolium
chloride; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; MAP2,  microtu­
bule‑associated protein 2; CCA, common carotid artery; ECA, external
carotid artery; ICA, internal carotid artery

Key words: electro-acupuncture, cerebral ischemia, Wnt/β-catenin,
neural progenitor cells, proliferation

Wnt/β‑catenin signaling pathway may promote NPC proliferation in the cortical peri‑infarct area after stroke, consequently
providing a therapeutic effect against cerebral ischemia.
Introduction
Stroke is the leading cause of adult disability, as well as the
second most common cause of mortality worldwide (1).
Ischemic stroke accounts for approximately 80% of all
strokes (1,2). Over the past decade, thrombolysis has been
established as an effective treatment in the most acute phase
of ischemic stroke. However, many patients develop lifelong
disabilities following ischemic stroke as they do not receive
the necessary treatment within the therapeutic time window.
Therefore, increasing the window of therapeutic efficacy of
established treatments or identifying other therapies with
alternative targets is necessary to improve the neurological
outcomes in ischemic stroke victims. Targeting key cellular
survival/proliferation mechanisms may improve prognosis.
Recently, it was reported that the signaling molecule, β‑catenin,
is degraded in the peri‑infarct area of the brain following focal
cerebral ischemia (3‑7). In a previous study, it was demonstrated
that in doubleridge mice, which have a reduced expression of
Dkk‑1, an antagonist of Wnt/β‑catenin signaling, the reduction
of β‑catenin was attenuated and the infarct volume was reduced
following middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) (5). This
suggests that prevenint the decrease in Wnt/β‑catenin signaling
in cerebral ischemia may prove to be a potential novel therapeutic modality.
In addition, the conditional expression of stabilized
β ‑catenin in neural progenitor cells (NPCs) enlarges the
cortical surface area through the expansion of the progenitor
cell population (8). The overexpression of Wnt3 has been
shown to increase neurogenesis in adult hippocampal precursor
cells, while the blockade of Wnt signaling reduces neurogenesis both in vitro and in vivo (9). These studies also implicate
the canonical Wnt/β‑catenin pathway in the proliferation and
self‑renewal of NPCs (3,8,9).
Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) has long been an important component of complementary and alternative medicine in

1216

CHEN et al: EA PROMOTES NPC PROLIFERATION

several Asian countries, and recently in Western society. Modern
research has revealed the potential therapeutic effects of TCM
in the treatment of various diseases, including cerebrovascular
diseases and cancer (10,11). Its unique functions in gene therapy
have also been discussed (12,13). Electro‑acupuncture (EA) is
a traditional therapeutic method used in China, widely used for
both the prevention and treatment/rehabilitation of cerebral ischemia. Nevertheless, the mechanisms responsible for its effects are
not yet fully understood. Previous studies have indicated that EA
significantly attenuates neurological deficits, and reduces infarct
volume and mortality in both animal models of stroke and in
patients suffering from stroke when administered at appropriate
acupoints with suitable stimulation parameters (14‑19). Two
specific acupoints, Quchi (LI11) and Zusanli (ST36), are one of
the most effective prescriptions commonly used in EA treatment
of ischemic stroke (17,20). Preliminary data have demonstrated
that EA at these two acupoints significantly promotes NPC
proliferation following cerebral ischemia in the subventricular
zone  (SVZ) of the lateral ventricle, and in the subgranular
zone (SGZ) of the hippocampus (17,20). A growing body of
evidence suggests that cortex‑derived neural stem/progenitor
cells may contribute to the repair of ischemic lesions of the
cerebral cortex (21‑23). Based on these and other findings, the
elucidation of the Wnt signaling mechanisms underlying the
promoting effects of EA on NPC proliferation in the cortical
peri‑infarct area after stroke, is an important step toward validating the clinical application and benefits of this treatment
modality in the treatment of ischemic stroke.
Materials and methods
Materials and reagents. TRIzol reagent was purchased from
Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA, USA). The RevertAid™ First
Strand cDNA Synthesis kit and Taq DNA Polymerase were
purchased from Fermentas (Hanover, MD, USA). Primary
antibodies against glial fibrillary acidic protein  (GFAP, a
marker for reactive astrocytes; #3670), glycogen synthase
kinase‑3  (GSK3; #5676) and β ‑actin (#4970), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)‑conjugated secondary antibodies
(anti‑mouse, #7076; anti‑rabbit, #4970) were all obtained from
Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Beverly, MA, USA). Antimicrotubule‑associated protein 2 (MAP2, a marker of neurons;
ab32454), anti-nestin (a marker of progenitor cells and astrocytes; 2Q178) and anti-β‑catenin (ab22656) primary antibodies
were all obtained from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA). All
other chemicals, unless otherwise stated, were obtained from
Sigma‑Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Animals and groups. Adult male Sprague‑Dawley rats (weighing
250‑280 g) were obtained from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory
Animal Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). All experiments were
performed strictly in accordance with the International Ethical
Guidelines and the National Institutes of Health Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
A total of 72 rats were randomly divided into 4 groups
(18 rats in each group) as follows: ⅰ) sham-operated (sham)
group; ⅱ) MCAO group; ⅲ) MCAO + EA group: ischemic
rats treated with EA at the Quchi (LI11) and Zusanli (ST36)
acupoints; and ⅳ)  sham  +  EA group: sham-operated rats
treated with EA.

Induction of focal cerebral ischemia. A rat model of focal
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) was utilized in this study.
The left middle cerebral artery (MCA) was occluded by the
placement of an embolus at the origin of the MCA, as previously
described (24). Following anesthetization with 10% chloral
hydrate (300 mg/kg), each rat was placed in the prone position.
A midline incision was made on the dorsal surface of the skull,
and the skull was thinned with a burr hole over the left parietal
cortex (5 mm lateral and 1 mm posterior to the bregma) without
injury to the dura mater. The laser Doppler perfusion monitor
(LDF100C; Biopac Systems,  Inc., Goleta, CA, USA) was
attached to the skull with dental cement. With the rat in a supine
position, MCAO was performed via ligation of the left common
carotid artery (CCA) and external carotid artery (ECA) and
closure of the internal carotid artery (ICA). The embolus was
gently advanced within the left ICA to the origin of the MCA,
until a slight resistance was encountered (20±2 mm). Cerebral
blood flow was measured beginning 5 min prior to the induction
of occlusion. Ischemic rats that showed a stable drop of 80%
in blood perfusion units (BPU) compared with the baseline
level (before MCAO), were used in the subsequent experiments.
Reperfusion was achieved by removing the intraluminal occlusive embolus to restore blood supply to the MCA area 2 h later.
Animals subjected to sham operation were treated in a similar
manner, but without ligations and occlusions.
Neurological assessment. Neurological deficits were assessed to
confirm successful MCAO. A neurological score was assigned
to each animal 2 h following I/R, in a blinded manner, according
to a well‑established 5‑point neurological scale (24): score 0, no
apparent deficits; 1, failure to fully extend the right forepaw;
2, circling to the right; 3, falling or leaning over to the right;
4, no spontaneous walking and a depressed level of consciousness; and 5, dead. Rats subjected to MCAO with neurological
deficit scores of 1‑3 were used in the subsequent experiments.
Treatment wtih EA. EA was applied at the LI11 (Quchi, in
the depression lateral to the anterior aspect of the radius joint
of the forelimb) and ST36 (Zusanli, 5 mm below the head of
fibula under the knee joint and 2 mm lateral to the anterior
tibial tubercle) acupoints on the right paralyzed limb using an
EA stimulation instrument [Model G6805; Shanghai Marine
Instrument General Factory (SMIF), Shanghai, China]. Two
stainless steel acupuncture needles, 0.3 mm in diameter,
connected to the output terminals of the EA stimulation instrument, were inserted at a depth of 2‑3 mm at the LI11 and ST36
acupoints. The acupoints were stimulated with disperse‑dense
waves of 1 or 20 Hz frequencies for 30 min, once a day, and the
current intensity was maintained slightly below the level that
induced visible muscle contraction. Treatment commenced on
the day following the operation and continued daily until the
animals were sacrificed.
Measurement of cerebral infarct volume. Three days following
cerebral I/R injury, the rats were euthanized under deep
anesthesia using 10% chloral hydrate and perfused transcardiacally with 0.9% NaCl. The brains of all the rats were rapidly
removed and sliced into 5 coronal blocks at a thickness of
2 mm per section. The fresh slices were incubated in 2% (w/v)
2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC; Sigma‑Aldrich)

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 36: 1215-1222, 2015

1217

Table I. Primer sequences used for PCR.
Gene names	
Wnt1	
GSK3	
β-catenin	
β-actin	

Forward	

Reverse

5'-CAG TGG AGC AAC GGT ATG AG-3'	
5'-AGA CCA AAA TCA TCT ACC AC-3'	
5'-CAT CCT TAT CCC TCC TCA CGC-3'	
5'-CGG GAG AAC AGG GTA TGA-3'	

5'-TTC TTC CCT GCC TTG ATG T-3'
5'-ACT CTG TGC CTG TCT CAT-3
5'-TTA TTG GTC TGT CCA CGG TCT-3''
5'-CAG GCT GGA AGG AGA AGA T-3'

GSK3, glycogen synthase kinase‑3.

solution in phosphate‑buffered saline  (PBS; HyClone,
Beijing, China) for 20 min, at 37˚C in the dark. Images of the
5 sections were captured using a high‑resolution digital camera
(PowerShot SX20 IS; Canon) and examined by a blinded observer
to determine the infarct size using computerized image analysis
software (Motic Med 6.0 system; Motic China Group Co.,. Ltd.,
Shenzhen, China). The infarct volume data are expressed as
a percentage of the total brain volume. Lesion volume was
estimated using an indirect method to avoid the effects of
tissue swelling or shrinkage: 100x (contralateral hemisphere
volume ‑ non‑infarct ipsilateral hemisphere volume)/contralateral hemisphere volume, as previously described (25).
Tissue preparation. The rats were anesthetized with 10%
chloral hydrate and intracardially perfused with chilled saline
followed by 0.01 M PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde
through the left ventricular lumen of the heart. The brains
were collected and post‑fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4˚C
overnight, and then embedded in paraffin. Coronal sections
were cut into 5‑µm‑thick sections, and used for immunofluoresence staining. For western blot analysis RT‑PCR, the
ischemic boundary zones were extracted from the ischemic
brains and prepared accordingly.
Immunofluorescence staining. The brain sections were
processed by immunofluorescence staining using several
specific cell markers (MAP2, neurons; GFAP, astrocytes;
nestin, NPC and astrocytes). Coronal sections (5‑µm‑thick)
were de‑paraffinized in dimethylbenzene, hydrated successively in gradient ethanols, and antigens were retrieved twice
in 0.1 M citrate buffer (pH 6.0). The sections were blocked in
blocking buffer (10% normal goat serum, 0.3% Triton X in
PBS) for 1 h at room temperature, then incubated with primary
antibodies at 4˚C overnight. After washing in 0.01 M PBS, the
sections were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with a
combination of goat anti‑mouse IgG H&L (FITC; ab6785;
Abcam) and goat anti‑rabbit  IgG  H&L (TRITC; ab6718;
Abcam) secondary antibodies. The sections were stained
with DAPI (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) to
localize the nuclei and were coverslipped for observation. The
labelled sections were visualized and imaged using a confocal
microscope (LSM710 META NLO; Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen,
Germany).
Western blot analysis. The left cerebral tissues were dissected
out and homogenized in RIPA buffer containing Protease

Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim,
Germany) and PMSF. The samples were kept on ice for 30 min
and the insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at
14,000 x g for 15 min. The protein concentration was quantified
by BCA assay (Pierce Biotechnology, Inc., Rockford, IL, USA).
Brain homogenates (50 µg) were separated by SDS‑PAGE and
transferred onto PVDF membranes. The membranes were
subsequently blocked for 2 h with 5% non‑fat powdered milk
in Tris‑buffered saline containing 0.1%  Tween‑20  (TBST)
and then incubated overnight at 4˚C with appropriate primary
antibodies: GFAP, Wnt1 (SAB2102711; Sigma‑Aldrich),
GSK3, β ‑catenin and β ‑actin (at a dilution of 1:1,000). The
membranes were then washed with TBST followed by incubation with the appropriate HRP‑conjugated secondary antibody
for 1‑2 h at room temperature. Normalization of the results
was ensured by running parallel western blot analyses with
β‑actin antibody. The optical density was quantified using a
Bio‑Image Analysis System (Bio‑Rad, Hercules, CA, USA),
with the value of the sham-operated group designated as 1.0.
RNA extraction and RT‑PCR. Total RNA was extracted using
TRIzol Reagent (Life Technologies). The RNA concentrations
were determined by OD260/280 readings using a GeneQuant
spectrophotometer (Amersham Biosciences, Amersham, UK).
The oligo(dT)‑primed RNA (3 µg) was reverse‑transcribed
using the RevertAid™ First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit
(Fermentas, Chicago, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Semi‑quantitative PCR was performed
to measure the Wnt1, GSK3, β ‑catenin and β ‑actin mRNA
expression levels. The primer sequences used for each gene are
listed in Table I. The samples were analyzed by gel electrophoresis (1.5% agarose). The DNA bands were examined using a
Gel Documentation System (Model Gel Doc 2000; Bio‑Rad),
with the value of the sham-operated group designated as 1.0.
Cell quantification and statistical analysis. The infarct area
was defined by tissue autofluorescence, while the peri‑infarct
area was defined by the presence of MAP2‑positive immunofluorescent cells. Cell quantification in the cortical peri‑infarct
area was performed by observers blinded to the sample
identity using Image‑Pro Plus 6.0 software. The results are
expressed as the number of MAP2‑positive cells/cm 2. All
data were analyzed using the SPSS package for Windows
(version 16.0) and are presented as the means ± standard error
of the mean (SEM). Statistical data analysis was performed
with the unpaired Student's t‑test, the Mann‑Whitney U test

CHEN et al: EA PROMOTES NPC PROLIFERATION

1218

Figure 1. Effects of electro‑acupuncture (EA) on cerebral infarction after stroke. (A) Cerebral tissues from each group were coronally sectioned into 2‑mm‑thick
slices and then processed for 2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. Normal areas of the brain were stained deep red, indicating intact mitochondrial function, whereas the infarct areas remained unstained. Representative images were captured using a high‑resolution digital camera. (B) Infarct volume
was quantified using the Motic Med 6.0 system, and is presented as a percentage of the total brain volume. Data shown are the means ± SEM from 5 individual
rats in each group. ##P<0.01 vs. MCAO group. Sham, sham operation, control; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Table Ⅱ. Assessment of neurological deficits.
Group	
Sham	
MCAO	
MCAO + EA	
Sham + EA	

2 h after I/R	

3 days after I/R

0	
0
2.33±0.19	2.08±0.23
2.42±0.19	
1.42±0.19a
0	
0

Data shown are the means  ±  SEM from 18 individual rats in each
group. aP<0.05 vs. the MCAO group. Sham, sham operation, controls;
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; EA, electro-acupuncture;
I/R, ischemia/reperfusion; SEM, standard error of the mean.

or ANOVA. Differences with P<0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results
EA alleviates neurological deficits and reduces infarct volume
after stroke. Compared with the rats in the sham-operated and
sham + EA groups, which did not present with any signs of
cer­ebral injury, all rats in both the MCAO and MCAO + EA
groups demonstrated obvious manifestations of neurological
deficits and cerebral infarction (Fig. 1 and Table Ⅱ). There
were no statistically significant differences observed between
the MCAO and MCAO + EA groups at 2 h after cerebral I/R
injury. However, EA administered at the Zusanli and Quchi
acupoints for 3 days significantly improved neurological
deficits (MCAO, 2.08±0.23; MCAO + EA, 1.42±0.19; P<0.05)
(Table II), and decreased the cerebral infarct volume (MCAO,
35.39±1.56%; MCAO + EA, 22.39±2.50%; P<0.01) (Fig. 1),
demonstrating the therapeutic efficacy of EA against cerebral
I/R injury.

EA accelerates the proliferation of GFAP‑positive reactive
astrocytes in the cortical peri‑infarct area after stroke. The
border of the infarct core was defined by MAP2 staining (Fig. 2),
and the subsequent results identified a few GFAP‑positive
cells in the non‑ischemic cortex (Fig. 3E and H); however, the
majority of GFAP‑positive cells were observed in the post‑stroke
cortex, specifically in the peri‑infarct area (Fig. 3F and G).
Western blot analysis also revealed a significant increase in
GFAP expression in the MCAO and MCAO  +  EA groups
within the post‑stroke cortex, compared with the comparable
MCA area in the sham-operated (sham) and sham + EA groups
(sham, 1±0; MCAO, 1.95±0.24; MCAO + EA, 3.10±0.44; and
sham + EA, 0.97±0.07; P<0.01 vs.sham and sham + EA groups;
Fig. 3I and J). In addition, overall GFAP expression was significantly higher in the MCAO + EA group than in the MCAO
group (P<0.05), suggesting that treatment with EA promoted
the proliferation of GFAP‑positive reactive astrocytes in the
cortical peri‑infarct area after stroke.
EA enhances the proliferation of NPCs in the cortical peri‑in­
farct area after stroke. The presence of nestin/GFAP‑positive
cells within the post‑stroke cortex was investigated in order
to assess the generation of injury‑induced NPCs. Previous
studies have reported that nestin and GFAP‑positive cells
can acquire stem cell activity in the cortical peri‑infarct area
after stroke (21,22). In the present study, a nestin‑positive
subpopulation of NPCs formed on the ipsilateral, but not the
contralateral side of the brain after stroke. At 3 days after stroke,
the number of nestin‑positive cells was significantly higher in
the MCAO + EA group than in the MCAO group. Similarly,
the number of nestin/GFAP‑positive cells was significantly
higher in the MCAO  +  EA group (MCAO, 257.72±49.73;
MCAO + EA, 379.56±20.05; P<0.05; Fig. 4), demonstrating
that EA potentially increased the proliferation of the NPCs in
the cortical peri‑infarct area after stroke.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 36: 1215-1222, 2015

1219

Figure 2. Changes in cerebral blood flow in response to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Trace recordings of the blood flow in the ischemic brains
were measured using a laser Doppler perfusion monitor. (A) MCAO immediately decreased the perfusion units (PU) to 20% of the base value, was regarded as
a successful model. Tissue corresponding to (B) normal and the (C) peri‑infarct area. The area peri‑infarct is depicted by the red rectangle. The border of the
infarct core (dotted line) was defined by microtubule‑associated protein 2 (MAP2) staining.

Figure 3. Effect of electro‑acupuncture (EA) on glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)‑positive reactive astrocytes after stroke. (A‑D) The border of the infarct
core is defined by microtubule‑associated protein 2 (MAP2) staining (green). (E‑H) Cells expressing GFAP were identified by immunofluorescence staining
(green) and (I and J) western blot analysis. Data are representative of 5 individual rats from each group. **P<0.01 vs. sham (sham-operated) and sham + EA
groups; #P<0.05 vs. middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) group.

1220

CHEN et al: EA PROMOTES NPC PROLIFERATION

Figure 4. Effects of electro‑acupuncture (EA) on neural progenitor cell (NPC) proliferation after stroke. Representative double immunofluorescence staining
for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (green) and nestin (red) in the peri‑infarct area. (A‑D) Higher magnification of insets are indicated by white squares.
Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). Data shown as the means ± SEM from 5 individual rats from each group. #P<0.05 vs. middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) group.

Figure 5. Effects of electro‑acupuncture (EA) on the activation of the Wnt signaling pathway. (A) The mRNA levels of Wnt1, glycogen synthase kinase‑3 (GSK3)
and β‑catenin in the cortical peri‑infarct area were measured by RT‑PCR. (B) The protein expression levels of Wnt1, GSK3 and β‑catenin were measured by
western blot analysis. β‑actin was used as an internal control for both RT‑PCR and western blot analysis. Data are representative of 4 individual rats from each
group. #P<0.05, ##P<0.01 vs. middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) group; *P<0.05, **P<0.01 vs. sham and sham + EA groups.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE 36: 1215-1222, 2015

EA regulates the activation of the Wnt pathway in the cortical
peri‑infarct area after stroke. To examine the effects of EA
on the Wnt signaling pathway, we measured the protein and
mRNA levels of Wnt1, GSK3 and β‑catenin in the ischemic
cortex by western blot analysis and RT‑PCR. As shown in Fig. 5,
focal cerebral I/R injury significantly reduced the expression of Wnt1 and β‑catenin, while the transcription of GSK3
was significantly increased in the ischemic cortex at 3 days
following stroke when compared to the sham and sham + EA
groups (P<0.05). Of note, the decrease in the expression of
Wnt1 and β‑catenin was circumvented by treatment with EA,
and the upregulated transcription of GSK3 was significantly
reduced following treatment with EA (P<0.05). Taken together,
these results suggest that EA applied at the Quchi and Zusanli
acupoints significantly promotes the activation of the Wnt
signaling pathway in the peri‑infarct cortex.
Discussion
In response to stroke, subpopulations of cortical reactive
astrocytes proliferate and express several proteins commonly
associated with neural stem/progenitor cells, such as GFAP,
nestin and RC2 (21‑23). Shimada et al (21) demonstrated that
GFAP‑expressing reactive astrocytes can be isolated from the
cortical peri‑infarct area 3 days after stroke, and de‑differentiated into reactive astrocyte‑derived neural stem/progenitor
cells with self‑renewal and multipotent properties when grown
under neurosphere conditions. Lineage tracing identified reactive astrocytes as a cell of origin for neural stem cells (NSCs)
derived from cortical peri‑infarct tissues after stroke (21).
In this study, in order to investigate the effects of EA on
NPC proliferation via Wnt signaling, we treated sham-operated
and rats subjected to MCAO with electric stimulation at the
Quchi (LI11) and Zusanli (ST36) acupoints on the contralateral
paralyzed limb. Our results revealed that EA applied at these
acupoints 1 day following cerebral I/R injury and once daily for
3 consecutive days, significantly improved neurological function (MCAO, 2.08±0.23; MCAO + EA, 1.42±0.19; P<0.05) and
attenuated the increase in the cerebral infarct volume (MCAO,
35.39±1.56%; MCAO + EA, 22.39±2.50%; P<0.01) induced by
MCAO. Our findings corroborate those of previous studies that
used a model of transient focal cerebral ischemia to demonstrate the therapeutic efficacy of EA (14‑17). Furthermore,
immunofluorescence staining was performed to observe several
markers associated with the activation of NPCs. Our results
revealed that the number of proliferating nestin/GFAP‑positive
NPCs was significantly increased within the post‑stroke cortex
in the MCAO group (257.72±49.73) (Fig. 4) but even more so
in the MCAO + EA group (379.56±20.05, P<0.05 vs. MCAO
group), suggesting that EA promoted the proliferation of neural
stem/progenitor cells in rats subjected to MCAO. The emergence of NPCs in the peri‑infarct area is a documented event in
the brain after stroke (21-23). However, the signaling pathway
controlling the proliferation of these NPCs is poorly defined.
Of note, previous studies have indicated that Wnt/β‑catenin
signaling is critically involved in the regulation of the proliferation and differentiation of NPCs (3,8,9). The Wnt/β‑catenin
pathway is activated when a Wnt ligand binds to its seven‑transmembrane receptors, the Frizzled proteins. The activation of
the Wnt pathway inhibits GSK‑3β, which results in the cyto-

1221

plasmic accumulation of β‑catenin. Stabilized β‑catenin then
translocates into the nucleus and interacts with the transcription
factors TCF/Lef to activate downstream genes such as cyclin
D1 and c‑myc (26,27).
Cerebral ischemia profoundly reduced the transcription of
Wnt1 and β‑catenin and increased the expression of GSK3.
Treatment with EA reversed these effects (Fig. 5). Moreover,
this is consistent with the results of previous reports that the Wnt
pathway is markedly degraded after stroke (3‑5). In a previous
study, when assessed at 3 days following an endothelin-1 (Et-1)
injection, treatment with lithium ions prevented the decrease in
the expression of β‑catenin in the ischemic cortex (5). In this
study, the treatment of NPCs with EA significantly increased
the expression of Wnt1 and β ‑catenin, while inhibiting the
transcription of GSK3. These data indicate that EA applied at
the Quchi (LI11) and Zusanli (ST36) acupoints promoted the
proliferation of NPCs in the cortical peri‑infarct area via the
Wnt/β‑catenin pathway.
In conclusion, the results of the present study strongly
suggest that treatment with EA provides robust protection
against transient cerebral ischemic injury and promotes the
proliferation of neural stem/progenitor cells in response to ischemia via the Wnt/β‑catenin pathway. Our data are supported by
evidence in the current literature. These results may provide a
theoretical and experimental basis for the future clinical application of EA and its potential use in the treatment of cerebral
ischemia.
However, even with optimal stimulation parameters, treatment with EA targets multiple mechanisms in order to achieve
its protective effects against ischemic insults. Therefore, the
precise mechanisms of action associated with this treatment
the reparative process in the post‑ischemic brain requires
further investigation.
Acknowledgements
This study was sponsored by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (grant nos. 81273835 and 81373778). We
would like to thank Clarity Manuscript Consultants, LLC, for
their assistance in the editing of this manuscript.
References
 1.	Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M and Davis SM: Stroke.
Lancet 371: 1612‑1623, 2008.
 2.	Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd‑Jones DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD,
Borden WB, Bravata DM, Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, et al; American
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics
Subcommittee: Heart disease and stroke statistics ‑ 2012 update:
a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 125:
e2‑e220, 2012.
 3.	Hirabayashi Y, Itoh Y, Tabata H, Nakajima K, Akiyama  T,
Masuyama N and Gotoh Y: The Wnt/beta‑catenin pathway
directs neuronal differentiation of cortical neural precursor cells.
Development 131: 2791‑2801, 2004.
 4.	Zhang H, Ren C, Gao X, Takahashi T, Sapolsky RM, Steinberg GK
and Zhao H: Hypothermia blocks beta‑catenin degradation after
focal ischemia in rats. Brain Res 1198: 182‑187, 2008.
 5.	Mastroiacovo F, Busceti CL, Biagioni F, Moyanova  SG,
Meisler MH, Battaglia G, Caricasole A, Bruno V and Nicoletti F:
Induction of the Wnt antagonist, Dickkopf‑1, contributes to the
development of neuronal death in models of brain focal ischemia.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29: 264‑276, 2009.
 6.	Scott EL and Brann DW: Estrogen regulation of Dkk1 and
Wnt/β ‑Catenin signaling in neurodegenerative disease. Brain
Res 1514: 63‑74, 2013.

1222

CHEN et al: EA PROMOTES NPC PROLIFERATION

 7.	Sun FL, Wang W, Zuo W, Xue JL, Xu JD, Ai HX, Zhang  L,
Wang XM and Ji XM: Promoting neurogenesis via Wnt/β‑catenin
signaling pathway accounts for the neurorestorative effects of
morroniside against cerebral ischemia injury. Eur J Pharmacol 738:
214‑221, 2014.
 8.	Pöschl J, Grammel D, Dorostkar MM, Kretzschmar HA and
Schüller  U: Constitutive activation of β ‑catenin in neural
progenitors results in disrupted proliferation and migration
of neurons within the central nervous system. Dev Biol 374:
319‑332, 2013.
 9.	Lie DC, Colamarino SA, Song HJ, Désiré L, Mira H, Consiglio A,
Lein ES, Jessberger S, Lansford H, Dearie AR and Gage FH:
Wnt signalling regulates adult hippocampal neurogenesis.
Nature 437: 1370‑1375, 2005.
10.	Zhai XF, Chen Z, Li B, Shen F, Fan J, Zhou WP, Yang YK,
Xu J, Qin X, Li LQ and Ling CQ: Traditional herbal medicine
in preventing recurrence after resection of small hepatocellular
carcinoma: a multicenter randomized controlled trial. J Integr
Med 11: 90‑100, 2013.
11.	 Liang J, Li F, Wei C, Song H, Wu L, Tang Y and Jia J: Rationale
and design of a multicenter, phase 2 clinical trial to investigate
the efficacy of traditional Chinese medicine SaiLuoTong in
vascular dementia. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 23: 2626‑2634,
2014.
12.	Wang LN, Wang Y, Lu Y, Yin ZF, Zhang YH, Aslanidi  GV,
Srivastava A, Ling CQ and Ling C: Pristimerin enhances
recombinant adeno‑associated virus vector‑mediated transgene
expression in human cell lines in vitro and murine hepatocytes
in vivo. J Integr Med 12: 20‑34, 2014.
13.	Ling CQ, Wang LN, Wang Y, Zhang YH, Yin ZF, Wang  M
and Ling C: The roles of traditional Chinese medicine in gene
therapy. J Integr Med 12: 67‑75, 2014.
14.	Liu H, Shen X, Tang H, Li J, Xiang T and Yu W: Using microPET
imaging in quantitative verification of the acupuncture effect in
ischemia stroke treatment. Sci Rep 3: 1070, 2013.
15.	Kim JH, Choi KH, Jang YJ, Bae SS, Shin BC, Choi BT and
Shin HK: Electroacupuncture acutely improves cerebral blood
flow and attenuates moderate ischemic injury via an endothelial
mechanism in mice. PLoS One 8: e56736, 2013.
16.	Jin Z, Liang J, Wang J and Kolattukudy PE: Delayed brain
ischemia tolerance induced by electroacupuncture pretreatment
is mediated via MCP‑induced protein 1. J Neuroinflammation 10:
63, 2013.

17.	Tao J, Xue XH, Chen LD, Yang SL, Jiang M, Gao YL and
Wang XB: Electroacupuncture improves neurological deficits
and enhances proliferation and differentiation of endogenous
nerve stem cells in rats with focal cerebral ischemia. Neurol
Res 32: 198‑204, 2010.
18.	Mazighi M, Meseguer E, Labreuche J and Amarenco P: Bridging
therapy in acute ischemic stroke: a systematic review and
meta‑analysis. Stroke 43: 1302‑1308, 2012.
19.	Wu P, Mills E, Moher D and Seely D: Acupuncture in poststroke rehabilitation: a systematic review and meta‑analysis of
randomized trials. Stroke 41: e171‑e179, 2010.
20.	Tao J, Chen B, Gao Y, Yang S, Huang J, Jiang X, Wu Y, Peng J,
Hong Z and Chen L: Electroacupuncture enhances hippocampal
NSCs proliferation in cerebral ischemia‑reperfusion injured rats
via activation of notch signaling pathway. Int J Neurosci 124:
204‑212, 2014.
21.	Shimada IS, LeComte MD, Granger JC, Quinlan NJ and Spees JL:
Self‑renewal and differentiation of reactive astrocyte‑derived
neural stem/progenitor cells isolated from the cortical peri‑infarct
area after stroke. J Neurosci 32: 7926‑7940, 2012.
22.	Nakagomi T, Taguchi A, Fujimori Y, Saino O, Nakano‑Doi A,
Kubo S, Gotoh A, Soma T, Yoshikawa H, Nishizaki T, et al:
Isolation and characterization of neural stem/progenitor cells
from post‑stroke cerebral cortex in mice. Eur J Neurosci 29:
1842‑1852, 2009.
23.	Nakagomi T, Molnár Z, Nakano‑Doi A, Taguchi A, Saino O,
Kubo S, Clausen M, Yoshikawa H, Nakagomi N and Matsuyama T:
Ischemia‑induced neural stem/progenitor cells in the pia mater
following cortical infarction. Stem Cells Dev 20: 2037‑2051, 2011.
24.	Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R: Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20: 84‑91, 1989.
25.	Swanson RA, Morton MT, Tsao‑Wu G, Savalos RA, Davidson C
and Sharp FR: A semiautomated method for measuring brain
infarct volume. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 10: 290‑293, 1990.
26.	He TC, Sparks AB, Rago C, Hermeking H, Zawel L, da Costa LT,
Morin PJ, Vogelstein B and Kinzler KW: Identification of c‑MYC
as a target of the APC pathway. Science 281: 1509‑1512, 1998.
27.	Shtutman M, Zhurinsky J, Simcha I, Albanese C, D'Amico M,
Pestell R and Ben‑Ze'ev A: The cyclin D1 gene is a target of
the beta‑catenin/LEF‑1 pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 96:
5522‑5527, 1999.

