Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 20–27
© 2015 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/15 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

RAPID COMMUNICATION

Regional distribution of selective neuronal loss and microglial
activation across the MCA territory after transient focal
ischemia: quantitative versus semiquantitative systematic
immunohistochemical assessment
Julius V Emmrich1,2,6, Sohail Ejaz1,6, Jonas J Neher3,7, David J Williamson1,4 and Jean-Claude Baron1,5
Histopathologic assessment in transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) rodent models generally lacks comprehensiveness
and exposes to interobserver bias. Here we compared a novel quantitative assessment of regional infarction, selective neuronal loss
(SNL) and microglial activation (MA) across the MCA territory to a previously published semiquantitative visual protocol. NeuN and
OX42 immunohistochemistry was applied after either 15 or 45 minutes distal MCAo to maximize SNL and infarction, respectively.
Survival times varied from 28 to 60 days to cover potential biases such as delayed tissue shrinkage. Damage was assessed using a
template of 44 cytoarchitectonic regions of interest (ROIs) mapped onto a subset of digitized coronal sections spanning the MCA
territory. For each ROI were obtained a semiquantitative visually determined index of histopathologic changes (method 1), and
lpsilateral/contralesional ratios of remaining neurons and activated microglia cell counts (method 2). There was excellent
agreement between the two methods for 28-day survival for both MCAo durations, whereas method 2 more sensitively detected
subtle SNL and MA at 45 days and 60 days after 15-minute MCAo. Thus the visual method is accurate for usual degrees of ischemic
damage, but absolute cell quantiﬁcation is superior to detect subtle changes and should therefore be preferred in brief MCAo
models, although requires optimal staining quality.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 20–27; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.181; published online 29 October 2014
Keywords: brain ischemia; immunohistochemistry; inﬂammation; selective neuronal death

INTRODUCTION
Within the acutely ischemic brain, there are two major regions of
injury: the ischemic core, where severe hypoperfusion rapidly
causes irreversible membrane damage, cell death, and progression toward tissue infarction (pan-necrosis), and the comparatively
less hypoperfused ischemic penumbra, where cells are equally
nonfunctional but are still viable and that will escape infarction if
perfusion is reestablished early enough.1,2 Although rescuing the
penumbra is the main determinant of neurological recovery,
studies in humans and various animal species have shown that the
salvaged penumbra may be affected by selective neuronal loss
(SNL). Importantly, SNL, which refers to the death of single or
patches of neurons with preserved tissue integrity, is consistently
associated with microglial activation (MA) in the ﬁrst few weeks
after injury.3 As both these processes might impede functional
recovery after reperfusion, they are considered potential new
therapeutic targets in postacute ischemic stroke (see Baron4 for
review). It is therefore important in animal models of transient

focal cerebral ischemia mimicking early recanalization in the clinical
setting to be able to reliably assess the regional distribution and
intensity of the full spectrum of tissue damage, from pan-necrosis
to subtle SNL and MA.
Histopathologic evidence of SNL and MA within the rescued
penumbra has been well characterized in various animal
models of focal ischemia. As recently extensively reviewed,3
transient (⩽30 minutes) proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion
(tMCAo) in rats causes mainly striatal SNL with small and
occasional cortical patches of SNL. However, cortical pathology
is of particular clinical relevance owing to its greater rescueability
by thrombolysis and more pronounced and long-lasting behavioral effects in the clinical setting (see Baron4 for review), which
also applies to sensorimotor function in rodent models.3,5–7
Consistently extensive, pure cortical SNL can be induced using
distal tMCAo.8–10
Hematein and eosin and Nissl staining have been traditionally
used for postmortem assessment of SNL, detecting dead or dying

1
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Stroke Research Group, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 2Department of Neurology, Charité—Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany; 3Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; 4Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK and 5INSERM U894, Hôpital Sainte-Anne, Université Paris Descartes/Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. Correspondence: Professor J-C Baron, INSERM U894, 2 ter
rue d'Alésia, Paris 75014, France.
E-mail: jean-claude.baron@inserm.fr
This study was funded by an EU Grant (EUSTROKE Health-F2-2008-2022131); JVE was funded by a grant from Theracur Stiftung; DJW was funded by an MRC collaborative grant
(G0600986).
6
These authors contributed equally to this work.
7
Present address: Department of Cellular Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
Received 1 August 2014; revised 10 September 2014; accepted 30 September 2014; published online 29 October 2014

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

21
neurons based on evaluation of cellular morphology and staining
features.11–13 However, a limitation of these conventional staining
methods is that once dead neurons have been cleared by phagocytosis, neuronal loss can be difﬁcult to assess on the background
of similarly stained glial cells or neuropil, potentially leading to
underestimating or even completely missing the damage. In
addition, quantitative assessment of MA using these nonspeciﬁc
stains is not practical. In contrast, thanks to the more recent
introduction of speciﬁc antibodies directed against neuronal or
microglial cellular surface markers such as NeuN or OX42, respectively, straightforward assessment of SNL and MA, expressed
as reduced or increased staining intensity against background,
respectively, is now possible. In addition, selective immunohistochemical staining allows for easy quantiﬁcation of these changes
by standard cell-counting methodology.
So far, various approaches to immunohistochemical evaluation
of SNL or MA have been proposed. Most commonly, for time
constraint reasons analysis is conducted in a noncomprehensive
manner, i.e., counting neurons or microglial cells per randomly
selected nonoverlapping microscopic ﬁelds.11–13 Another approach
involves visual scoring on small number of prespeciﬁed brain
regions.8,14,15 However, both methods lack comprehensiveness
and expose to the risk of interobserver bias, especially given the
well-established intersubject variability in extent and severity of
ischemic damage, and the fact that SNL can occur in cortical areas
remote from the ischemic core.3 Although a comprehensive and
systematic assessment of the whole brain avoids these issues, it
can be extremely time-consuming unless speciﬁc solutions are
implemented. One recently proposed and validated solution
involves the visual scoring of a ﬁxed template of cytoarchitectonically deﬁned regions of interest (ROIs) spanning the MCA
territory.10 Yet, visual methods only allow for a semiquantitative
assessment using arbitrary scales to grade the severity and/or
extent of changes. In addition, visual assessment might miss subtle
yet meaningful changes. Although quantitative cell counting does
not have these potential limitations, systematic MCA territory
assessment has not been reported so far.
The aim of the present study therefore was to compare and
assess the respective merits of two distinct methods to assess
ischemic brain damage across separate ROIs spanning the MCA
territory, namely the above visual scoring method10 and a novel
software-assisted automated quantitative cell-counting method.
To allow a meaningful comparison, the same template of ROIs was
used in both methods. Furthermore, to encompass the entire
spectrum of ischemic damage subtypes, we used both a relatively
long tMCAo model, namely 45 minutes, where infarction is known
to frequently occur9 as well as a much shorter duration, namely
15 minutes, where only SNL is expected.3 In both cases, we used
the distal clip tMCAo method to maximize on cortical pathology.
In addition, to assess the most subtle end of the spectrum of
ischemia-induced changes, we studied a sample of rats with very
long survival after 15-minute tMCAo, namely 45 and 60 days,
where inﬂammation is expected to have become minimal or even
absent,3 while neuronal loss may become difﬁcult to measure
because of late tissue shrinkage16,17 and/or neurogenesis.18 To
compare the two methods, we performed correlation analyses
between the visual scores for SNL/MA and the cell counts for
neurons and microglia for each ROI across groups.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
All experiments were performed in accordance with the UK Animals
(Scientiﬁc Procedures) Act (1986) and were approved by the University of
Cambridge Ethical Review Panel. According to this approval, the number of
subjects was limited to the minimum required to obtain scientiﬁcally
meaningful results. Twenty male spontaneously hypertensive rats, 10 to
12 weeks of age, were used for surgical induction of ischemia. We chose
© 2015 ISCBFM

to use this strain because it has been shown to result in the most
consistent as well as extensive cortical ischemia after distal MCAo.19,20 This
manuscript was written up according to the Animal Research: Reporting of
In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines for reporting animal experiments.

Anesthesia
All animals were induced with 4% isoﬂurane plus oxygen and nitrous
oxide (ratio 0.3/0.7) and maintained with 2% isoﬂurane during surgical
procedures. Temperature was maintained at 37°C throughout the surgery
using a heating blanket.

Temporary Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
Rats were subjected to 15 minutes (n = 12) or 45 minutes (n = 8) distal clip
tMCAo, and survived for 28 (n = 14; 6 and 8 in each tMCAo group,
respectively), 45 (n = 3; all 15 minutes tMCAo), or 60 days (n = 3; 15 minutes
tMCAo). Findings in the subgroup of rats subjected to 45 minutes tMCAO
have already been published in part elsewhere.9 The distal clip tMCAo
model was performed using Buchan et al ’s method19 as implemented in
our laboratory.9,10,21 Brieﬂy, the left common carotid artery was isolated
through a ventral midline incision on the neck and a loose ligature of 4-0
silk suture was placed around it. With the rat positioned onto its right ﬂank,
a 2.5 cm skin incision perpendicular to, and bisecting the line between the
lateral canthus of the right eye and the external auditory canal was made,
and the underlying temporalis muscle excised to reveal the base of the
skull. Under direct visualization, the underlying temporalis muscle was
excised and craniectomy was performed under saline irrigation to expose
the left MCA through a 2-mm burr hole drilled 2 to 3 mm rostral to the
fusion of the zygomatic arch with the squamosal bone. The dura was
retracted to visualize the MCA at a position where it crosses the inferior
cerebral vein, which lies within the rhinal ﬁssure. A micro-aneurysm clip
(No 1, Codman, Sundt AVM, Raynham, MA, USA) was placed on the MCA
proximal to the point where it crosses the inferior cerebral vein, and the
left common carotid artery was permanently ligated. The clip was removed
after 15 or 45 minutes and the wound was closed after visual veriﬁcation of
the restoration of blood ﬂow.10 The effects on tissue perfusion of distal
ligation as performed in our laboratory have been published previously.10

Cryosectioning
The experiment was terminated by perfusion-ﬁxation through the heart as
detailed elsewhere.10 The whole brain was embedded in optimal cutting
temperature medium and mounted on a specimen holder of a freezing
sledge microtome for serial 40 μm coronal sections. Sections were
collected from across the MCA territory, i.e. from the level of the forceps
minor of the corpus callosum to the visual cortex and the superior colliculi
(bregma 3.7 to 6.80 mm)10 and mounted on gelatine-coated slides.

Immunohistochemistry and Image Acquisition
For immunohistochemistry, frozen brain sections were quenched with 10%
methanol and 10% H2O2 for 5 minutes and blocked in 3% normal horse
serum (S-2000, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) in phosphatebuffered saline. Consecutive sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with
primary antibody speciﬁc for nuclear protein for mature neurons (NeuN,
1:1000; MAB377, Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, USA) and reactive
microglia and macrophages (OX42, 1:400; MCA275R, Serotec, Kidlington,
UK). After washing three times with Tris-buffered saline, sections were
incubated with biotinylated antimouse IgG (rat-absorbed: dilution 1:200;
Vector Laboratories) secondary antibodies, washed with Tris-buffered
saline, incubated in avidin–biotin horseradish peroxidase complex solution
(ABC Kit, Vector Laboratories) for 10 minutes, and the reaction product
visualized with diaminobenzidine (DAB kit, Vector Laboratories). Finally, the
sections were dehydrated through alcohol, cleared with xylene and slides
were cover-slipped with di-n-butyle phthalate in xylene mounting medium
(1330-20-7, Merck, White House Station, NJ, USA).
Eight coronal sections spanning the cortical MCA territory were selected
for analysis at the following locations relative to the bregma: 2.70, 1.00,
− 0.26, − 0.92, − 2.12, − 3.14, − 4.52, and − 6.04 mm.9,10 Stained sections
were captured via whole-slide scanning on a NanoZoomer slide scanner
(Hamamatsu Photonics, Hamamatsu City, Japan) and exported with NDP
viewer software (Hamamatsu Photonics). Composite images were stitched
automatically from individual frames.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

22
Image Processing
A set of symmetrical anatomic cytoarchitectonic ROIs derived from the
stereotaxic atlas of the rat brain (Paxinos & Watson, 2004) was applied to
each digitized section, as described previously.9,10 Per hemisphere, the ROI
template is composed of 39 cytoarchitectonically distinct cortical ROIs, 4
caudate/putamen ROIs and 1 thalamus ROI. The resulting digitized maps of
individual animals at corresponding coronal levels were then mapped into
the common 44-ROI template using Adobe Photoshop CS (Adobe Systems,
Mountain View, CA, USA) and digital images of each section with the
superimposed ROIs were acquired (Figure 1A).

Visual Scoring
Brieﬂy, two experienced scorers independently rated OX42 pathology in
each ROI of each section and each animal, using a visual grading scale
integrating pathology across the ROI. This scale comprises both a severity
score (0 to 10; 0 = normal OX42 staining relative to homologous ROI on
unaffected side, 10 = maximally increased OX42 staining, i.e., densely
packed, darkly stained cells; with 1 to 9 being intermediate; not considering the actual shape of the cells, i.e., ramiﬁed versus ameboid) and an
area score (0 to 10; 0 = no abnormally increased OX42 staining in any part
of the ROI, 10 = whole ROI affected by abnormally increased OX42 staining,
with 1 to 9 being intermediate extent relative to the corresponding
contralateral ROI). For each ROI, the area score was then multiplied by the
severity score, to yield an overall OX42 score expressing both the extent
and degree of abnormal staining in the ROI ranging from 0 to 100% (0
meaning normal; 100 meaning maximal pathology present throughout the
whole ROI). The scores provided by the two scorers were averaged to
produce a ﬁnal score for each ROI in each rat. A similar procedure was used
for NeuN staining, except that the severity score (0 to 10) this time
represented loss of staining relative to the contralateral homologous ROI.
Excellent interobserver reproducibility for this scoring procedure has been
reported before.10,21
In addition, a ‘weighted mean’ SxA score for each rat was computed by
averaging the ROI SxA values, weighted by their respective areas. To this
end, for each rat the SxA score of each particular ROI was normalized for
the ROI area, and these weighted scores were then averaged across all
ROIs to obtain an area-weighted mean.
Note that visual scoring and automated cell counting for the OX42
dataset from the 45-minute tMCAo group was not performed a priori
because both staining quality and slide mounting were suboptimal for
most sections in all rats. This was a technical error unrelated to the
presence of infarcts in this group.
The interrater correlation of SxA scores between the two independent
raters across all data from all rats (both 45- and 15-minute tMCAo groups)
was 0.97 and 0.96 for NeuN and OX42, respectively, Pearson’s correlation
coefﬁcient: both Po0.01 and not different from identity, indicating very
strong reliability of this measure, similar to our previous ﬁnding.10

Software-Assisted Quantiﬁcation of Cell Numbers
The procedure is illustrated in Figure 1. To automate image processing and
analysis of a large number of ROIs using batch processing, each ROI of
each section of each animal was saved as an individual image ﬁle using the
batch command in Adobe Photoshop CS (Adobe Systems; see Figure 1B
for illustration of the quantiﬁcation process). After enhancing image
contrast using the Auto Contrast command, noise reduction of grayscale
images was achieved by consecutively using the Unsharp-Mask (amount
100%, radius 5 pixels, threshold none), Despeckle, and High-Pass ﬁltering
(radius 10 pixels) commands using Adobe Photoshop CS. Binarization of
NeuN and OX42-stained images was performed using the ImageJ software
Auto Threshold command (ImageJ, U.S. National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA; http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/). For NeuN-stained images,
the range of pixel intensity was then adjusted manually on an initial set of
images to achieve optimal threshold values (i.e., optimal ‘highlighting’ of
neuronal cell bodies). The determined range of pixel intensities was then
used for automated thresholding of the remaining set of images. Similarly,
for OX42-stained sections, the range of pixel intensities was ﬁrst
determined using the Auto Threshold command on an initial set of
images, followed by subsequent manual adjustment to achieve optimal
threshold values for subsequent automated processing. Of note, using
OX42, an antibody against microglial integrin CD11b that is upregulated
on activated microglia,21 the differentiation between quiescent and
activated microglia is based on differences in staining,22,23 allowing for
selective thresholding of activated microglia. Finally, the ImageJ Watershed
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

algorithm was applied to both sets of NeuN and OX42-stained images to
separate touching or overlapping cells. The total cell number for each ROI
was automatically quantiﬁed using the Particle Analysis command. To
allow for meaningful automated quantiﬁcation of particles from binary
image data (i.e., to avoid incorrect counting of ‘background pixels’ or ‘giant
particles’) ranges of particle characteristics for automatic quantiﬁcation
were determined as follows: For NeuN-stained cells the average area and
circularity of 300 cells from 10 randomly selected ipsi- and contralesional
ROIs (30 cells per ROI) were assessed manually using the ImageJ Measure
command. The average area and circularity of the selected NeuN-stained
cells ± 1 s.d. were subsequently used as inclusion ranges for automatic
quantiﬁcation. Similarly, using this method, ranges of particle characteristics for OX42-stained cells were determined on OX42-stained images. To
match the metric used for the visual analysis, the relative change of the
number of NeuN-stained neurons and OX42-stained microglia between
corresponding ipsi- and contralesional ROIs was expressed for each ROI as
a ratio of the number of NeuN/OX42-stained cells on the affected
hemisphere/number of NeuN-/OX42-stained cells on the unaffected
hemisphere. These cell counts normalized to the unaffected hemisphere
will be referred to in what follows as ‘NeuN ratios’ and ‘OX42 ratios’,
respectively. In addition, for each rat a whole-hemisphere average cell
number change was calculated as the ‘weighted mean’ across all 44 ROIs,
taking into account the area of each ROI. To this end, for each rat the NeuN
or OX42 ratio for each particular ROI was normalized by the ROI area, and
these normalized values then averaged across all ROIs to obtain an areaweighted mean for NeuN-stained neurons and for OX42-stained activated
microglia, respectively.
Cell counting was feasible only when immunostained sections were of
good or excellent quality. Exclusion was performed a priori by an external
colleague masked to group assignment and unfamiliar with the purpose of
this study. As a result, a number of sections were excluded a priori from the
analysis (both methods). A particular case is rat 1 from the 45 minutes
group in which several NeuN sections showed highly inconsistent staining
and staining artefacts; accordingly, this rat was excluded from all
subsequent analyses. Regarding the 28 days, 45 days, and 60 days survival
subgroups from the 15 minutes group, 2/48 NeuN-stained and 4/48 OX42stained; 3/24 NeuN-stained; and 6/24 NeuN-stained and 2/24 OX42-stained
sections were excluded from subsequent analysis, respectively, resulting in
an overall exclusion rate of 8.9%. Again, these exclusions were not related
to the presence or extent of tissue damage.

Statistical Handling
Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (version 15, SPSS, Chicago,
USA) software. To assess whether individual ROIs showed signiﬁcant
changes in NeuN or OX42 SxA scores across all subjects from each group,
the data for each ROI were tested against 0 using paired t-tests. To allow a
meaningful comparison between the visual and cell counting methods, the
same statistical test was applied to cell densities between ipsi- and
contralesional sides. However, given their metrics were entirely different,
the data derived from the two quantiﬁcation methods were not directly
compared. Nonparametric Kendall’s tau was used to assess the correlation
between visual scores and cell count ratios. Results were considered to be
statistically signiﬁcant if two-tailed Po0.05.

RESULTS
45-Minute tMCAo Group
As explained above, only NeuN data were available for this set of
rats. Based on visual analysis, both infarction and SNL were observed
in 5/7 rats, rat 5 exhibited partial infarction in combination with
SNL, and rat 3 had SNL only (see Ejaz et al9 for details).
Table 1 shows the mean (± s.e.m.) weighted mean NeuN ratio
and SxA score across the group.
Figures 2A and 2B, show the mean ( ± s.e.m.) SxA scores and
NeuN ratios in the 44 ROIs, respectively. Across ROIs, the mean
values ranged from zero (no change in any rat) up to nearly
maximum (pan-necrosis in most rats), with the regional distribution of the changes being almost identical with the two methods.
Affected ROIs were mostly located in the primary and secondary
somatosensory areas, and to a lesser extent the insula, auditory,
parietal and visual cortices. Assessing ROIs for statistically
signiﬁcant changes across the group, 13 and 19 ROIs were
© 2015 ISCBFM

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

23

Figure 1. (A) Illustration of cytoarchitectonic ROI templates used for analysis shown on NeuN-stained whole-brain sections of a rat 60 days
after 15-minute tMCAo, which were digitized using a Hamamatsu NanoZoomer slide scanner. Eight coronal sections, composed of 39 cortical,
4 caudate/putamen, and 1 thalamus ROI per hemisphere were selected for analysis (see Hughes et al, 10 for details). Lesion is on the right side
of the scan. Scale bar, 1 mm. (B) Flow diagram exemplifying for one selected ROI (primary somatosensory cortex) with deﬁnite selective
neuronal loss and colocalized microglial activation 28 days after 15-minute tMCAo, the software-assisted quantiﬁcation of NeuN-stained and
OX42-stained cells (upper and lower row, respectively; only the affected hemisphere is shown for illustration). Following manual application of
the template each ROI was (a) processed as an individual image ﬁle using the batch command in Adobe Photoshop to (b) enhance contrast
using the Auto Contrast command and (c) reduce background noise using Unsharp-Mask, Despeckle, and High-Pass ﬁlters. In (d), ImageJ
batch processing was used to create binary images based on threshold values determined with the Auto Threshold command and (e) cell
numbers were quantiﬁed based on average (±1 s.d.) value for size and circularity using the Particle Analysis command (see Materials and
Methods section for details). In (e), outlines of the quantiﬁed particles are depicted; upper and lower inserts show small, round particles and
larger, ramiﬁed particles representative of the characteristic shapes of neuronal cell bodies and activated microglia, respectively. See Materials
and Methods for further details. ROI, region of interest.

© 2015 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

24
individually signiﬁcant using visual scoring and cell counting,
respectively, again with essentially the same distribution with the
two methods. Accordingly, there was an excellent correlation
between mean SxA scores and NeuN ratios (Kendall’s τ = −0.755,
Po 0.001, Figure 2C). Similarly signiﬁcant correlations were
present in all rats taken individually (data not shown).
15-Minute tMCAo Group
As expected, the ischemic changes after 15-minute tMCAo were
much less prominent as compared with the 45 minutes tMCAo
group, notably there was no instance of pan-necrosis. Based on
the visual assessment, SNL was detected in 5/6, 2/3, and 2/3 rats at
28, 45, and 60 days post tMCAo, respectively. Corresponding MA
was observed in 6/6, 1/3, and 1/3 rats at 28, 45, and 60 days post
tMCAo, respectively (see Figure 1 for an illustrative example of
colocalized cortical SNL and MA at 28 days post 15 minutes
tMCAo). Table 1 shows the weighted mean (± s.e.m.) NeuN ratios,
showing much lower values in the 28 days survival group than
those found in the 45 minutes tMCAo group, as well as declining
values with longer recovery times. This was also true for the OX42
ratios. This table also tabulates the SxA scores for NeuN and OX42,
which showed changes parallel to but less sensitive than the
corresponding ratios.
The spatial distribution of ischemic changes was similar to that
observed with the 45 minutes tMCAo, i.e., the primary and
secondary somatosensory areas including the barrel ﬁeld were
maximally affected, followed by the insula and parietal cortices
(see Figure 1). These changes were of similar magnitude for NeuN
and OX42, but again with much smaller values for both SxA and
cell count ratios as compared with the 45-minute tMCAo group
(data not shown). Like with the data shown in Table 1, the
changes were more marked for the 28 days recovery group as
compared with the 45 and 60 days groups, especially so for OX42.
Accordingly, assessing individual ROIs for statistically signiﬁcant
local changes across the 28 days group (n = 6) and pooled 45 and
60 days (n = 6; for the sake of statistical power), there were 2 and 0
signiﬁcant ROIs for SxA NeuN scoring; 9 and 8 for NeuN ratios; 18
and 0 for OX42 SxA scoring; and 15 and 3 for OX42 ratios,
respectively.
There was high intermethod consistency for the 28-day
recovery group (Kendall’s τ = −0.569 and 0.625 for NeuN and
OX42, respectively; P o 0.001 for both; Figures 3A and 3B). Because
of a loss of sensitivity of the visual method, the intermethod
agreement for the 45-day recovery group was less strong yet still
highly signiﬁcant for OX42, but not signiﬁcant anymore for NeuN
(Kendall’s τ = 0.419 and − 0.217; P o 0.001 and P = 0.23, respectively; Figures 3C and 3D). This disagreement was even worse for
the 60 days recovery group, where there was no agreement at all
with either immunostain (Figures 3E and 3F).

DISCUSSION
The aim of this study was to compare and assess the respective
merits of two entirely different procedures designed to assess
ischemic damage throughout the affected vascular territory after
tMCAo in rodents, using the same objective ROI template applied
to both protocols. One conspicuous strength of this study is that
the two methods were evaluated within the same animals
allowing for an optimal comparison.
To summarize the results, both methods produced similar
ﬁndings in rats subjected to 45 minutes temporary distal tMCAo
(Figure 2C), which induced mainly infarcts, as well as in rats
subjected to 15-minute tMCAo producing pure SNL together with
marked associated MA when assessed at 28 days postinjury
(Figures 3A and 3B). However, as clearly depicted by Figures 3C–F,
when assessing 15-minute tMCAo rats at later time points (45 and
60 days), the visual method picked up only the most marked
changes but underestimated or missed completely the subtler cell
changes, which were readily detected by the cell-counting method.
This underestimation is also clear from Table 1, which shows the
weighted mean cell changes across subjects in each group. Even
accounting for the different metrics characterizing the two methods,
both NeuN and OX42 SxA weighted mean scores were essentially
zero at 45 and 60 days after 15-minute tMCAo (although
signiﬁcantly different from neutral for one of them), whereas the
cell counting method did pick up sizeable and consistently
signiﬁcant changes. It would therefore appear from the present
study that although the visual method is sensitive to even mild
ischemic changes such as common degrees of SNL, it is poorly
sensitive to more subtle changes such as mild/diffuse SNL or MA
present late after the insult.
Previous studies have applied the visual method to a small set
of prespeciﬁed brain regions or microscopic ﬁelds,8,14,15 which is
suboptimal when assessing tMCAo given the usually extensive
ischemia as well as the intersubject variability in lesion topography. In our laboratory, Hughes et al10 recently developed a
similar approach but allowing for whole MCA territory assessment
in a systematic and objective manner, by applying a template of
ROIs derived from the stereotaxic atlas of the rat brain.24 In the
present study, we compared this validated method to the classical
cell-counting method, for the ﬁrst time adapting the latter so as to
allow a similar whole MCA territory systematic assessment across
the same ROI template as with the visual analysis to permit a
direct comparison of the two methods. One potential advantage
of the cell counting over the visual method is its more automated
process, and hence anticipated reproducibility from laboratory to
laboratory. This is the ﬁrst study of its kind and there were no
previous publication to compare our results to.
Apart from actual sensitivity, other factors need to be considered when assessing the relative merits of these two methods.
Regarding the visual scoring method, standard immunohistochemical quality and image acquisition techniques are sufﬁcient
as assessment is performed at tissue level. In contrast, meticulous

Table 1. Weighted means (± s.e.m.) for ipsilateral/contralesional cell number ratios and visual SxA scores across rats for NeuN-stained sections at
28 days after 45-minute tMCAo (n = 7), and for both NeuN and OX42-stained sections obtained 28 days (n = 6), 45 days (n = 3), and 60 days (n = 3)
after 15-minute tMCAo
28 Days after 45-minute tMCAo 28 Days after 15-minute tMCAo 45 Days after 15-minutes tMCAo 60 Days after 15-minute tMCAo
NeuN ratio
NeuN SxA score
OX42 ratio
OX42 SxA score

−23.4 ± 5.1***
12.0 ± 3.0###
NA
NA

− 8.6 ± 1.6%***
5.8 ± 1.0###
29.4 ± 4.9%***
10.6 ± 1.4###

NA, not applicable; tMCAo, transient proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion.
##/###
Po 0.01/0.0001 paired t-test against neutral.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

− 5.5 ± 1.1%***
0.5 ± 0.3
20.5 ± 4.0%***
0.3 ± 0.2

− 3.5 ± 1.8%*
1.0 ± 0.6##
6.0 ± 2.3%*
0.1 ± 0.1

P o0.05/0.0001 versus corresponding contralesional ROIs, paired t-test.

*/***

© 2015 ISCBFM

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

25

Figure 2. (A) Bar graph showing the mean (± s.e.m.) NeuN SxA scores for each of the 44 regions of interest (ROIs) at 28 days after 45-minute
tMCAo across all animals (n = 7 rats per ROI; */**P o0.05/0.01, paired t-test against 0). (B) Similarly laid out bar graph showing the mean ( ± s.e.
m.) ipsilateral/contralesional NeuN cell number ratios for the 44 ROIs across all animals (n = 7 rats per ROI, */**Po 0.05/0.01 versus
corresponding contralesional ROI, paired t-test). ROI code assignments: A, auditory cortex; C, caudate putamen; I, insular cortex; M, motor
cortex; P, piriform cortex; Pa, parietal cortex; R, rhinal cortex; S1, primary somatosensory cortex; S2, secondary somatosensory cortex; SBF,
primary somatosensory barrel ﬁeld; T, thalamus; V, visual cortex (see Hughes et al,10 for details). (C) Plot of NeuN SxA scores versus ipsilateral/
contralesional cell number ratios for all 44 ROIs (mean values across seven animals, respectively), showing strong intermethod agreement
(τ = −0.755, P o0.001).

© 2015 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

26

Figure 3. Plots of NeuN and OX42 SxA scores versus ipsilateral/contralesional cell number ratios for all 44 regions of interest (ROIs). Mean
values across (A and B) six rats 28 days after 15-minute tMCAo showing strong intermethod agreement (Po0.001 for both NeuN and OX42)
for NeuN and OX42-stained cells, respectively, (C and D) three rats 45 days after 15-minute tMCAo showing signiﬁcant intermethod agreement
for OX42-stained cells (P o0.001), but not for NeuN; and (E and F) three rats 60 days after 15-minute tMCAo, showing no intermethod
agreement for either staining method.

tissue and immunohistochemical processing are required for the
cell-counting method, as suboptimal quality (e.g., cutting artefacts,
inconsistent staining, and damaged sections) will seriously
hamper quantiﬁcation accuracy. Regarding time efﬁciency, visual
scoring allows for evaluation of MCA-territory pathology in ~ 30
minutes per brain, compared with ~ 90 minutes for scanning and
evaluation using the cell counting method as used here. However,
the visual evaluation requires raters experienced with the
assessment of ischemia-induced brain histopathology and the
scoring procedure, whereas ROI template application and particle
quantiﬁcation for the cell counting method can be performed by
investigators without previous histopathologic experience. Assessment of ischemia-induced changes using the visual method is
based on the underlying assumption that corresponding contralesional ROIs are intact. No such assumption is needed for the
cell counting method which allows for within-subject comparison
of absolute cell numbers between corresponding ipsi-/contralesional ROIs, resulting in strong statistical validity. Regarding
equipment, the visual scoring can be performed using a
conventional microscope camera and image processing software
for ROI template application. In contrast, to efﬁciently process
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

large number of sections using the cell counting method requires
an automatic stage microscope or dedicated slide scanner and
Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems) and ImageJ software for
quantiﬁcation. Table 2 summarizes the advantages and drawbacks
of the two methods.
One important conclusion from our study is therefore that,
given the above constraints of the cell-counting method, the
visual method is acceptable as surrogate whenever visually
evident damage such as infarction or substantial degrees of SNL
and MA is considered. However, to quantify subtle, microscopic,
damage requires the use of the former, in spite of it being more
time consuming, cumbersome and expensive.
Limitations of our study include the relatively small sample size.
However, the distal clip tMCAo method is skill-intensive, and the
immunohistochemical processing time-consuming, so in practice
only small samples can be assessed.8–10,12 We chose here to assess
cortical pathology because cortical SNL and MA are assumed to
have particularly prominent behavioral consequences.3,5–7,13 It
would nevertheless be of interest to compare the visual scoring
and cell-counting methods for striatal pathology as produced by
proximal MCAo. We studied only spontaneously hypertensive rats
© 2015 ISCBFM

Comparing methods for immunohistochemistry in MCAo
JV Emmrich et al

27
Table 2. Advantages and limitations of the two histology-based methods for whole-brain assessment of ischemic damage after tMCAo in rats
assessed here

Required quality of tissue processing and immunohistochemistry
Required equipment
Level of technical expertise required
Time efﬁciency
Quantitation
Sensitivity
Underlying assumption
Assessment across the MCA territory

Visual scoring

Software-assisted cell counting

Standard
Standard
High
Good (~30 minutes per brain)
Semiquantitative
Good for nonsubtle damage
Contralesional hemisphere intact
Yes

Optimal
Expensive
Standard
Poorer (~90 minutes per brain)
Fully quantitative
Optimal even with subtle damage
None
Yes

MCA , middle cerebral artery; tMCAo, transient proximal middle cerebral artery occlusion.

here because this is the strain that is most sensitive to ischemia
and reﬂects a common clinical situation in ischemic stroke, namely
chronic hypertension. However, it would be of interest to study
other rat strains as well as mice. Finally, because of unexpected
technical errors during immunohistochemical processing using
OX42 antibody for the 45-minute tMCAo rats, we had to exclude
all these sections from analysis. Note, however, that the expected
less prominent MA present at 28 days after 15-minute tMCAo was
readily picked up by both methods.
In conclusion, this is the ﬁrst study to apply systematic
assessment of postischemic SNL and MA across the MCA territory
using both visual scoring and software-assisted cell counting
methods. We show that both methods are adequately sensitive for
the detection of damage including infarction and usual degrees of
SNL and MA, and hence that the less cumbersome and expensive
visual method can serve as a reliable surrogate for the cell counting method, including when staining quality is not optimal.
Conversely, the latter is more reliable to pick up more subtle
changes and should be implemented in such situations despite its
more demanding staining and processing requirements.
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

REFERENCES
1 Muir KW, Buchan A, von Kummer R, Rother J, Baron JC. Imaging of acute stroke.
Lancet Neurol 2006; 5: 755–768.
2 Astrup J, Siesjo BK, Symon L. Thresholds in cerebral ischemia—the ischemic
penumbra. Stroke 1981; 12: 723–725.
3 Baron JC, Yamauchi H, Fujioka M, Endres M. Selective neuronal loss in ischemic
stroke and cerebrovascular disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2014; 34: 2–18.
4 Baron JC. How healthy is the acutely reperfused ischemic penumbra?. Cerebrovasc
Dis 2005; 20: 25–31.
5 Wegener S, Weber R, Ramos-Cabrer P, Uhlenkueken U, Sprenger C, Wiedermann
D et al. Temporal proﬁle of T2-weighted MRI distinguishes between pannecrosis
and selective neuronal death after transient focal cerebral ischemia in the rat.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2006; 26: 38–47.
6 Wegener S, Weber R, Ramos-Cabrer P, Uhlenkueken U, Wiedermann D, Kandal K
et al. Subcortical lesions after transient thread occlusion in the rat: T2-weighted
magnetic resonance imaging ﬁndings without corresponding sensorimotor deficits. J Magn Reson Imaging 2005; 21: 340–346.
7 Freret T, Bouet V, Leconte C, Roussel S, Chazalviel L, Divoux D et al. Behavioral
deﬁcits after distal focal cerebral ischemia in mice: usefulness of adhesive
removal test. Behav Neurosci 2009; 123: 224–230.
8 Qiao M, Zhao Z, Barber PA, Foniok T, Sun S, Tuor UI. Development of a model of
recurrent stroke consisting of a mild transient stroke followed by a second
moderate stroke in rats. J Neurosci Methods 2009; 184: 244–250.

© 2015 ISCBFM

9 Ejaz S, Williamson DJ, Ahmed T, Sitnikov S, Hong YT, Sawiak SJ et al. Characterizing infarction and selective neuronal loss following temporary focal cerebral
ischemia in the rat: a multi-modality imaging study. Neurobiol Dis 2013; 51:
120–132.
10 Hughes JL, Beech JS, Jones PS, Wang D, Menon DK, Baron JC. Mapping selective
neuronal loss and microglial activation in the salvaged neocortical penumbra in
the rat. Neuroimage 2010; 49: 19–31.
11 Garcia JH, Liu KF, Ye ZR, Gutierrez JA. Incomplete infarct and delayed neuronal
death after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Stroke 1997; 28:
2303–2309. discussion 2310.
12 Katchanov J, Waeber C, Gertz K, Gietz A, Winter B, Bruck W et al. Selective
neuronal vulnerability following mild focal brain ischemia in the mouse. Brain
Pathol 2003; 13: 452–464.
13 Sicard KM, Henninger N, Fisher M, Duong TQ, Ferris CF. Long-term changes of
functional MRI-based brain function, behavioral status, and histopathology after
transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 2006; 37: 2593–2600.
14 Li F, Han SS, Tatlisumak T, Liu KF, Garcia JH, Sotak CH et al. Reversal of
acute apparent diffusion coefﬁcient abnormalities and delayed neuronal death
following transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Ann Neurol 1999; 46:
333–342.
15 Li F, Liu KF, Silva MD, Omae T, Sotak CH, Fenstermacher JD et al. Transient and
permanent resolution of ischemic lesions on diffusion-weighted imaging after
brief periods of focal ischemia in rats: correlation with histopathology. Stroke
2000; 31: 946–954.
16 Ding G, Jiang Q, Li L, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Lu M et al. Longitudinal magnetic
resonance imaging of sildenaﬁl treatment of embolic stroke in aged rats. Stroke
2011; 42: 3537–3541.
17 Weise G, Lorenz M, Posel C, Maria Riegelsberger U, Storbeck V, Kamprad M et al.
Transplantation of cryopreserved human umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells
does not induce sustained recovery after experimental stroke in spontaneously
hypertensive rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2014; 34: e1–e9.
18 Huttner HB, Bergmann O, Salehpour M, Racz A, Tatarishvili J, Lindgren E et al. The
age and genomic integrity of neurons after cortical stroke in humans. Nat
Neurosci 2014; 17: 801–803.
19 Buchan AM, Xue D, Slivka A. A new model of temporary focal neocortical ischemia
in the rat. Stroke 1992; 23: 273–279.
20 Kaplan B, Brint S, Tanabe J, Jacewicz M, Wang XJ, Pulsinelli W. Temporal thresholds for neocortical infarction in rats subjected to reversible focal cerebral
ischemia. Stroke 1991; 22: 1032–1039.
21 Hughes JL, Jones PS, Beech JS, Wang D, Menon DK, Aigbirhio FI et al. A microPET
study of the regional distribution of [11C]-PK11195 binding following temporary
focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Correlation with post mortem mapping of
microglia activation. Neuroimage 2012; 59: 2007–2016.
22 Kato H, Kogure K, Liu XH, Araki T, Itoyama Y. Progressive expression of immunomolecules on activated microglia and invading leukocytes following focal
cerebral ischemia in the rat. Brain Res 1996; 734: 203–212.
23 Schroeter M, Jander S, Huitinga I, Witte OW, Stoll G. Phagocytic response in
photochemically induced infarction of rat cerebral cortex. The role of resident
microglia. Stroke 1997; 28: 382–386.
24 Paxinos G, Watson C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Third edn. Academic
Press: San Diego, London, 1996.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 20 – 27

