European Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 40, pp. 3413–3421, 2014

doi:10.1111/ejn.12723

DISORDERS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

Complete protection from impending stroke following
permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in awake,
behaving rats
Christopher C. Lay1,2,3 and Ron D. Frostig1,2,3,4
1

Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California, 2205 McGaugh Hall, Irvine, CA 92697-4550, USA
The Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
3
The Center for Hearing Research, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
4
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA
2

Keywords: animal models, ischemia, neuroprotection, plasticity, somatosensory cortex

Abstract
Using a rodent model of ischemic stroke [permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO)], our laboratory has previously
demonstrated that sensory-evoked cortical activation via mechanical single whisker stimulation treatment delivered under an
anesthetized condition within 2 h of ischemic onset confers complete protection from impending infarct. There is a limited time
window for this protection; rats that received the identical treatment at 3 h following ischemic onset lost neuronal function and
sustained a substantial infarct. Rats in these studies, however, were anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital or isoflurane,
whereas most human stroke patients are typically awake. To optimize our animal model, the present study examined, using functional imaging, histological, and behavioral analysis, whether self-induced sensorimotor stimulation is also protective in unrestrained, behaving rats that actively explore an enriched environment. Rats were revived from anesthesia either immediately or at
3 h after pMCAO, at which point they were allowed to freely explore an enriched environment. Rats that explored immediately
after ischemic onset maintained normal cortical function and did not sustain infarct, even when their whiskers were clipped. Rats
that were revived at 3 h post-pMCAO exhibited eliminated cortical function and sustained cortical infarct. Further, the data suggested that the level of individual active exploration could influence the outcome. Thus, early activation of the ischemic cortical
area via unrestrained exploration resulted in protection from ischemic infarct, whereas late activation resulted in infarct, irrespective of the level of arousal or whisker-specific stimulation.

Introduction
Stroke is a major cause of disability and mortality worldwide (Roger
et al., 2012). Both clinical and pre-clinical research has clearly
established that disruption of cerebral blood ﬂow during ischemic
stroke triggers large-scale reorganization of the brain at multiple levels, including cortical function and blood ﬂow [for a recent review
see Xerri (2012)]. Growing evidence based on functional, structural
and behavioral techniques in a rodent model of ischemia [permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO)] demonstrated that, when
administered soon after ischemic onset, sensory-induced evoked cortical activity initiates neurovascular plasticity resulting in a complete
protection from impending ischemic stroke (Lay et al., 2010, 2011,
2013; Davis et al., 2011; Hancock et al., 2013) as reviewed in Frostig et al. (2013). These studies have shown that multiple forms of
whisker tactile stimulation treatment can completely protect the
cortex from impending damage when initiated within 2 h of

Correspondence: Professor Ron Frostig, 1Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, as
above.
E-mails: rfrostig@uci.edu and layc@usc.edu
Received 9 July 2014, revised 11 August 2014, accepted 13 August 2014

pMCAO but, when initiated at 3 h post-pMCAO, treatment resulted
in irreversible damage.
The central hypothesis driving this line of research has been that
cortical activation within the ischemic region of the cortex plays a
critical role in protecting the brain from stroke (Frostig et al.,
2013). This hypothesis suggests that, after pMCAO, it is possible
to completely protect the adult rat ischemic cortex not solely
through passive mechanical stimulus delivered under anesthetized
conditions, but also through active, natural self-stimulation in
awake, behaving animals to create a more realistic animal model
for ischemic stroke. Here we tested this hypothesis by allowing
rats to freely explore an enriched environment. Rats were revived
from anesthesia either immediately or at 3 h after pMCAO, at
which point they were also allowed to freely explore an enriched
environment.
As the ischemic middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory can also
be stimulated by other types (i.e. not only whiskers) of sensorimotor
inputs present in an enriched environment during active exploration
(e.g. auditory, tactile, and motor stimuli), these types of stimulations
could, according to our hypothesis, also lead to protection. To
address this issue, we tested whether clipping the large facial

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd

3414 C. C. Lay and R. D. Frostig
whisker (vibrissae) array of rats immediately post-pMCAO and prior
to active exploration modiﬁed any potential protective effect.
Although the majority of our laboratory’s previous work was conducted using sodium pentobarbital, this anesthesia can render animals
unresponsive for many hours post-anesthesia cessation and therefore
missing the 2-h window of opportunity for protection. In order to circumvent this problem, we have recently incorporated the inhalational
anesthetic isoﬂurane, from which animals regain consciousness
within minutes of cessation. Our studies using isoﬂurane yielded
identical results to those obtained previously with sodium pentobarbital (Lay et al., 2013), conﬁrming that the isoﬂurane-anesthetized rat
pMCAO model can be used for a pMCAO stroke model, and therefore allowed us to investigate sensory-based protection from impending ischemic stroke using awake, behaving animals.

Materials and methods
All procedures were in compliance with NIH guidelines and approved
by the University of California, Irvine Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol no. 1997-1608, assurance ID no. A3416.01).

and maintained at 1.5–2.0% isoﬂurane (E-Z Anesthesia Machine) in
100% oxygen as described in Lay et al. (2013). In order to ensure
that all rats were exposed to the same duration of anesthesia, each
subject was anesthetized for 7 h prior to exposure to an enriched
environment, regardless of experimental group. Anesthetic depth was
assessed by monitoring the animal’s breathing rate and regular testing of reﬂexes. Body temperature was maintained at 37 °C. Dextrose
(5%, 3 mL, subcutaneous) was administered to prevent dehydration.
In a subset of rats, arterial oxygen saturation, respiration, pulse distension (a proxy for blood pressure), and heart rate were measured
using pulse oximetry (Starr Life Sciences, Allison Park, PA, USA) to
ensure that any observed changes following pMCAO were not due
to variability in vital parameters. Previous studies in our laboratory
have shown that pMCAO and stimulation treatment do not alter systemic vital parameters (Lay et al., 2011, 2013), and here again signiﬁcant alterations in vital parameters were not observed.
Experimental groups
Rats were randomly assigned to one of the following experimental
groups (n = 8 per group) (Fig. 1).

Surgical preparation and anesthesia
The male Sprague-Dawley rats (295–400 g; Charles River Laboratories) used in this study were individually housed in standard cages
with food and water ad libitum on a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle prior
to experimental procedures. All rats were anesthetized using isoﬂurane,

Experiment 1: the effects of early and late active exploration on
protection
The aim of Experiment 1 was to determine whether sensory-induced
neuroprotection is possible in awake, behaving subjects. Rats were

A

B

C

D

E

F

Fig. 1. Schematic of the experimental design with constituent experimental and control groups. (A–F) Each row represents the experimental group listed (e.g.
A +0 h). For all groups (except sham pMCAO control groups that never undergo MCA occlusion) vertical lines indicate time of permanent occlusion of the
MCA (pMCAO), time of treatment, and the following 24 h reassessment. The rat icon indicates the time of revival from anesthesia and placement into the
enriched environment, and possession or lack of whisker arrays.
© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

Sensory-induced stroke protection in awake rats 3415
revived from isoﬂurane anesthesia either immediately (+0 h, n = 8)
(Fig. 1A) or at 3 h (+3 h, n = 8) (Fig. 1B) following pMCAO
(ischemia onset), at which point they were placed into an enriched
environment (see below for details). Two control groups were also
employed: a sham-operation group and an untreated pMCAO group.
In the sham-operated awake treatment group (sham controls, n = 8)
(Fig. 1C), rats underwent identical surgical procedures but the MCA
was never blocked. These sham control rats were revived immediately following surgery, and were thus included to rule out potential
confounding effects that the experimental procedure and/or novel
environment might have exerted on the rodent cortex. Finally, in
order to determine the degree of stroke damage sustained as a result
of pMCAO in the absence of treatment, an untreated pMCAO control group (pMCAO controls, n = 8) (Fig. 1D) was also included in
Experiment 1. These untreated pMCAO control rats underwent
pMCAO and were maintained under isoﬂurane for 5 h prior to
being placed in the enriched environment in order to match experimental animals on all variables apart from exposure to enriched
environment within the protective time window.
Experiment 2: is sensory-induced protection whisker-speciﬁc?
The aim of Experiment 2 was to determine whether sensory-induced
neuroprotection is whisker stimulus-speciﬁc. To address this question, an additional +0 h awake group of rats had their whisker array
clipped prior to pMCAO, and were then immediately placed into the
enriched environment (+0 h clipped, n = 8) (Fig. 1E). To functionally assess these rats at 24 h post-pMCAO, whiskers were reattached using superglue just prior to evoked functional imaging. To
control for any changes that whisker clipping and reattachment may
have had on cortical function and plasticity, a whisker-clipped
sham-pMCAO control group, comprised of rats that underwent an
identical surgical procedure but whose MCA was never blocked
(clipped sham controls, n = 8) (Fig. 1F), was also assessed at baseline, and at 24 h after whisker clipping and placement into the
enriched environment.
Permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion
Ischemic conditions were achieved via surgical occlusion and transection of the M1 segment (just distal to the lenticulostriate branching) of the left MCA (Davis et al., 2013). Only MCA cortical
branches were affected and thus only a cortical infarct (no subcortical damage) was expected (Coyle, 1982; Risedal et al., 1999). The
skull and dura were carefully removed from a 2 9 2-mm ‘surgical
window’ just anterior and lateral to the imaging window (over the
occlusion location; the M1 segment just distal to the lenticulostriate
branching of the MCA), and a half-curve reverse cutting suture
needle and thread (4–0 silk) was passed through the pial layer of
the meninges, below the MCA and above the cortical surface. A
double ligature was tied and tightened around the MCA and the vessel was then transected (completely severed) between the two knots;
for more details about the procedure see Davis et al. (2013). Experiments were terminated if there was any sign of bleeding from the
MCA, or if there were obvious arterial abnormalities or malformations (Niiro et al., 1996).
Enriched environment and behavioral analysis
Following pMCAO, rats were individually placed into an enriched
environment including a tunnel connecting two large cages that
included small objects and buried food treats to encourage active

exploration. All rats were monitored with a digital video camera for
120 min following revival from anesthesia. Afterwards, observers
blind to experimental group identity quantiﬁed how long each
animal took to revive from anesthesia, and the total time spent
actively exploring the environment. Revival was deﬁned as spontaneous movement from a prone to sitting position. Active exploration
was deﬁned as occurring when the animal sniffed, oriented towards,
or made contact with the cage walls, tunnel, or toys with any part
of its head, whiskers, or forelimbs (Sahakian et al., 1977). After
each experiment, the enriched environment and all components were
thoroughly washed prior to reuse.
Intrinsic signal optical imaging and analysis
We used the functional imaging technique of intrinsic signal optical
imaging to assess whisker functional representation prior to and at
24 h after pMCAO to assess the functional integrity of the rat
cortex. Intrinsic signal optical imaging has been used extensively to
provide high spatial resolution maps of stimulus-evoked hemodynamic-related signals as an indirect means to image the functional
organization of the cortex, and examine how these contribute to
brain function (Grinvald et al., 1986; Frostig et al., 1990; Ts’o
et al., 1990). The initial dip phase of the whisker functional representation is generally associated with evoked neuronal activity and
the overshoot phase with the blood ﬂow response [for a recent
review of intrinsic signal optical imaging see Frostig & Chen-Bee
(2012)].
An area (~6 9 5 mm) of skull overlying the left somatosensory
cortex was exposed and thinned, and a vaseline wall was built
around the periphery of the thinned skull region, ﬁlled with saline,
and covered with a glass coverslip to enhance image quality. A
charge-coupled device camera was used for imaging with red-light
illumination (630 nm). Stimulus began at 1.5 s into the start of an
imaging trial. During stimulus delivery, a single whisker was
deﬂected for 1 s in the rostral-caudal direction at a frequency of
5 Hz. A complete data set of 64 stimulation trials was collected, in
which each 15-s trial consisted of 1.5 s of collected pre-stimulus
data followed by 13.5 s of collected post-stimulus data with a
6  5 s random inter-trial interval. Imaging trials were then collapsed from 100-ms to 500-ms frames to increase the signal-to-noise
ratio. Ratio images were created by dividing each 500-ms frame of
post-stimulus signal activity by the 500-ms frame of pre-stimulus
intrinsic signal activity. Under isoﬂurane anesthesia, the areal extents
of the initial dip and overshoot were quantiﬁed at a threshold level
of 5.0 9 10 4 away from zero and peak amplitude in fractional
change units from the pixel with peak activity within the maximum
areal extent of the evoked activity (Chen-Bee et al., 2007; Lay
et al., 2010, 2011; Davis et al., 2011). Whereas previous work
using sodium pentobarbital has utilized 2.5 9 10 4 fractional
change, the higher 5.0 9 10 4 fractional change threshold was
chosen here to achieve areal extent values that were comparable to the
previous studies. Peak amplitude was quantiﬁed in fractional change
units from the pixel with peak activity within the maximum areal
extent for each of the two phases [for details see Lay et al. (2013)].
Histology
At 24 h after pMCAO, rats were euthanized with 2.0 ml of Euthasol, the brain was removed, sectioned into 2-mm coronal slices, and
then incubated in 2% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride at 37 °C
for 20 min in the dark. The red stain intensity correlates to the functional activity of mitochondria and thus reﬂects viable neural tissues,

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

3418 C. C. Lay and R. D. Frostig

Fig. 4. Sensory-induced neuroprotection is not necessarily whisker-stimulation dependent. (A and B) Representative data from intrinsic signal optical imaging
of the initial dip for +0 h groups; sham controls and 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining for comparison. All +0 h rats regained whisker functional representation and did not sustain infarct. Quantitative analysis of whisker functional representation in terms of area (left) and amplitude (right) of the initial dip (C) and overshoot (D). Group baseline and 24-h post-pMCAO data are plotted in each graph. Means and SEs are provided for the area and amplitude
of the whisker functional representation; a value of zero indicates no response. Signiﬁcant differences between group baseline and 24-h values (**P < 0.01).
Scale bars indicate 5 mm, and arrows within TTC images indicate the area of the cortex within MCA blood supply territory.

compared with the baseline assessment (F1,14 = 13.08, P = 0.003)
(Fig. 4C). This result reproduced previous data demonstrating a signiﬁcant increase in the initial dip amplitude of rats treated immediately post-occlusion with mechanical whisker stimulation in
anesthetized conditions (Lay et al., 2010, 2013; Davis et al., 2011).

Finally, despite the overall trend of +0 h clipped rats to maintain
baseline or greater levels of whisker functional representation, a
reduction in the area of the initial dip and overshoot was observed in
three of eight rats. In addition, all three of these rats sustained a small
infarct (14.7  4.7 mm3) (Fig. 5). Interestingly, if these animals are

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

Sensory-induced stroke protection in awake rats 3417
whereas unstained (white) areas are indicative of cortical infarct.
The 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride-stained sections were photographed, and the total infarct volume was determined by multiplying
the infarct area of each slice by the slice thickness following the
protocol described previously (Lay et al., 2010, 2011; Davis et al.,
2011).
Statistical analysis
For statistical analysis, the evoked area and amplitude were converted to difference score values (post-occlusion
baseline), with
values away from 0 signifying a change from baseline. A constant
was added to obtain only positive numbers in order to allow for
ANOVA. Scores were transformed with a natural log function to better
satisfy the assumptions of an ANOVA, and inferential statistics were
performed on the transformed data. The alpha level was set to 0.05
and Bonferroni adjustments were applied to account for multiple
contrasts. Separate ANOVA s followed by respective contrasts were
performed for the two phases of the whisker functional representation. The alpha level was set to 0.05 and Bonferroni adjustment
applied to account for multiple contrasts. Student’s t-tests (twotailed) were used in order to compare infarct volumes between
experimental groups.

Results
Experiment 1: early active exploration completely protects the
cortex from ischemic stroke, whereas late exploration leads to
infarct
In order to determine whether self-induced sensorimotor activity,
independent of anesthesia, also protects the brain from stroke, rats
were revived from anesthesia following pMCAO and allowed to
freely explore an enriched environment. Rats that were placed
immediately into the enriched environment following pMCAO
(+0 h) (Fig. 2A) maintained whisker functional representation equivalent to, or greater than, baseline representation and did not sustain
infarct. When revived at 3 h after pMCAO (+3 h), enriched environment exposure resulted in an eliminated whisker functional representation in ﬁve out of eight rats, and substantial cortical infarct
(Fig. 2B). The remaining three rats demonstrated a reduced whisker
functional representation and small infarct. Control rats that underwent sham-pMCAO and were placed into the enriched environment
immediately following surgery (Fig. 2C) maintained consistent whisker functional representation. Enriched environment exposure in
untreated pMCAO controls (Fig. 2D) resulted in diffuse and unlocalized whisker functional representation, and cortical infarct.
(Because histological analysis also conﬁrmed ischemic damage in
untreated pMCAO controls, we feel conﬁdent that the whisker functional representation in these subjects may be categorized as ‘abnormal’, and not simply enlarged or heightened.) Given the diffuse and
unquantiﬁable nature of the whisker functional representation in
untreated pMCAO controls when reassessed at 24 h post-pMCAO,
this group was excluded from further imaging analysis, and work is
currently underway to further elucidate the nature of cortical dysfunction in these rats.
To quantify these ﬁndings, between-subject ANOVAs of imaging
data were conducted between sham controls, +0 h, and +3 h rats at
baseline, and at 24 h following treatment. At baseline, there were
no between-group differences in area or amplitude of the initial dip
(area, F2,21 = 0.11, P = 0.90; amplitude, F2,21 = 0.10, P = 0.91;
ANOVA) or overshoot (area, F2,21 = 0.24, P = 0.79; amplitude,

Fig. 3. Sensory-induced cortical activity protects cortical structure. Box and
whisker plots of infarct volume (mm3) with individual subjects plotted for
sham-pMCAO (gray), pMCAO+no stimulus controls (green), +0 h (blue),
and +3 h (red) groups. N.S., no signiﬁcant differences between groups.

F2,21 = 1.93, P = 0.17; ANOVA). Differences were found between
groups at 24 h after pMCAO for both the initial dip and overshoot
(initial dip: area, F2,21 = 7.74, P = 0.003; amplitude, F2,21 = 11.45,
P = 0.0004; overshoot: area, F2,21 = 8.96, P = 0.002; amplitude,
F2,21 = 6.73, P = 0.01; ANOVA) (Fig. 2E and F). Both sham control
and +0 h groups maintained baseline level whisker functional representation at 24 h after pMCAO. In contrast, the +3 h group demonstrated a signiﬁcant reduction in whisker functional representation at
24 h post-pMCAO (initial dip: area, F1,21 = 19.99, P = 0.0002;
amplitude, F1,21 = 22.30, P = 0.0001; overshoot: area, F1,21 =
18.63, P = 0.0003; amplitude, F1,21 = 16.57, P = 0.0003).
The 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride histology revealed that
rats that explored the enriched environment immediately after
pMCAO (+0 h) did not sustain stroke damage (Fig. 3). In contrast,
all +3 h rats sustained infarct (mean  SE: 45.8  8.2 mm3) at the
24-h post-pMCAO assessment (Fig. 3). Untreated pMCAO controls
sustained infarct (38.4  5.5 mm3) (Fig. 3) equivalent to +3 h rats
(t(14) = 0.66, P = 0.51).
Experiment 2: sensory-induced protection is not whiskerspecific
We further sought to address whether sensory-induced neuroprotection in the enriched environment was whisker-speciﬁc. Two additional groups of rats therefore underwent the same procedures as
+0 h rats and sham controls, except that, after baseline imaging and
prior to pMCAO, both whisker arrays were removed (clipped sham
controls and +0 h clipped) (Figs 1E and F, and 4A and B).
There were no between-group differences in area or amplitude of
the initial dip (area, F1,14 = 2.28, P = 0.15; amplitude, F1,14 = 1.33,
P = 0.27; ANOVA), or overshoot (area, F1,14 = 0.01, P = 0.91; amplitude, F1,14 = 1.61, P = 0.22; ANOVA) at baseline. When assessed at
24 h post-pMCAO, there were no between-group differences in area
of the initial dip (Fig. 4C), area of the overshoot (Fig. 4D), or
amplitude of the overshoot (initial dip: area, F1,14 = 0.04, P = 0.85;
overshoot: area, F1,14 = 0.0008, P = 0.98; amplitude, F1,14 = 0.08,
P = 0.78; ANOVA).
Differences from baseline were found between groups at 24 h for
the amplitude of the initial dip (F1,14 = 4.65, P = 0.0489, ANOVA).
In +0 h clipped rats, the amplitude of the initial dip increased

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

3418 C. C. Lay and R. D. Frostig

Fig. 4. Sensory-induced neuroprotection is not necessarily whisker-stimulation dependent. (A and B) Representative data from intrinsic signal optical imaging
of the initial dip for +0 h groups; sham controls and 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining for comparison. All +0 h rats regained whisker functional representation and did not sustain infarct. Quantitative analysis of whisker functional representation in terms of area (left) and amplitude (right) of the initial dip (C) and overshoot (D). Group baseline and 24-h post-pMCAO data are plotted in each graph. Means and SEs are provided for the area and amplitude
of the whisker functional representation; a value of zero indicates no response. Signiﬁcant differences between group baseline and 24-h values (**P < 0.01).
Scale bars indicate 5 mm, and arrows within TTC images indicate the area of the cortex within MCA blood supply territory.

compared with the baseline assessment (F1,14 = 13.08, P = 0.003)
(Fig. 4C). This result reproduced previous data demonstrating a signiﬁcant increase in the initial dip amplitude of rats treated immediately post-occlusion with mechanical whisker stimulation in
anesthetized conditions (Lay et al., 2010, 2013; Davis et al., 2011).

Finally, despite the overall trend of +0 h clipped rats to maintain
baseline or greater levels of whisker functional representation, a
reduction in the area of the initial dip and overshoot was observed in
three of eight rats. In addition, all three of these rats sustained a small
infarct (14.7  4.7 mm3) (Fig. 5). Interestingly, if these animals are

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

Sensory-induced stroke protection in awake rats 3419

Fig. 5. Sensory-induced cortical activity protects cortical structure. Box and
whisker plots of infarct volume (mm3) for animals that had their whiskers
clipped just prior to enriched environment exposure: sham-pMCAO (green)
and +0 h (blue).

excluded from imaging analysis, the initial dip area, in addition to
the initial dip amplitude, is strengthened (area increases from
11.2  2.5 to 19.4  1.9 mm2) and amplitude signiﬁcantly
increases from 13.1  2.1 to 15.1  2.3 (mean  SE; F1,6 = 20.94,
P = 0.004; ANOVA) in the ﬁve remaining +0 h clipped subjects;
therefore the results were expanded to include area in addition to
amplitude.
Movement within the enriched environment and its potential
relationship to permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion
outcome
To determine whether the revival time from anesthesia or active
exploration played a role in the current functional and structural
ﬁndings, we measured the latency-to-revive from isoﬂurane during
the post-pMCAO observation period (see Materials and methods for
details). All experimental groups revived from anesthesia within
~15 min of cessation (F5,42 = 0.28, P = 0.92; ANOVA). In addition,
work in other laboratories has shown that whisker clipping reduces
whisker-guided exploration in rats, even when rats are placed within
a novel environment (Sun et al., 2010). We observed a similar result
in the +0 h clipped rats: unclipped +0 h rats explored for
26.7  5.3 min (mean  SEM), whereas +0 h clipped rats explored
for only 8.9  3.6 min (t(14) = 2.71, P = 0.01). Interestingly, the
same three subjects that sustained diminished whisker functional
representation and small infarct explored the enriched environment
for 0, 0, and 5.3 min, which on average was equal to 20% of their
group and therefore among the lowest exploration durations
observed. In the +3 h group no correlation was found between the
level of movement within the enriched environment and the size of
infarct as measured by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
(r = 0.004, n = 8, P = 0.993).

Discussion
In order to further optimize the pMCAO rat model of ischemic
stroke for potential translation, we studied the effects of self-induced
sensorimotor activity during ischemia in unrestrained, exploring rats.
Based on previous studies in our laboratory, we hypothesized that
sensory-induced activation within the ischemic territory would play

a critical role in protecting rats that explored an enriched environment immediately post-pMCAO (+0 h), and a harmful role when
exploration was initiated at 3 h post-pMCAO (+3 h). In order to
encourage sensorimotor stimulation via exploratory behavior following pMCAO, we placed revived rats within an enriched environment. An enriched environment promotes exploratory behavior of
rodents (Rosenzweig & Bennett, 1996) leading to adaptive cortical
plasticity (Xerri, 2012), even in rats (Johansson & Ohlsson, 1996)
and mice (Nygren & Wieloch, 2005) that have recently undergone
MCA occlusion, thereby supplying the ischemic cortex with sensorimotor activity soon after ischemic onset.
We found that rats were fully protected from ischemic stroke when
revived immediately (+0 h) following pMCAO, presumably by the
same sensory evoked mechanism that allows blood ﬂow from collaterals into the permanently occluded MCA and therefore enables reperfusion and protection of the ischemic area (Lay et al., 2010).
Furthermore, the protective effect of sensory-evoked cortical activity
is not limited to whisker-evoked activity only. Rats that have had
their whisker arrays removed (clipped) prior to pMCAO and are
placed into the enriched environment immediately post-occlusion also
maintain whisker baseline or greater levels of whisker functional representation, contingent upon active exploration. Speciﬁcally, the
amplitude of the initial dip increased compared with baseline imaging
in these rats. Given that sham controls (which also had their whisker
array clipped) display a consistent whisker functional representation,
we suggest that the increase in the +0 h clipped group’s initial dip
amplitude is indicative of neuroprotective plasticity in response to
sensory stimulation post-pMCAO (Lay et al., 2010; Davis et al.,
2011; Frostig et al., 2013). Through video analysis of all subjects, we
found that the great majority of clipped rats explore the enriched
environment in a manner very similar to rats with intact whiskers (i.e.
clipped rats scan the perimeter of the enriched environment by keeping their body close to the cage walls). As a result, we cannot deﬁnitively rule out that experimental subjects did not receive a limited
degree of whisker stub sensory stimulation. With this caveat in mind,
the whisker array clipped animal data further support the hypothesis
that cortical activation within the MCA ischemic region plays a key
role in protection from ischemic insult by demonstrating that, in the
presence of sensorimotor activity, stroke protection was observed
irrespective of either anesthesia or whisker-speciﬁc stimulus.
If sensorimotor activity is indeed the critical factor, we further
hypothesized that the degree of stroke protection could be modulated
by the amount of neuronal activity evoked within the ischemic territory. The data show that this is plausible. Despite the overall trend of
+0 h whisker array clipped rats to maintain baseline or greater levels
of whisker functional representation, a reduction in whisker functional representation was observed in three of eight rats, and all three
of these rats sustained a small infarct (14.7  4.7 mm3). In addition,
these three rats also engaged in active exploration for 20% of the
average time of their experimental group. The variability in active
exploration in +0 h whisker array clipped rats may have played a critical role in cortical activation post-ischemic onset; by remaining stationary for an extended period of time, these rats may have
minimized the degree of cortical activation of the ischemic area
induced by exploratory activity, and thereby limited its protective
effect. Because this sample of three animals is small, further research
is needed to reveal whether addition of sensory stimulation could
compensate for the lack of movement.
Previous studies have suggested that, instead of protecting the
cortex, early sensorimotor activation augments physical disability
and infarct (Grabowski et al., 1995; Ohlsson & Johansson, 1995;
Johansson & Ohlsson, 1996; Humm et al., 1998; Risedal et al.,

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

3420 C. C. Lay and R. D. Frostig
1999, 2002; Leasure & Schallert, 2004; Holschneider & Maarek,
2008). Bland et al. (2000), in particular, have demonstrated that, in
adult male rats, plaster cast immobilization of the unaffected forepaw and forced early use of the affected forepaw resulted in greater
physical disability (Bland et al., 2000), and noted a signiﬁcant cortical damage after 3-h transient MCA occlusion. Although seemingly
contradictory to the data presented here, we believe that our ﬁndings
are in agreement for two primary reasons. First, similar to the study
of Bland et al. (2000), we also ﬁnd that sensorimotor activity after
3 h results in ischemic damage to the cortex. Second, Bland et al.
(2000) also found that subjects that were not immobilized, but were
allowed to use both paws freely following MCAO occlusion, sustained infarct equivalent to sham-occlusion controls (i.e. no ischemic
cortical damage was sustained). Although this effect was attributed
to the ‘moderate but not severe’ level of ischemia induced in their
model, it is possible that those subjects that were allowed to move
freely beneﬁted from the same type of sensory-induced neuroprotection being described here.
We initiated this study of awake, behaving, ischemic rats in order
to further optimize the pMCAO animal stroke model given that
most human stroke patients are awake and unanesthetized. As in our
previous studies, which used passive mechanical whisker stimulation, we hypothesized that sensory-induced cortical activity within
the ischemic territory plays a central role in protecting the brain
from stroke. We found that active exploration after pMCAO indeed
has the same complete functional and structural protection effects,
ﬁndings that ﬁt our previous studies in anesthetized rats and therefore are independent of the level of arousal. We also observed the
opposite effect, i.e. several cases in which animals, although awake,
remained largely stationary after revival and showed decreased protection, as was the case for immobile +0 h rats. Although seemingly
contradictory, each scenario described above might be captured
within the theoretical framework of cortical activation: exploration
of the enriched environment results in an increase in evoked cortical
activity within the ischemic territory. This activity, in turn, protects
the cortex from impending ischemic stroke when initiated early, and
varying the amount of cortical activity, which is presumably related
to sensorimotor activity within the enriched environment, will correspondingly vary the degree of protection. When compared with our
previous results, it is evident that these effects are independent of
anesthetic effect. The ﬁnding that actively exploring +0 h rats without whisker arrays were also protected from stroke suggests that
their cortical activation of the ischemic area via alternate sensory
and motor activity is sufﬁcient to induce neuroprotection, and that
this effect is not speciﬁc to whisker sensory stimulation.
In the past, treatment for acute ischemic stroke consisted of stabilization, observation, and rehabilitation (Shaikh, 2010). In recent years,
new therapies and a better understanding of the pathophysiology have
led to the concept of ‘Time is Brain,’ and have placed an emphasis
upon early evaluation and treatment (Shaikh, 2010; Frostig et al.,
2013; Xerri & Zennou-Azogui, 2014). If proven to be effective in the
human clinical population, cortical activation treatment presents an
opportunity for the development of a safe and effective treatment
option for acute ischemic stroke that could be initiated rapidly, by ﬁrst
responders or informed friends and family, or accompany current clinical procedures such as intravenous thrombolysis using tissue plasminogen activator.

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Quynh Vu, Patricia Vu, Nina Butingan, and
Amber Nierode for their contribution to the experiments herein. This

work was supported by the NIH-NINDS NS-066001, NS-055832, and
NRSA 1T32DC010775-01. The authors declare no potential conﬂicts of
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Abbreviations
+0 h, whisker stimulation treatment delivered immediately following ischemic onset; +3 h, whisker stimulation treatment delivered at 3 h post-ischemic
onset; MCA, middle cerebral artery; pMCAO, permanent middle cerebral
artery occlusion.

References
Bland, S.T., Schallert, T., Strong, R., Aronowski, J., Grotta, J.C. & Feeney,
D.M. (2000) Early exclusive use of the affected forelimb after moderate
transient focal ischemia in rats: functional and anatomic outcome. Stroke,
31, 1144–1152.
Chen-Bee, C.H., Agoncillo, T., Xiong, Y. & Frostig, R.D. (2007) The triphasic intrinsic signal: implications for functional imaging. J. Neurosci., 27,
4572–4586.
Coyle, P. (1982) Middle cerebral artery occlusion in the young rat. Stroke,
13, 855–859.
Davis, M.F., Lay, C.C., Chen-Bee, C.H. & Frostig, R.D. (2011) Amount but
not pattern of protective sensory stimulation alters recovery after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke, 42, 792–798.
Davis, M.F., Lay, C.C. & Frostig, R.D. (2013) Permanent cerebral vessel
occlusion via double ligature and transection. J. Vis. Exp., 77, e50418.
Frostig, R.D. & Chen-Bee, C.H. (2012) The use of intrinsic signal optical
imaging for mapping cortical function. In Brette, R. & Destexhe, A. (Eds),
Handbook of Neuronal Activity Measurements. Cambridge University
Press.
Frostig, R.D., Lieke, E.E., Ts’o, D.Y. & Grinvald, A. (1990) Cortical functional architecture and local coupling between neuronal activity and the
microcirculation revealed by in vivo high-resolution optical imaging of
intrinsic signals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 87, 6082–6086.
Frostig, R.D., Lay, C.C. & Davis, M.F. (2013) A rat’s whiskers point the
way toward a novel stimulus-dependent, protective stroke therapy. Neuroscientist, 19, 313–328.
Grabowski, M., Sorensen, J.C., Mattsson, B., Zimmer, J. & Johansson,
B.B. (1995) Inﬂuence of an enriched environment and cortical grafting
on functional outcome in brain infarcts of adult rats. Exp. Neurol., 133,
96–102.
Grinvald, A., Lieke, E., Frostig, R.D., Gilbert, C.D. & Wiesel, T.N. (1986)
Functional architecture of cortex revealed by optical imaging of intrinsic
signals. Nature, 324, 361–364.
Hancock, A.M., Lay, C.C., Davis, M.F. & Frostig, R.D. (2013) Sensory
stimulation-based complete protection from ischemic stroke remains stable
at 4 months post-occlusion of MCA. J. Neurol. Disord., 1, 135.
Holschneider, D.P. & Maarek, J.M. (2008) Brain maps on the go: functional
imaging during motor challenge in animals. Methods, 45, 255–261.
Humm, J.L., Kozlowski, D.A., James, D.C., Gotts, J.E. & Schallert, T.
(1998) Use-dependent exacerbation of brain damage occurs during an early
post-lesion vulnerable period. Brain Res., 783, 286–292.
Johansson, B.B. & Ohlsson, A.L. (1996) Environment, social interaction, and
physical activity as determinants of functional outcome after cerebral
infarction in the rat. Exp. Neurol., 139, 322–327.
Lay, C.C., Davis, M.F., Chen-Bee, C.H. & Frostig, R.D. (2010) Mild sensory stimulation completely protects the adult rodent cortex from ischemic
stroke. PLoS One, 5, e11270.
Lay, C.C., Davis, M.F., Chen-Bee, C.H. & Frostig, R.D. (2011) Mild sensory stimulation reestablishes cortical function during the acute phase of
ischemia. J. Neurosci., 31, 11495–11504.
Lay, C.C., Jacobs, N., Hancock, A.M., Zhou, Y. & Frostig, R.D. (2013)
Early stimulation treatment provides complete sensory-induced protection
from ischemic stroke under isoﬂurane anesthesia. Eur. J. Neurosci., 38,
2445–2452.
Leasure, J.L. & Schallert, T. (2004) Consequences of forced disuse of the
impaired forelimb after unilateral cortical injury. Behav. Brain Res., 150,
83–91.
Niiro, M., Simon, R.P., Kadota, K. & Asakura, T. (1996) Proximal branching patterns of middle cerebral artery (MCA) in rats and their inﬂuence
on the infarct size produced by MCA occlusion. J. Neurosci. Meth., 64,
19–23.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

Sensory-induced stroke protection in awake rats 3421
Nygren, J. & Wieloch, T. (2005) Enriched environment enhances recovery of
motor function after focal ischemia in mice, and downregulates the transcription factor NGFI-A. J. Cerebr. Blood F. Met., 25, 1625–1633.
Ohlsson, A.L. & Johansson, B.B. (1995) Environment inﬂuences functional
outcome of cerebral infarction in rats. Stroke, 26, 644–649.
Risedal, A., Zeng, J. & Johansson, B.B. (1999) Early training may exacerbate brain damage after focal brain ischemia in the rat. J. Cerebr. Blood
F. Met., 19, 997–1003.
Risedal, A., Mattsson, B., Dahlqvist, P., Nordborg, C., Olsson, T. & Johansson, B.B. (2002) Environmental inﬂuences on functional outcome after a
cortical infarct in the rat. Brain Res. Bull., 58, 315–321.
Roger, V.L., Go, A.S., Lloyd-Jones, D.M., Benjamin, E.J., Berry, J.D.,
Borden, W.B., Bravata, D.M., Dai, S., Ford, E.S., Fox, C.S., Fullerton,
H.J., Gillespie, C., Hailpern, S.M., Heit, J.A., Howard, V.J., Kissela,
B.M., Kittner, S.J., Lackland, D.T., Lichtman, J.H., Lisabeth, L.D., Makuc,
D.M., Marcus, G.M., Marelli, A., Matchar, D.B., Moy, C.S., Mozaffarian,
D., Mussolino, M.E., Nichol, G., Paynter, N.P., Soliman, E.Z., Sorlie,
P.D., Sotoodehnia, N., Turan, T.N., Virani, S.S., Wong, N.D., Woo, D. &
Turner, M.B. (2012) Heart disease and stroke statistics - 2012 update: a
report from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 125, e2–e220.

Rosenzweig, M.R. & Bennett, E.L. (1996) Psychobiology of plasticity:
effects of training and experience on brain and behavior. Behav. Brain
Res., 78, 57–65.
Sahakian, B., Robbins, T. & Iversen, S. (1977) The effects of isolation rearing on exploration in the rat. Anim. Learn. Behav., 5, 193–198.
Shaikh, S. (2010) Anesthesia considerations for the patient with acute ischemic stroke. Semin. Cardiothorac. Vasc. Anesth., 14, 62–63.
Sun, M.L., Zhang, X.B., Sun, X., Zhao, M.H. & Yu, Y.Q. (2010) Effect of
whisker trimming on behavior and barrel cortex of rat. Chinese J. Appl.
Physiol., 26, 354–358.
Ts’o, D.Y., Frostig, R.D., Lieke, E.E. & Grinvald, A. (1990) Functional
organization of primate visual cortex revealed by high resolution optical
imaging. Science, 249, 417–420.
Xerri, C. (2012) Plasticity of cortical maps: multiple triggers for adaptive
reorganization following brain damage and spinal cord injury. Neuroscientist, 18, 133–148.
Xerri, C. & Zennou-Azogui, Y.i. (2014) Early and moderate sensory
stimulation exerts a protective effect on perilesion representations of
somatosensory cortex after focal ischemic damage. PLoS One, 9,
e99767.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3413–3421

