Cytotherapy, 2015; 17: 1200e1212

Bone marrow stromal cell transplantation through tail vein injection
promotes angiogenesis and vascular endothelial growth factor
expression in cerebral infarct area in rats

ZHIHUA YANG1,2,*, XUELI CAI3,*, ANDING XU2,*, FENGXIA XU2 & QIN LIANG1
1

Department of Neurology, the First Afﬁliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China,
Department of Neurology, the First Afﬁliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China, and 3Department of
Neurology, the Fifth Afﬁliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical college, Zhejiang, China

2

Abstract
Background aims. This study sought to identify correlations between vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression
after tail-vein injection of rat-derived bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) and neurogenesis and angiogenesis in cerebral
infarct of rats. Methods. Rats with intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion were injected in a tail vein with Hoechstlabeled BMSCs. Functional recovery from cerebral infarction was observed through the use of a locomotion score. The
brains of injected rats were sliced, and Hoechst-labeled BMSCs in the infarct and peri-infarct areas and subventricular zone
(SVZ) were detected with the use of ﬂuorescence microscopy. Ki-67 (as a cell proliferation marker) and VEGF expression
were determined by means of immunohistochemistry. Neuroﬁbril formation and angiogenesis were examined by means of
Bielschowsky staining. Results. Within 1 to 2 weeks after BMSC injection, rats showed signiﬁcantly improved locomotion
scores compared with rats without BMSC injection (P < 0.01). Viable BMSCs were found in the peri-infarct area. The
numbers of Ki-67epositive and VEGF-positive cells in the peri-infarct area and SVZ of injected rats were signiﬁcantly
increased compared with the control group (P < 0.01). Numerous new vessels, neuroﬁbrils and anastomosed vasculatures
were present in the infarct area. These neuroﬁbrils mainly surrounded the neovasculatures. Conclusions. These results
indicate that BMSC-transplantation in rats through tail vein injection can increase neurogenesis, perhaps as the result of
VEGF-mediated and/or Ki-67emediated angiogenesis.
Key Words: cerebral infarction, mesenchymal stromal cells, Ki-67, VEGF

Introduction
Transplantation of bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs) improves the recovery of neuronal function after cerebral infarction in rat models [1e4].
Among all BMSC transplantation methods, vein injection is the simplest and most clinically practical
[5]. Injection of BMSCs through tail veins has been
shown to improve neurological recovery from cerebral infarction in rats. Viable BMSCs have been
recovered from the infarction area up to 1 year after
injection [6]. Although these cells express neural
proteins, studies to date have failed to demonstrate
that BMSCs can form synapses to connect with other
neurons to rebuild neural networks.
Improved neurological recovery from cerebral
infarction after BMSC transplantation may be due to
the upregulation of many brain-derived neurotrophic

factors and cytokines [7]. These factors increase cell
growth, inhibit apoptosis, protect neurons from
ischemia and induce angiogenesis [8,9].
Newly synthesized vessels are crucial for the
survival of neurons, growth of neuroﬁbrils and
formation of synaptic connections after cerebral
ischemia. The correlation between BMSC transplantation and angiogenesis was ﬁrst demonstrated
by the observation that transplantation of BMSCs
induces angiogenesis in the ischemic boundary
zone of rats having had a stroke [10]. Although the
mechanism remains unclear, BMSC transplantation
appears to affect upregulation of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF receptor 2 [11].
However, vein injection of BMSCs has not been
found to induce a similar effect when compared with
direct injection of cells into the injured region.

*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Anding Xu, MD, Department of Neurology, the First Afﬁliated Hospital of Jinan University, No. 613 HuangPu Avenue West, Tianhe
District, Guangzhou, China. E-mail: andingxu@gmail.com
(Received 20 October 2014; accepted 8 June 2015)
ISSN 1465-3249 Copyright Ó 2015, International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.06.005

Neurogenesis in cerebral infarction
VEGF induces neuroprotection, neurogenesis
and angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia
[12,13]. Ischemia stimulates VEGF expression in the
brain [14e18]. VEGF also promotes the formation
of new cerebral blood vessels [19,20]. Introduction
of VEGF to the surface of the brain reduces infarct
size [21]; intravenous VEGF improves neurological
function [18]; intracerebroventricular injection of
VEGF protects the brain against ischemia [22].
Furthermore, intraventricular injection of antiVEGF antibody increases infarct size after focal
cerebral ischemia [23]. VEGF, along with brainderived neurotrophic factor, has been implicated in
the regulation of brain neurogenesis by promoting
the proliferation and differentiation of neuronal
precursors [24,25] and acting as a direct mitogen on
neuronal precursors [26].
Ki-67 is a protein whose expression is tightly linked
to cell proliferation and is required for progression
through mitosis [27]. Ki-67 is frequently used as a
marker for the detection of newly synthesized cells in
damaged brains after infarction. In the present study,
we demonstrate that BMSCs, introduced into rats
with intraluminal middle cerebral-artery occlusion
through vein injection, migrate to the peri-infarct area.
Transplantation of BMSCs was found to induce
higher expression of VEGF as well as a number of Ki67epositive cells, both of which are key features of
neuroﬁbril growth and vascular synthesis.

Methods
Isolation and culturing of rat BMSCs
Three Sprague-Dawley rats, age 3 to 4 weeks and
weighing 50 to 60 g, were killed by neck dislocation
and soaked in 75% alcohol for 3 to 5 min. Both ends
of the femoral epiphysis were cut off, and the marrow
cavities were ﬂushed with 10 mL of LeDulbecco’s
modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (L-DMEM)/F12 medium
repeatedly until femurs turned white. Each cell suspension was gently pipetted to separate cells and
transferred to a 15-mL centrifuge tube and centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. The cell pellet was
suspended with 6 to 8 mL of L-DMEM/F12 medium
containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), plated in
25-cm2 ﬂasks and cultured at 37 C in an atmosphere
of 5% CO2 and saturated humidity. The cells were
subcultured every 3 to 4 days. The cells were sorted
by use of ﬂow cytometry with markers speciﬁc for
CD29(þ), CD44(þ), CD31() and CD45() to
collect BMSCs [28]. The phenotype of BMSC is
shown in Supplementary Figure 5. The cells were
labeled with 10 mg/mL Hoechst 33342 in DMEM/
F12 medium before being administered through tail
veil injection.

1201

Animal preparation
Three days before the intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) procedure [29], SpragueDawley rats, weighing 250 to 300 g, were selected by use
of a locomotion test [30] (Beam Walking Test,
described in Supplementary Methods). Twenty-four
rats, with an average score >9 on three tests, were
selected. The MCAO procedure was performed on the
rats, as described in Supplementary Methods. Three
days after the procedure, the rats were randomly divided
into control and transplantation groups (n ¼ 12 for each
group). The rats in the control group were injected with
1 mL DMEM/F12 medium through the tail vein. The
rats in the transplantation group were injected with
Hoechst 33342-labeled BMSCs (5  106 cells/mL
DMEM/F12 medium) through the tail vein. The two
respective study groups were assessed again by means of
the locomotion test before the injection and 1 or 2 weeks
after injection, to measure functional recovery.
Brain slices and ﬂuorescent microscopy
After the locomotion test, each rat was anesthetized
with the use of abdominal injection of 1% sodium
pentobarbital (50 mg/kg); the chest was opened to
expose the heart, and the right atrial appendage was
cut open. The rat was rapidly perfused with 300 mL
of saline at 4 C saline, followed by 300 mL 4%
paraformaldehyde (pH 7.4) at the same temperature
through the left ventricle. Craniotomy was then
carried out. The brain of the rat was removed from
the skull and submerged in 4% paraformaldehyde
(pH 7.4) at 4 C for 4 h. After the 4-h ﬁxation, each
brain was dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol
solutions, cleaned with the use of xylene and
embedded in parafﬁn. Three, 4-mm-thick serial sections were sliced from the brain at a distance of
1.6 mm, 0.4 mm and 2.8 mm from the anterior
fontanelle. The selected section is shown graphically
in Supplementary Figure 6. To observe the survival
and distribution of Hoechst 33342elabeled BMSCs,
the slices were examined by use of ﬂuorescence microscopy (Olympus Corporation) with ultraviolet
light at an excitation wave length of 365 nm. Three
ﬁelds were randomly selected, and the average
number of positive cells in the region was recorded.
Latex perfusion
The latex perfusion solution was prepared by mixing
carbon ink (Hero) and latex (60% Natural Latex
Concentrate, Tavorn Rubber Industry), at a ratio of
1:20. Latex perfusion solution was connected to a
perfusion device and intravenous pump. After the rat
was anesthetized, the latex perfusion solution was

1202

Z. Yang et al.

injected into aortic arch at a rate of 12.8 mL/min. The
rat was then euthanized, and the brain was taken and
ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 h, followed
by photographic imaging. Image-Pro Plus software
(Media Cybernetics Inc) was used for area calculations.
Quantitative determination of the vessel area by uptake of
ﬂuorescein isothiocyanateedextran
After anesthetization, 1 mL of ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran (50 mg/mL) solution was
injected into the tail vein of the rats. After 2 min, the
rat was killed; the brain was obtained and cut into 2mm to 8-mm blocks. After ﬁxation for 24 h in 4%
paraformaldehyde, the brains were dehydrated and
ﬁxed in a solution of 30% sucrose and 4% paraformaldehyde for 48 h. The resultant tissue was then
divided into 50-mm frozen slices and visualized by
use of an EVOS f1 ﬂuorescence microscope (AMG).
Image-Pro Plus software (Media Cybernetics Inc)
was used for area calculations.
Immunohistochemistry and Bielschowsky silver staining
Parafﬁn-embedded brains were sliced at a distance of
1.6 mm, 0.2 mm and 2.8 mm from the anterior
fontanelle. Three, 3-mm-thick serial sections were obtained from each site. The brain slices were ﬁrst
deparafﬁnized, followed by antigen retrieval and
staining with antieki-67 antibody (rabbit anti-rat,
1:250 dilution; Abcam) and anti-VEGF antibody
(mouse anti-rat, 1:200 dilution; Abcam) at 4 C overnight. The negative experimental control had
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in place of antiVEGF antibody. Detection was achieved with the use
of a goat anti-rabbit/-mouse secondary antibody
immunohistochemistry kit (Dako), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The brain slices were ﬁrst
deparafﬁnized and re-hydrolyzed and then were incubated in 236 mmol/L of silver nitrate solution in the
dark for 24 h. The slices were subsequently washed
with distilled water and dipped into freshly prepared
silver ammonia solution for 5 min until they turned
light brown. The slices were then dipped into 10%
formalin solution for 10 min, becoming black. The
slices were continuously dipped into 49 mmol/L gold
chloride solution to enrich the colors. The slices were
treated with 316 mmol/L sodium thiosulfate solution
for 2 min to remove the unreduced silver and then were
washed with tap water for 15 min. The slices were
dehydrated with the use of 95% ethanol, 100% ethanol
and xylene and then were mounted with resinous
medium. The images of slices, 0.20 mm from the
anterior fontanelle at 200 magniﬁcation, were acquired and analyzed. Three ﬁelds were randomly
selected from of the infarct area, subventricular zone

(SVZ) and peri-infarct area. The average number of
positive cells in these three regions was recorded.
Statistical analyses
Continuous variables, at each time point, from the
control and transplantation groups were compared
by use of the Mann-Whitney U test. The Wilcoxon
signed-rank test was used to compare the difference
between measurements at 1 and 2 weeks after
transplantation. Data are presented as median
values. All statistical assessments were two-sided and
evaluated at the 0.05 level of signiﬁcance. Statistical
analyses were performed with the use of SPSS 13.0
statistics software (SPSS).
Results
Neurological functional recovery after BMSC
transplantation
Before transplantation, the median locomotion scores
of both the control and transplantation groups were
not signiﬁcantly different; both were w2. By weeks 1
and 2 after transplantation, median locomotion
scores of the transplantation groups (5 and 7,
respectively) were signiﬁcantly higher than that of the
control groups (3 and 5, respectively; P < 0.001;
Figure 1). Furthermore, the transplantation group
had signiﬁcantly higher scores at 2 weeks after transplantation, compared with the same group at 1 week
after transplantation (P < 0.001). No signiﬁcant difference was observed in the control group, however,
in comparing scores before and 1 week after transplantation (2 and 3, respectively). By 2 weeks after
transplantation, the locomotion score for the control
group was signiﬁcantly improved (5, compared with
scores at 1 and 2 weeks; P < 0.001). These results
indicated that transplantation of BMSCs through tail
vein injection effectively aided neurological functional
recovery after MCAO-induced cerebral infarction.
Infarct volume of MCAO was reduced after BMSC
transplantation
As shown in Supplementary Figure 1, infarct volume
was signiﬁcantly decreased by weeks 1 and 2 after
transplantation with BMSCs, compared with the
control group (P < 0.001).
Translocation of BMSCs
One week after transplantation, no Hoechst 33342
signal was evident in the peri-infarct area of rats in the
control group (Figure 2A) after excitation with 365 nm
ultraviolet light. In contrast, at 1 week after

Neurogenesis in cerebral infarction

1203

Figure 1. Locomotion scores of rats after MCAO-induced cerebral infarction. There was no signiﬁcant difference in the locomotion scores between the two groups before transplantation.
However, After transplantation, increase in the locomotion score
was observed in the control group by week 2 after transplantation).
In the BMSC transplantation group, the locomotion score
increased (**P < 0.001) by 1 week after transplantation. The
locomotion score further increased by 2 weeks after transplantation (*P < 0.01).

transplantation, the treatment group demonstrated
abundant Hoechst 33342 signals from BMSC nuclei
present in the peri-infarct area, in the form of round,
blue spots (Figure 2B, red arrow). A similar result was
observed 2 weeks after transplantation (Figure 2C,D).
These results are quantiﬁed in Figure 2E. No Hoechst
signal was detected in the infarct area and subventricular zone (SVZ; data not shown), indicating that
injected BMSCs localized, exclusively, to the periinfarct area. These results support the notion that
BMSCs effectively relocate to, and remain viable in,
the peri-infarct area after tail vein injection.

Expression of Ki-67 after BMSC transplantation
As shown in Figure 3AeD, at 1 and 2 weeks after
transplantation, Ki-67epositive cells (red arrows)
could be observed in the peri-infarct area in both the
control and transplantation groups. However, the
number of Ki-67epositive cells in the transplantation groups was signiﬁcantly higher than in
the control groups (Figure 3E, P < 0.05). When
comparing the presence of Hoechst-labeled BMSCs
and Ki-67epositive cells in the peri-infarct area, the
number of Ki-67epositive cells was signiﬁcantly
higher than the number of Hoechst-labeled BMSCs
at 1 and 2 weeks after transplantation (Figure 3F,
P < 0.05). These observations indicated that
injected BMSCs could enhance endogenous cell
proliferation in the peri-infarct region of rats that
received transplanted BMSCs. Ki-67epositive cells
were present in the SVZ of both the control and
transplantation groups at 1 and 2 weeks after

Figure 2. Localization of Hoechst-labeled BMSCs. In the periinfarct area, Hoechst-positive cells were observed in the transplantation groups (B and D, blue dots) but not in the control
groups (A and C). The number of Hoechst-positive cells at 1 and 2
weeks after transplantation was not signiﬁcantly different (E).

transplantation (Figure 4AeD). The number of Ki67epositive cells in the transplantation groups was
also signiﬁcantly higher than that in the control
groups in the SVZ (Figure 4E, P < 0.05). These
results were consistent with the view that the
injected BMSCs could effectively increase cell
proliferation not only at the site of their location
(peri-infarct area) but also in a remote area (SVZ).
Synthesis of neuroﬁbrils and vessels in the infarct zone
As shown in Figure 5A,C, at 1 and 2 weeks after
transplantation, several oval structures (neovasculature) and brown ﬁbers (neuroﬁbrils) were
present in the infarct zone in the control groups. A
greater number of oval structures of different sizes
and brown ﬁbers were observed in the infarct zone
in the transplantation groups (Figure 5B,D). Neuroﬁbrils were distributed around the neovasculature
in the transplantation group and not in the control
rats, indicating an association between angiogenesis
and neurogenesis. The numbers of neovasculatures
and neuroﬁbrils in the transplantation groups were
signiﬁcantly higher than in the control groups
(Figure 5E,F; P < 0.05). Furthermore, when
comparing the numbers of neovasculatures in the

1204

Z. Yang et al.

Figure 3. Expression of Ki-67 in the peri-infarct area. (AeD) After immunohistochemistry, Ki-67epositive cells were stained brown (red
arrows). (E) In the peri-infarct area, the expression of Ki-67 in the transplantation group was signiﬁcantly higher than in the corresponding area of the control groups at 1 and 2 weeks after transplantation (*P < 0.05). However, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the
expression of Ki-67 in the peri-infarct area over time in either the control or transplantation groups. (F) The number of Ki-67epositive
cells was also signiﬁcantly higher than the number of Hoechst-positive cells in the transplantation groups at 1 and 2 weeks after
transplantation (*P < 0.05).

Neurogenesis in cerebral infarction

1205

Figure 4. Expression of Ki-67 in the SVZ. (AeD) After immunohistochemistry, Ki-67epositive cells were stained brown (red arrows). (E)
In the SVZ, expression of Ki-67 in the transplantation group was signiﬁcantly higher than that in corresponding regions of the control groups
at both 1 and 2 weeks after transplantation (*P < 0.05). However, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the expression of Ki-67 in the SVZ
over time in either test group.

transplantation groups between 1 and 2 weeks after
transplantation, the number in the second week was
signiﬁcantly higher than the number in the ﬁrst
week (Figure 5E; P < 0.05). The numbers of neuroﬁbrils in the control and transplantation groups at
the second week after transplantation were,
respectively, higher than those in the control and
transplantation groups at the ﬁrst week after transplantation (Figure 5F; P < 0.05).
Angiogenesis in the infarction area
Angiogenesis in the infarction area was signiﬁcantly
enhanced in the transplantation groups when
compared with the control group (P < 0.001,

Figure 6). As shown in Figure 7A-E, the latex
perfusion experiment revealed that BMSC transplantation could promote the vascular anastomosis
between cerebral pial vasculature and the artery in
the infarction area. In addition, the abundance and
caliber, as well as the total area of anastomosed
vasculatures on the surface of the cerebral hemisphere, were signiﬁcantly increased in transplanted
rats compared with the control group (P < 0.001,
Figure 7F). The brain slides from areas of anastomosed vasculatures showed localization of Hoechst
33342elabeled BMSCs along the vascular walls
(Supplementary Figure 2). This suggests that transplanted BMSCs may translocate to the anterior cerebral artery, where some may differentiate into

1206

Z. Yang et al.

Figure 5. Neovasculatures and neuroﬁbrils in the infarct area. (AeD) The vessels appear as oval structures of different sizes (red arrows), and
neuroﬁbrils as dark brown ﬁbers (yellow arrows). (E,F) The numbers of neovasculatures and nerve ﬁbers in the transplantation group were
signiﬁcantly increased compared with that in the control group at 1 week after transplantation (*P < 0.05), and at 2 weeks after transplantation
(**P < 0.005). Moreover, at 2 weeks after transplantation, the number of neovasculatures and nerve ﬁbers signiﬁcantly increased in the transplantation group, although the number of the nerve ﬁbers also signiﬁcantly increased in the control rats (all P < 0.005).

Neurogenesis in cerebral infarction

1207

Figure 6. Angiogenesis in the infarction area was quantiﬁed by measurement of FITC-dextran uptake. (A-D) Vessel in the infarction area
(green). (E) Quantiﬁcation of the vessel area in the infarct zones of rats from respective control and transplant groups (n ¼ 5 for each group).
***P < 0.001.

endothelium in the anastomosed cerebral pial
vasculature and promote vascular anastomosis.
Expression of VEGF after BMSC transplantation
As shown in Figure 8A,C, at 1 and 2 weeks after
transplantation, few VEGF-positive cells were detected in the samples from control rats, whereas samples
from animals in the BMSC-transplantation group
demonstrated an accumulation of VEGF-positive

cells (Figure 8B,D). The number of VEGF-positive
cells in the transplantation group was signiﬁcantly
higher than that in the control groups (Figure 8E,
P < 0.05). The total number of VEGF-positive
cells in the transplantation group signiﬁcantly
increased from 1 to 2 weeks after transplantation
(a, P < 0.05). The Western blot data revealed
increased expression of VEGF in the infarct zone of
the transplantation group when compared with that
of the control group (Supplementary Figure 3).

1208

Z. Yang et al.

Figure 7. Vascular anastomosis in the infarct zone. (A-E) Latex perfusion experiment was used to show the cerebral pial vasculature.
Rectangular image shows a 2-cm2 area (dashed line) in the vascular anastomosis, between cerebral pial vasculature and the artery in the
infarct zone, magniﬁed (see inset) for analysis. At 1 week after transplantation, some anastomosed vasculature was observed in the transplantation group (white arrows) but not in the control group. At 2 weeks after transplantation, anastomosed vasculature in the transplantation group increased signiﬁcantly, whereas no such increase was noted for the control group. (F) Quantiﬁcation of the anastomosed
vascular area in two groups (n ¼ 5 for each group). ***P < 0.001.

Compared with samples from control animals,
VEGF expression and VEGF receptor (VEGFR)
expression in the anastomosed vasculature of the
infarction area were signiﬁcantly elevated in
the BMSC transplantation group (P < 0.001,
Supplementary Figure 4). This result suggests that
VEGF/VEGFR signaling may play a role in BMSCinduced angiogenesis.

Discussion
BMSC transplantation by various routes has been
explored, with the goal of improving functional

recovery from brain injury. Of all routes explored,
vein injection of BMSCs is the simplest, most practical and easiest for clinical applications. In this
study, infarct rats were transplanted with Hoechstlabeled BMSCs through a tail vein injection. We
used a dose of 5  106 cells/rat(in 1 mL PBS) for
transplantation. A preliminary study has been conducted to determine the appropriate cell dose (dose
of 5  105, 5  106, and 5  107 cells/rat were
tested). The results showed that the dose of 5  105
cells/rat was too low, so that there were only a few
Hoechst-labeled BMSCs found in the infarction
area. As for the dose of 5  107 cells/rat, the mortality
rate of transplanted rats was high because of injection

Neurogenesis in cerebral infarction

1209

Figure 8. Expression of VEGF in the infarct area. (AeD) VEGF-positive cells were stained brown after immunohistochemistry (red arrows).
(E) Expression of VEGF in the transplantation group was signiﬁcantly higher than that in the control groups at 1 and 2 weeks after transplantation (*P < 0.05). In addition, the expression of VEGF signiﬁcantly increased over time in the transplantation group (P ¼ 0.046).

of high cell doses, which caused cell aggregation and
pulmonary embolism. Therefore, the dose of 5  106
cells/rat was chosen. One and 2 weeks after transplantation, the BMSCs were found localized exclusively to the peri-infarct area. However, cell
proliferation was limited only to the peri-infarct area;
rather, active proliferation was observed in both the
peri-infarct area and the SVZ. The number of neovasculatures and neuroﬁbrils was signiﬁcantly higher
in the infarct area of the animals who had received
the transplanted BMSCs compared with control.
Enhanced expression of VEGF in the infarct area was
also observed after transplantation. Injection of
BMSCs increased the locomotion scores of rats with

brain infarcts. These results support the view that
injection of BMSCs enhances neuron regeneration
and angiogenesis, with more neurological function
recovered after infarction.
MSCs from various species have been shown to
be effective for the therapy of stroke. However, a
review of MSCs from various species showed that
there is currently no consensus as to which cell surface markers should be tested for in any species [31].
The International Society for Cellular Therapy
(ISCT) proposes criteria to deﬁne human MSCs
(positive for CD105, CD73 and CD90 and negative
for CD45, CD34, CD14 or CD11b, CD79a or
CD19) [32]. BMSCs in our study were uniformly

1210

Z. Yang et al.

negative for the hematopoietic lineage marker CD31
and the leukocyte common antigen CD45 but positive for CD29 and CD44, which are routinely used to
characterize the MSCs [28,33,34]. These CD29and CD44-positive BMSCs displayed no visible
changes in their morphology, phenotypic properties
and growth patterns even through 15 passages and
have highly proliferative potential as reported previously [35]. Therefore, these highly proliferative
BMSCs could be easily expanded to a sufﬁcient
amount for transplantation.
Intravenous Hoechst-labeled BMSCs have been
observed migrating toward the infarct area and were
localized in the peri-infarct area. Very few BMSCs
transform to neurons or neuroglial cells [6]. We
found that Hoechst-labeled BMSCs were limited to
the peri-infarct area; cell proliferation was active in
the peri-infarct area and especially in the SVZ. This
result suggests that the enhancement of cell proliferation by BMSC transplantation may occur indirectly. Transplanted BMSCs may utilize a paracrine
mechanism to enhance cell proliferation, such as the
secretion of growth factors or cytokines [36,37],
including VEGF, basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
(bFGF), epidermal growth factor, granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor, Flt-3 ligand,
stem cell factor, and interleukin-6, -7, -8, -11, -12,
-14 and -15 [1e4,7e9]. Among these factors, bFGF
may be involved in endogenous neuron proliferation
in the peri-infarct area and SVZ after BMSC transplantation and may inhibit neuron apoptosis in the
peri-infarct area [7e9]. These factors may also help
promote angiogenesis in the peri-infarct area.
In the present study, we found that BMSC
transplantation promoted angiogenesis in the
infarction area. We examined two potential mechanisms for BMSC-mediated angiogenesis. The ﬁrst
one was that BMSCs might differentiate into endothelium cells in the anastomosed cerebral pial
vasculature, promoting vascular anastomosis.
Another is that the transplanted BMSCs secrete
VEGF to enhance the proliferation of endothelial
cells, which subsequently drives vascular anastomosis. The BMSC-mediated vascular anastomosis
between the cerebral pial vasculature and the artery
would promote the angiogenesis in the infarction
area, which is good for regeneration in the infarction
area and functional nerve recovery.
The importance of angiogenesis in the periinfarct area has been established with regard to the
survival of neurons, growth of neuroﬁbrils and the
formation of synapses [8e10]. In the present study,
numerous neuroﬁbrils and vessels of different sizes
were observed in the infarct area of the brains of rats
that received transplanted BMSCs. Most of the
newly formed neuroﬁbrils were distributed around

these neovasculatures. In the control rats, fewer
neovasculatures and neuroﬁbrils were present in the
infarct area. The results suggest a correlation between angiogenesis and neurological repair in the
infarct area.
Furthermore, BMSC transplantation resulted in
an accumulation of VEGF-positive cells in the infarct
area. VEGF is considered the most important factor
for post-infarction angiogenesis. Circulating VEGF
binds to VEGF receptors on endothelial cells, triggering a tyrosine kinase pathway that drives endothelial cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis
[38]. VEGF-positive cells were primarily localized
to neovasculatures. BMSC transplantationeinduced
angiogenesis may be elicited by the upregulation of
endogenous VEGF and VEGFR2 [10]. VEGF, along
with angioproteins (eg, VEGF-A), is involved in
regeneration of vessels and maturation of neovasculatures [11]. bFGF, which is secreted from
BMSCs, can increase the expression of VEGF in
astrocytes in the peri-infarct area [11]. VEGF-A can
stimulate the release of endothelial progenitor cells
from bone marrow to facilitate angiogenesis after
infarction [11]. Besides angiogenesis, intracerebroventricular injection of VEGF protects the
brain against ischemia [22]. This early neuroprotective action progresses before angiogenesis,
possibly through activation of the phosphoinositol-3kinase (PI3K-Akt) pathway [22]. VEGF also protects
HN33 mouse hippocampal neuron X neuroblastoma
cells from death induced by serum withdrawal [26]
and reduces hypoxic death of both HN33 cells and
cultured cerebral cortical neurons [39,40]. VEGF is
further involved in neurogenesis; it stimulates axonal
outgrowth and improves the survival of cultured superior cervical and dorsal-route ganglion neurons
[41,42] and enhances the survival of mesencephalic
neurons in organotypic explant cultures [43]. Along
with the angiogenesis in the infarct area and the
improvement of micro-environments, the proliferation of neurons and neuroglial cells, the growth of
neuroﬁbrils are also enhanced. These elements are
reciprocal factors for the repair of the infarct area
[16].
Several main ﬁndings of this study have been
reported, such as that BMSC transplantation resulted in neurological functional recovery, neuronal
proliferation, VEGF expression and angiogenesis
[10,44]. However, this study further showed that
injected BMSCs translocated to peri-infarct area,
followed by vascular anastomosis between cerebral
pial vasculature and the artery in the infarction area,
which is important for collateral ﬂow in our MCAO
model. One of the limitations in this study is that
we chose Ki 67 as a proliferative marker. Although
Ki67 was used as a cell proliferative marker of

Neurogenesis in cerebral infarction
neurogenesis in several recently published studies
[4e6], more appropriate neurogenesis proliferation
markers such as MCM2, NeuroD or DCX could
have been used. This limitation should be considered
in the future studies.
Our study conﬁrms that intravenous BMSCs can
increase functional neurological recovery through
angiogenesis, cell proliferation and neuroﬁbril synthesis. VEGF upregulation in the infarct area may
play an important role in these events, although the
detailed mechanism of how this occurs will require
further investigation.
Acknowledgments
The project was funded by Guangdong Technology
Department (2009B030801354), Foundation by
Guangzhou Education Bureau (61092). This work
was also supported by Zhejiang Medical Association
Clinical Research Foundation (Grant No. 2013zycA146) during the revision stage.
Disclosure of interests: The authors have no
commercial, proprietary, or ﬁnancial interest in the
products or companies described in this article.

References
[1] Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Lu D, Lu M, et al. Therapeutic beneﬁt of intravenous administration of bone marrow
stromal cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 2001;32:
1005e11.
[2] Li Y, Chopp M. Marrow stromal cell transplantation in
stroke and traumatic brain injury. Neurosci Lett 2009;456:
120e3.
[3] Pavlichenko N, Sokolova I, Vijde S, Shvedova E,
Alexandrov G, Krouglyakov P, et al. Mesenchymal stem cells
transplantation could be beneﬁcial for treatment of experimental ischemic stroke in rats. Brain Res 2008;1233:203e13.
[4] Sasaki M, Honmou O, Kocsis JD. A rat middle cerebral
artery occlusion model and intravenous cellular delivery.
Methods Mol Biol 2009;549:187e95.
[5] Deng J, Petersen BE, Steindler DA, Jorgensen ML,
Laywell ED. Mesenchymal stem cells spontaneously express
neural proteins in culture and are neurogenic after transplantation. Stem Cells 2006;24:1054e64.
[6] Shen LH, Li Y, Chen J, Cui Y, Zhang C, Kapke A, et al.
One-year follow-up after bone marrow stromal cell treatment
in middle-aged female rats with stroke. Stroke 2007;38:
2150e6.
[7] Wakabayashi K, Nagai A, Sheikh AM, Shiota Y,
Narantuya D, Watanabe T, et al. Transplantation of human
mesenchymal stem cells promotes functional improvement
and increased expression of neurotrophic factors in a rat focal
cerebral ischemia model. J Neurosci Res 2010;88:1017e25.
[8] Chen J, Li Y, Katakowski M, Chen X, Wang L, Lu D, et al.
Intravenous bone marrow stromal cell therapy reduces
apoptosis and promotes endogenous cell proliferation after
stroke in female rat. J Neurosci Res 2003;73:778e86.

1211

[9] Honma T, Honmou O, Iihoshi S, Arada K, Houkin K,
Hamada H, et al. Intravenous infusion of immortalized
human mesenchymal stem cells protects against injury in a
cerebral ischemia model in adult rat. Exp Neurol 2006;199:
56e66.
[10] Chen J, Zhang ZG, Li Y, Wang L, Xu YX, Gautam SC, et al.
Intravenous administration of human bone marrow stromal
cells induces angiogenesis in the ischemic boundary zone
after stroke in rats. Circ Res 2003;92:692e9.
[11] Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Tsang W, Soltanian-Zadeh H,
Morris D, Zhang R, et al. Correlation of VEGF and angiopoietin expression with disruption of blood-brain barrier and
angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 2002;22:379e92.
[12] Ergul A, Alhusban A, Fagan SC. Angiogenesis: a harmonized target for recovery after stroke. Stroke 2012;43:
2270e4.
[13] Sun Y, Jin K, Xie L, Childs J, Mao XO, Logvinova A, et al.
VEGF-induced neuroprotection, neurogenesis, and angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. J Clin Invest 2003;111:
1843e51.
[14] Hayashi T, Abe K, Suzuki H, Itomaya Y. Rapid induction of
vascular endothelial growth factor gene expression after
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Stroke
1997;28:2039e44.
[15] Kovàcs Z, Ikezaki K, Samoto K, Inamura T, Fukui M.
VEGF and ﬂt: expression time kinetics in rat brain infarct.
Stroke 1996;27:1865e73.
[16] Lennmyr F, Ata KA, Funa K, Olsson Y, Terent A. Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its
receptors (Flt-1 and Flk-1) following permanent and transient occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in the rat.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1998;57:874e82.
[17] Plate KH, Beck H, Danner S, Allegrini PR, Wiessner C. Cell
type speciﬁc upregulation of vascular endothelial growth
factor in an MCA-occlusion model of cerebral infarct.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1999;58:654e66.
[18] Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q, Zhang R, Davies K, Powers C,
et al. VEGF enhances angiogenesis and promotes bloodbrain barrier leakage in the ischemic brain. J Clin Invest
2000;106:829e38.
[19] Krum JM, Mani N, Rosenstein JM. Angiogenic and astroglial
responses to vascular endothelial growth factor administration
in adult rat brain. Neuroscience 2002;110:589e604.
[20] Rosenstein JM, Mani N, Silverman WF, Krum JM. Patterns
of brain angiogenesis after vascular endothelial growth factor
administration in vitro and in vivo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1998;95:7086e91.
[21] Hayashi T, Abe K, Itoyama Y. Reduction of ischemic
damage by application of vascular endothelial growth factor
in rat brain after transient ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 1998;18:887e95.
[22] Kaya D, Gürsoy-Ozdemir Y, Yemisci M, Tuncer N,
Aktan S, Dalkara T. VEGF protects brain against focal
ischemia without increasing bloodebrain permeability when
administered intracerebroventricularly. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 2006;26:447.
[23] Bao WL, Lu SD, Wang H, Sun FY. Intraventricular vascular
endothelial growth factor antibody increases infarct volume
following transient cerebral ischemia. Chung Kuo Yao Li
Hsueh Pao 1999;20:313e8.
[24] Louissaint A, Rao S, Leventhal C, Goldman SA. Coordinated interaction of neurogenesis and angiogenesis in the
adult songbird brain. Neuron 2002;34:945e60.
[25] Palmer TD, Willhoite AR, Gage FH. Vascular niche for
adult hippocampal neurogenesis. J Comp Neurol 2000;425:
479e94.

1212

Z. Yang et al.

[26] Jin KL, Mao XO, Greenberg DA. Vascular endothelial
growth factor rescues HN33 neural cells from death induced
by serum withdrawal. J Mol Neurosci 2000;14:197e203.
[27] Scholzen T, Gerdes J. The Ki-67 protein: from the known
and the unknown. J Cell Physiol 2000;182:311e22.
[28] Sun S, Guo Z, Xiao X, Liu B, Liu X, Tang PH, et al.
Isolation of mouse marrow mesenchymal progenitors by a
novel and reliable method. Stem Cells 2003;21:527e35.
[29] Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL,
Bartkowski H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model and development of a neurologic examination. Stroke 1986;17:472e6.
[30] Feeney DM, Gonzalez A, Law WA. Amphetamine, haloperidol, and experience interact to affect rate of recovery after
motor cortex injury. Science 1982;217:855e7.
[31] Penny J, Harris P, Shakesheff KM, Mobasheri A. The
biology of equine mesenchymal stem cells: phenotypic
characterization, cell surface markers and multilineage differentiation. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) 2012;17:892e908.
[32] Dominici M, Le Blanc K, Mueller I, Slaper-Cortenbach I,
Marini F, Krause D, et al. Minimal criteria for deﬁning
multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells. The International
Society for Cellular Therapy position statement. Cytotherapy
2006;8:315e7.
[33] McCarty RC, Gronthos S, Zannettino AC, Foster BK,
Xian CJ. Characterisation and developmental potential of
ovine bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells. J Cell
Physiol 2009;219:324e33.
[34] Vieira NM, Brandalise V, Zucconi E, Secco M, Strauss BE,
Zatz M. Isolation, characterization and differentiation
potential of canine adipose-derived stem cells. Cell Transplant 2010;19:279e89.
[35] Hou M, Yang KM, Zhang H, Zhu WQ, Duan FJ, Wang H,
et al. Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells from
human bone marrow improves damaged heart function in
rats. Int J Cardiol 2007;115:220e8.
[36] Hung SC, Pochampally RR, Chen SC, Hsu SC, Prockop DJ.
Angiogenic effects of human multipotent stromal cell conditioned medium activate the PI3K-Akt pathway in hypoxic
endothelial cells to inhibit apoptosis, increase survival, and
stimulate angiogenesis. Stem Cells 2007;25:2363e70.

[37] Kinnaird T, Stabile E, Burnett MS, Lee CW, Barr S,
Fuchs S, et al. Marrow-derived stromal cells express genes
encoding a broad spectrum of arteriogenic cytokines and
promote in vitro and in vivo arteriogenesis through paracrine
mechanisms. Circ Res 2004;94:678e85.
[38] Holmes K, Roberts OL, Thomas AM, Cross MJ. Vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor-2: structure, function,
intracellular signalling and therapeutic inhibition. Cell Signal
2007;19:2003e12.
[39] Jin KL, Mao XO, Greenberg DA. Vascular endothelial
growth factor: direct neuroprotective effect in in vitro
ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000;97:10242e7.
[40] Jin K, Mao XO, Batteur SP, McEachron E, Leahy A,
Greenberg DA. Caspase-3 and the regulation of hypoxic
neuronal death by vascular endothelial growth factor.
Neuroscience 2001;108:351e8.
[41] Sondell M, Lundborg G, Kanje M. Vascular endothelial
growth factor has neurotrophic activity and stimulates axonal
outgrowth, enhancing cell survival and Schwann cell proliferation in the peripheral nervous system. J Neurosci 1999;19:
5731e40.
[42] Sondell M, Sundler F, Kanje M. Vascular endothelial growth
factor is a neurotrophic factor which stimulates axonal
outgrowth through the ﬂk-1 receptor. Eur J Neurosci 2000;
12:4243e54.
[43] Silverman WF, Krum JM, Mani N, Rosenstein JM. Vascular,
glial and neuronal effects of vascular endothelial growth
factor in mesencephalic explant cultures. Neuroscience
1999;90:1529e41.
[44] Deng YB, Ye WB, Hu ZZ, Yan Y, Wang Y, Takon BF, et al.
Intravenously administered BMSCs reduce neuronal apoptosis
and promote neuronal proliferation through the release of
VEGF after stroke in rats. Neurol Res 2010;32:148e56.

Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can
be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.06.
005.

