Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neurobiology of Disease
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynbdi

Cerebral collateral ﬂow deﬁnes topography and evolution of molecular
penumbra in experimental ischemic stroke
Simone Beretta a,f,⁎,1, Elisa Cuccione a,b,1, Alessandro Versace a, Davide Carone a, Matteo Riva a, Giada Padovano a,
Valentina Dell'Era a, Ruiyao Cai a, Laura Monza a, Luca Presotto c,d, David Rousseau e, Fabien Chauveau e,
Giovanni Paternò a, Giovanni B. Pappadà a, Carlo Giussani a, Erik P. Sganzerla a, Carlo Ferrarese a,f
a

Laboratory of Experimental Stroke Research, Department of Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy
PhD Programme in Neuroscience, University of Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy
c
Department of Nuclear Medicine, San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy
d
Institute of Bioimaging and Molecular Physiology, National Research Council, Milan, Italy
e
Université de Lyon, CREATIS, CNRS UMR5220, Inserm U1044, INSA-Lyon, Université Lyon 1, France
f
Milan Center for Neuroscience (NeuroMi), Milano, Italy
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 31 August 2014
Revised 18 November 2014
Accepted 26 November 2014
Available online 5 December 2014
Keywords:
Stroke
Penumbra
Cerebral collaterals
Hemodynamic changes
Neuroprotection

a b s t r a c t
Intracranial collaterals are dynamically recruited after arterial occlusion and are emerging as a strong determinant
of tissue outcome in both human and experimental ischemic stroke. The relationship between collateral ﬂow and
ischemic penumbra remains largely unexplored in pre-clinical studies. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the pattern of collateral ﬂow with regard to penumbral tissue after transient middle cerebral artery
(MCA) occlusion in rats. MCA was transiently occluded (90 min) by intraluminal ﬁlament in adult male Wistar
rats (n = 25). Intracranial collateral ﬂow was studied in terms of perfusion deﬁcit and biosignal ﬂuctuation
analyses using multi-site laser Doppler monitoring. Molecular penumbra was deﬁned by topographical mapping
and quantitative signal analysis of Heat Shock Protein 70 kDa (HSP70) immunohistochemistry. Functional deﬁcit
and infarct volume were assessed 24 h after ischemia induction. The results show that functional performance of
intracranial collaterals during MCA occlusion inversely correlated with HSP70 immunoreactive areas in both
the cortex and the striatum, as well as with infarct size and functional deﬁcit. Intracranial collateral ﬂow was
associated with reduced areas of both molecular penumbra and ischemic core and increased areas of intact
tissue in rats subjected to MCA occlusion followed by reperfusion. Our ﬁndings prompt the development of
collateral therapeutics to provide tissue-saving strategies in the hyper-acute phase of ischemic stroke prior to
recanalization therapy.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Intracranial collateral circulation represents a multiple-level subsidiary vascular network which is dynamically recruited after occlusion of
cerebral arteries to provide a source of residual blood ﬂow (Liebeskind,
2003).
In both humans and rodents, a signiﬁcant supply of collateral
ﬂow after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion is provided by the
circle of Willis through the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and the
leptomeningeal anastomoses between the cortical branches of ACA
and MCA. However, a signiﬁcant degree of inter-individual variability

⁎ Corresponding author at: Laboratory of Experimental Stroke Research, Department of
Surgery and Translational Medicine, University of Milano Bicocca, Via Cadore 48, 20900
Monza (MI), Italy. Fax: +39 0264488108.
E-mail address: simone.beretta@unimib.it (S. Beretta).
1
These authors equally contributed to this work.
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.11.019
0969-9961/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

exists in the functional performance of intracranial collaterals under
ischemic conditions in humans (Qureshi et al., 2008; Liu et al., 2011)
and rodents (Armitage et al., 2010; Riva et al., 2012).
Cerebral collateral ﬂow is emerging as a powerful determinant of
functional and tissue outcome in unselected ischemic stroke patients
(Maas et al., 2009; Menon et al., 2011) and in stroke patients treated
with intravenous rtPA (Brunner et al., 2012; Miteff et al., 2009) or
endovascular recanalization (Bang et al., 2011; Bang et al., 2008).
For these reasons, an in-depth understanding of the physiology,
adaptive response and modulation of intracranial collateral circulation
is of foremost importance for acute stroke pathophysiology and therapy.
Ischemic penumbra was originally deﬁned as “tissue at risk”, which
has been made functionally silent and metabolically metastable by
ischemic injury but still has the potential for full recovery if reperfusion
is timely achieved (Branston et al., 1974; Hossmann, 1994; Baron,
1999). The concept of ischemic penumbra is gradually evolving, after
pre-clinical and clinical studies showed a heterogeneous and variable
pattern of perfusion deﬁcit, molecular response, topographical

306

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

distribution and evolution of the penumbra in relation to the ischemic
core (Del Zoppo et al., 2011; Manning et al., 2014).
HSP70 is the major inducible heat shock protein (Sharp et al., 2000),
whose expression after focal cerebral ischemia reﬂects an endogenous
cell response to injury. The neuronal expression of HSP70 is considered
as a molecularly deﬁned penumbra, where injured neurons have
activated endogenous pathways for protein renaturation and protection
against further ischemia.
In the present study, we investigated the relationship between
intracranial collateral ﬂow during transient MCA occlusion and the
development of molecular penumbra and ischemic infarct after 24 h.
The hemodynamic monitoring of central and peripheral MCA territories
was analyzed in terms of perfusion deﬁcit and biosignal ﬂuctuation.
Hemodynamic data were correlated with the corresponding areas of
molecular penumbra, infarct volume and functional deﬁcit.
Material and methods
Study design
The experimental protocol was approved by the Committee on
Animal Care of the University of Milano Bicocca, in accordance with
the national guidelines on the use of laboratory animals (D.L. 116/
1992) and the European Union Directive for animal experiments
(2010/63/EU), under project license from the Italian Ministry of Health.
A group of consecutive animals undergoing successful MCA
occlusion (see below) were used to explore the effect of cerebral
collateral ﬂow on molecular penumbra. Cerebral collateral ﬂow
(deﬁned as perfusion deﬁcit in the MCA–ACA borderzone territory)
was considered as a continuous independent variable. Primary outcome
was deﬁned as the quantiﬁcation of molecular penumbra (HSP70
positive areas). Secondary outcomes were infarct volume and
neurobehavior. Outcome assessment was blinded to hemodynamic
data on cerebral collateral ﬂow.
Animals and surgery
Animals were housed in single cages, exposed to 12/12 hour light/
dark cycle, at controlled room temperature, with free access to food
and water, in a speciﬁc pathogen free (SPF) facility.
Adult male Wistar rats (280 ± 5% g; n = 28) were anesthetized with
3% isoﬂurane in O2/N2O (1:3), and maintained with 1.5% isoﬂurane.
Occlusion of the origin of the right MCA was induced transiently for
90 min with a reperfusion period of 24 h. Brieﬂy, a silicone-coated
ﬁlament (diameter 0.39 ± 0.02 mm, Doccol Corporation, Redlands,
CA, USA), was introduced in the right external carotid artery and pushed
through the right internal carotid artery to occlude the origin of the
right MCA. The common carotid artery was transiently occluded immediately before the insertion of the ﬁlament and subsequently re-opened
during ischemia period and reperfusion. The pterygopalatine artery was
transiently occluded during both the surgical insertion of the ﬁlament
and ischemia, then re-opened during reperfusion.
During surgery, the core temperature of 37 °C was controlled by a
rectal thermometer connected to a feedback-controlled heating pad.
In a subset of animals (n = 12) cardio-respiratory parameters (arterial
pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate) were continuously monitored
using a Samba Preclin 420 transducer (Samba Sensors, Harvard
Apparatus, UK) inserted in the right femoral artery before ischemia
induction.
After reperfusion, rats were allowed to recover and had free access
to food and water. After 24 h from the onset of ischemia, animals
were assessed for neurobehavioral score (see below), then euthanized
using CO2 inhalation and the brains were collected for ﬁxation.
Three rats were excluded from the experimental series for early
death occurred before successful MCA occlusion (one rat died for
anesthesiological complications, two rats died for subarachnoid

hemorrhage). All successfully occluded rats (n = 25) survived the
24 hour reperfusion time and were used for analysis.
Laser Doppler multi-site perfusion monitoring
The induction of focal cerebral ischemia was assessed using laser
Doppler (LD) perfusion monitoring (dual channel moorVMS-LDFTM,
Moor, Axminster, UK) using two blunt needle probes (VP12). Probes
were positioned in a custom made silicon holder attached with surgical
glue over the intact skull and further secured in place using sutures to
surrounding soft tissues (Beretta et al., 2013). The ﬁrst probe (Probe
1) was attached to the skull 1 mm posterior to the bregma and 5 mm
lateral to the midline (lateral probe, corresponding to the central MCA
territory). The second probe (Probe 2) was attached to the skull 2 mm
anterior to the bregma and 2 mm lateral to the midline (medial probe,
corresponding to the borderzone territory between ACA and MCA
territories). Cerebral perfusion monitoring was performed continuously
during the entire period of anesthesia (approximately 140 min),
including reperfusion. The mean duration of cerebral perfusion
monitoring after reperfusion was 7.8 (4–15) min.
Three hemodynamic parameters were considered for signal analysis
of each probe: i) drop in cerebral perfusion (expressed as % of baseline)
during MCA occlusion following successful ﬁlament insertion;
ii) biosignal ﬂuctuation analysis during the pre-ischemic period and
during MCA occlusion (see below); and iii) cerebral reperfusion
(expressed as % of baseline), from the removal of the ﬁlament until
the end of anesthesia.
Hemodynamic assessment was blinded to outcome data
(neurobehavior, infarct volume, HSP70 staining).
Biosignal ﬂuctuation analysis of cerebral perfusion
Fluctuation analysis of blood microcirculation from LD signals or
alternative laser speckle imaging signals has been undertaken with
various measures (see Humeau-Heurtier et al., 2013 for a recent
review). In this study, auto-correlation R(k) analysis was based on linear
second order statistics (Humeau et al., 2008), see Supplementary
methods for details.
The auto-correlation R(k) measures the self-memory of the ﬂuctuations around the average value and constitutes an analysis different
from the record of the drop of average value between the two probes.
As shown in Fig. 2, the two autocorrelation functions estimated for the
two probes display a decrease but with a distinct characteristic time
decay. To quantify this observation, we compute the time in seconds
that autocorrelation R(k) takes to drop from 1 to 0.9 for each probe.
Neurobehavioral assessment
Rats were assessed 24 h after transient MCA occlusion with a functional neuroscore for neurological outcome on a scale from 3 (most
severe) to 18 (no deﬁcit) (Garcia et al., 1995). Behavioral assessment
was blinded to hemodynamic data and consisted of scoring the spontaneous movement, sensory function and motor function.
Histology and infarct volume determination
Brains were ﬁxed in ice-cold 10% neutral buffer formalin and coronal
sections (50 μm) were stained using Cresyl Violet 0.1% (Bioptica, Milano,
Italy). Infarct areas were measured in 19 consecutive sections with
250 μm interval (bregma +2.5 mm to −3.0 mm).
Infarct volume was calculated using ImageJ image processing
software (National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA), corrected
for inter-hemispheric asymmetries due to cerebral edema, and expressed
in mm3. Infarct volume calculation was blinded to hemodynamic data.

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

Heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) immunohistochemistry and topography
Brains were ﬁxed in ice-cold 10% neutral buffer formalin for at least
24 h. Serial coronal sections (50 μm thick) were obtained using a
vibratome throughout its rostro-caudal extension. For each brain,
slices anatomically identiﬁed as bregma + 1, − 1 and − 3 were
immunoreacted for HSP70. Free-ﬂoating coronal sections were preincubated for 10 min in 3% H2O2 and 30 min in blocking solution (10%
normal goat serum) and 0.2% Triton X-100. Sections were then
incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-HSP70 primary antibody
(1:1000, mouse anti-HSP70, Enzo LifeScience, Farmingdale, New York,
USA) and at room temperature for 75 min with monoclonal Horseradish
Peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:200, Millipore, Bellerica,
MA, USA). Sections were ﬁnally incubated with 3,30-diaminobenzidine
tetra hydrochloride (DAB) as chromogen. Negative controls, to verify
the speciﬁcity of the antibodies, were obtained by omitting primary
antibody. Macroscopic section images were obtained using a digital
camera (Nikon Coolpix P5000) adapted to optical microscope. Higher
magniﬁcation images were obtained using a Nikon Eclipse E200 optical
microscope and Leica Qwin V3.2.0 software.
HSP70 topography was obtained by manual identiﬁcation of stained
cell clusters in the cortex, whose areas were superimposed to corresponding brain atlas images at bregma +1, − 1 and −3 (Paxinos and
Watson, 2007). Each cell cluster is represented by a single pinkcolored area of variable size. A darker pink color is the result of variable
overlapping degree with adjacent areas from different animals.
This method of HSP70 qualitative topography was not applied in the
striatum, where HSP70-positive cells were mostly present as single
cells instead of cell clusters, because of its different cytoarchitecture
compared to the cortex.
TUNEL staining, NeuN and HSP70 triple co-immunoﬂuorescence
Triple labeling was obtained by performing TUNEL assay followed by
NeuN and HSP70 immunoﬂuorescence on the same brain sections. The
TUNEL kit was used following manufacturer instructions (DeadEnd™
Fluorometric TUNEL System, Promega, Madison, WI, USA), except that
the tissue permeabilization step was performed using 0.2% Triton
X-100 instead of Protease K. After stopping TUNEL reaction, a further
step of incubation with 0.1 M glycine in PBS for 15 min was performed.
Sections were then incubated with PBS 10% NGS blocking solution at RT
for 30 min and overnight at 4 °C with anti-NeuN primary antibody
(1:100, mouse anti-NeuN, Merck Millipore (Chemicon), © Merck
KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) and anti-HSP70 primary antibody (1:500,
mouse anti-HSP70, Enzo LifeScience, Farmingdale, New York, USA)
diluted in PBS 1% NGS. Afterwards sections were incubated at room
temperature for 75 min with appropriate ﬂuorochrome-conjugated
secondary antibody diluted in PBS 1% NGS (1:200, Alexa Fluor 647
goat anti-mouse, Invitrogen, Oregon, USA and 1:200, Alexa Flour 546
goat anti-rabbit, Invitrogen, Oregon, USA). Sections were then rinsed 3
times for 5 min with PBS 0.1% Triton X-100 and 5 mg/mL BSA and ﬁnally
mounted with polyvinyl alcohol with anti-fading (Polyvinyl Alcohol
mounting medium with DABCO® Antifading pH 8.7, Sigma-Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA).
Negative controls were obtained by omitting primary antibody for
HSP70/NeuN signal or TdT enzyme for TUNEL signal. Microscopy analysis was performed with laser confocal microscopy (Radiance 2100;
Biorad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Noise reduction was achieved
by Kalman ﬁltering during acquisition.
HSP70 quantitative immunohistochemistry
A quantitative analysis of the mathematical energy of HSP70 signal
was performed as previously described for quantitative immunohistochemistry (Matkowskyj et al., 2000). An in-house program was
developed using Matlab software to obtain automated signal energy

307

difference between corresponding regions of interests (ROIs) in the
control and ischemic hemisphere. Brieﬂy, HSP70 stained sections
anatomically identiﬁed as bregma + 1, − 1 and − 3 were considered.
On each section, four regions of interests (ROIs) were identiﬁed corresponding to the entire cortical or striatal regions of each hemisphere.
We assume that all information contained in the selected ROIs is of
importance. In other words, the amount of antibody-generated chromogen is represented by all the information contained in the image ﬁle.
After acquisition with a digital camera, the ﬁle for the experimental
image is opened in the Matlab dedicated program. The ROIs are deﬁned
using a tool that allows an area of any pixel dimension to be determined
by the operator. The same areas were considered for the cortex, as well
as the striatum, in each hemisphere (control and ischemic). The “norm”
function was used to compute a unique value of the energy from a
three-color image, which represents the mathematical energy of the
image ﬁle. The energy per pixel is estimated by normalizing the
measured energy over the whole ROI to the number of pixels included.
Finally, the normalized energy of the ischemic ROIs (cortex or striatum)
is subtracted from the corresponding control ROIs (cortex or striatum
respectively) and expressed as an absolute value.
Gelatin ink perfusion
In a further set of experiments, rats (n = 4) underwent a transcardiac perfusion 60 min after the induction of cerebral ischemia,
without reperfusion (the intraluminal ﬁlament was left in place).
Normal saline (200 mL) at 37 °C was infused ﬁrst followed by 20 mL
of gelatine-ink solution at 37 °C (gelatin 3% solution in 0.9% NaCl
mixed 1:1 with black ink NSE-40BL, Nihon Kohden, Tokyo, Japan). The
brains were then removed and ﬁxed in 10% neutral buffer formalin. To
enhance the contrast between ischemic and non-ischemic tissue, brains
were imaged using color inversion.
Sample size determination and statistical analysis
We planned this study with 25 animals in which we regressed
their values of collateral ﬂow perfusion against HSP70 immunohistochemistry intensity signal. Our previous data indicated that the
standard deviation of HSP70 signal was 0.5. Aiming for a slope of the
line obtained by regressing collateral ﬂow perfusion against HSP70
signal above 0.4 to be considered of interest and regression errors
below 0.3, we were able to reject the null hypothesis that this slope
equals zero with a probability (power) of 0.89. The Type I error probability associated with this test of this null hypothesis was 0.05.
Values were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). For twogroup analysis unpaired Student's t test was used. Correlation and linear
regression analyses were computed with Pearson's r test. A value of
p b 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.
Results
Multi-site cerebral perfusion monitoring during MCA occlusion
Hemodynamic monitoring with two LD probes was performed
during transient MCA occlusion, as shown in Fig. 1. The position of the
probes was decided according to the rat cerebral vascular territories
and veriﬁed by gelatin-ink perfusion experiments (Fig. 1A). Probe 1
(bregma − 1 mm, 5 mm from midline) was positioned within the
central MCA territory, while Probe 2 (bregma + 2 mm, 2 mm from
midline) was positioned in the borderzone territory between the
cortical branches of ACA and MCA to monitor anterior circulation
leptomeningeal collaterals. Multi-site cerebral perfusion monitoring
was performed during the entire period that the animals remained
under anesthesia (Figs. 1C and 1D).
Mean perfusion deﬁcit after MCA occlusion in Probe 2 was signiﬁcantly lower (p b 0.0001) and more variable compared to Probe 1

308

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

Fig. 1. Hemodynamic monitoring of intracranial collateral ﬂow (anterior circulation leptomeningeal collaterals). A. Representative brain perfused with gelatin-ink solution after 90 minute
ischemia, without reperfusion (intraluminal ﬁlament was left in place). After color-inversion, ischemic (not-perfused) area appeared intensely blue-colored, while the rest of the brain
appeared violet with white-stained vessels. The positions of the two laser Doppler probes are shown, with reference to their underlying MCA territory (blue dotted line) and bregma.
Probe 1 = central MCA territory (-1 mm from bregma, 5 mm from midline); Probe 2 = medial MCA–ACA borderzone territory (+2 mm from bregma, 2 mm from midline). Levels of
sections for HSP70 immunostaining (bregma +1, −1 and −3) are shown (white dotted lines). B. Perfusion deﬁcit (% of baseline) in the central MCA territory (Probe 1) and in the
MCA–ACA borderzone territory (Probe 2) during MCA-O and reperfusion (n = 25). Laser-Doppler tracings are shown from a representative animal showing a larger perfusion deﬁcit
in Probe 1 (C) compared to Probe 2 (D) during MCA-O, suggesting functionally active intracranial collaterals under ischemic conditions. E. Representative tracing of invasive blood pressure
monitoring during MCA-O and reperfusion. ***p b 0.0001 compared to Probe 1. MCA = middle cerebral artery. MCA-O = middle cerebral artery occlusion. ACA = anterior cerebral artery.
P.U. = perfusion units.

(Fig. 1B). Mean reperfusion values did not differ signiﬁcantly between
the two probes (approximately 92% of baseline, see Fig. 1B) and were
not correlated to outcome (data not shown).
Arterial pressure was continuously monitored (Fig. 1E) and did not
show signiﬁcant changes during MCA occlusion (mean arterial pressure
114 mm Hg; intra-subject SD 6 mm Hg; inter-subject SD 19 mm Hg; see
Supplementary Fig. 1).
A biosignal ﬂuctuation analysis of cerebral perfusion tracings, before
and after MCA occlusion, showed that the degree of auto-correlation
was similar in both probes in the pre-ischemic period, while it differed
signiﬁcantly during ischemia (Fig. 2). Although the auto-correlation
coefﬁcient increased in both probes compared to the pre-ischemic
period, a signiﬁcantly larger increase was observed in Probe 1 (approximately tripled; p b 0.001 versus pre-ischemic values) compared to
Probe 2 (approximately doubled; p b 0.05 versus pre-ischemic values)
during ischemia.
Topography of the molecular penumbra
HSP70 immunoreactivity was assessed 24 h after reperfusion at
sections bregma + 1, − 1 and − 3. Immunoﬂuorescent triple staining

conﬁrmed that neuronal HSP70 labeling and apoptotic neuronal nuclei
were mutually exclusive, conﬁrming that HSP70 positive cells represented surviving neurons (Fig. 3; see Supplementary Fig. 2 for details
on the transition zone between ischemic core and penumbra).
The pattern of HSP70 staining was consistently different in the
cortex compared to the striatum (Fig. 4A). In particular, cortical staining
showed discrete areas of intensely marked cell clusters (Figs. 4B and
4C), whereas sparse single stained cells were observed in the striatum
(Figs. 4D and 4E). Mapping of cortical cell clusters allowed visualizing
the topographical distribution of the penumbra in the cortex, which
consisted in multiple areas with considerable fragmentation and
variable degree of overlaps among different animals (Fig. 4F).
Quantiﬁcation of the molecular penumbra in relation to infarct size and
functional deﬁcit
HSP70 signal was quantiﬁed in selected ROIs in the cortex and
striatum as shown in Fig. 5A. A positive correlation was observed
between HSP70 signal (at section bregma + 1) and infarct volume in
both the cortex (Fig. 5B; p b 0.001; Pearson's r 0.67) and the striatum
(Fig. 5D; p b 0.05; Pearson's r 0.47). This correlation was also observed

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

309

Quantiﬁcation of the molecular penumbra in relation to intracranial
collateral ﬂow
No correlation was observed between HSP70 signal (at section
bregma + 1) and cerebral perfusion in Probe 1 in both the cortex
(Fig. 6A) and the striatum (Fig. 6B). Conversely, a negative correlation
was observed between HSP70 signal (at section bregma +1) and cerebral perfusion in Probe 2 in both the cortex (Fig. 6C; p b 0.01; Pearson's
r − 0.54) and the striatum (Fig. 6D; p b 0.05; Pearson's r − 0.42).
Interestingly, this correlation was gradually lost in more distant brain
sections, namely bregma −1 and −3 (Supplementary Fig. 4). A negative correlation (p b 0.001; Pearson's r −0.62) was observed between
infarct volume and cerebral perfusion in Probe 2, while this was not
observed in Probe 1 (Supplementary Fig. 5).

Discussion

Fig. 2. Biosignal ﬂuctuation analysis of cerebral perfusion in the central MCA territory
(Probe 1) and in the MCA–ACA borderzone territory (Probe 2) at baseline and during
MCAO. Regions of interests (ROIs) of laser Doppler tracings were selected and averaged
for offset (A). Self-memory of the signal was calculated and expressed as auto-correlation
analysis over time for Probe 1 and Probe 2 (B). Self-memory of the signal was quantiﬁed
(C) as the time to 10% drop in auto-correlation for Probe 1 and Probe 2, either before
ischemia and during MCA-O. ***p b 0.001 compared to pre-ischemic Probe 1. *p b 0.05
compared to pre-ischemic Probe 2. §p b 0.05 compared to ischemic Probe 2. MCA =
middle cerebral artery. MCAO = middle cerebral artery occlusion. ACA = anterior cerebral
artery. R(k) = auto-correlation function.

at other brain sections, namely at bregma −1 and −3 (Supplementary
Fig. 3). A negative correlation was observed between HSP70 signal
(at section bregma + 1) and neuroscore in both the cortex (Fig. 5C;
p b 0.05; Pearson's r − 0.49) and the striatum (Fig. 5E; p b 0.01;
Pearson's r −0.54).

The functional performance of intracranial collaterals is crucially
involved in the pathophysiology of acute ischemic stroke (Liebeskind,
2012). Functionally active cerebral collaterals have been associated with
reduced penumbra loss (Jung et al., 2013) and better outcomes (Cortijo
et al., 2014) in acute stroke patients, even with delayed reperfusion.
Therapeutic modulation of cerebral collateral ﬂow is being proposed
(Shuaib et al., 2011) and may be used for widening the therapeutic
window for recanalization and enhancing delivery of neuroprotective
drugs.
The endurance of “tissue at risk” in the setting of hypoperfusion
has been postulated to be dependent on collateral ﬂow in humans
(Liebeskind, 2013). Nonetheless, the relationship between the degree
of collateral perfusion and the extent and evolution of ischemic penumbra in acute ischemic stroke has not been investigated in experimental
studies and remains an important unsolved issue.
The deﬁnition of penumbral tissue in current stroke research mostly
relies on MRI imaging in human (Schlaug et al., 1999) and animal
models (Reid et al., 2012), applying diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)
and perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI) and calculating the PWI–DWI
mismatch. This method has been demonstrated to predict clinical outcome and ﬁnal infarct size in stroke patients undergoing endovascular
therapy (Lansberg et al., 2012; Wheeler et al., 2013). Nonetheless it is
recognized that PWI–DWI mismatch cannot deﬁne the penumbra with
absolute accuracy in humans (Heiss, 2011) and in animals (Duong,
2012) and remains unsatisfactory for pathophysiological studies
assessing tissue viability and response to injury.
Moreover, the pattern of DWI lesions and PWI–DWI mismatch in
the ﬁrst hours after acute ischemic stroke has been shown to display
signiﬁcant inter-individual variability and evolve over time (Olivot
et al., 2009).
Our experimental study investigated the dynamic relationship
between cerebral collateral ﬂow and the development of molecular
penumbra, after intraluminal proximal MCA occlusion (90 min)
followed by 24 hour reperfusion.
We mapped and quantiﬁed the ischemic penumbra by molecular
activation of HSP70. The extent of this “molecular penumbra” was
related to the vascular perfusion deﬁcit in the acute phase and to the
structural and functional outcome at 24 h.
Our ﬁndings indicate that good collateral ﬂow during MCA occlusion
reduces the molecular activation associated with penumbral tissue,
providing complete protection from ischemic injury in variable areas
of the cortex and striatum, if reperfusion is achieved. Conversely, poor
collateral status is associated with a greater extent of both ischemic
core and molecular penumbra.
This new scenario of the interplay between cerebral collateral ﬂow
and ischemic penumbra might have potential translational applications.
Therapeutic strategies aimed to enhance collateral circulation early
after arterial occlusion may completely prevent the “ischemic cascade”

310

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

Fig. 3. Triple staining immunohistochemical characterization of the post-reperfusion (24 h) penumbra. Penumbral areas showed HSP70-immunoreactive cells, co-labeling with the
neuronal cell marker Neu-N, and absence of TUNEL-positive nuclei (A–C). Ischemic core areas showed TUNEL-positive nuclei, co-labeled with Neu-N, and absence of HSP70immunoreactive cells with neuronal co-labeling (D–F). Sparse HSP70-positive non-neuronal cells were observed in the ischemic core, which did not co-localize with TUNEL-positive
nuclei. Representative micrographic pictures are shown.

Fig. 4. Morphology and topographic distribution of post-reperfusion penumbra. A. Representative picture of HSP70 staining 24 h after transient MCA-O (90 min) on brain section at bregma
+1. Higher magniﬁcation pictures showing HSP70-positive cells with neuronal morphology, which were observed in clusters in the cortex (B. 10×; C. 20×) and as single cells in the striatum (D. 10×; E. 20×). F. Topographical mapping of HSP70-immunoreactive cell clusters in the cortex at bregma levels +1, −1 and −3. Each cell cluster is represented by a single pinkcolored area of variable size. A darker pink color is the result of variable overlapping degree with adjacent areas from different animals.

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

311

Fig. 5. Quantitative immunohistochemistry of HSP70 after transient MCA-O in relation to structural and functional outcome. A. Representation of the four selected regions of interests
(ROIs) in section bregma +1, which were selected for quantiﬁcation of HSP70 immunoreactivity using a dedicated software for calculating the mathematical energy of HSP70 signal.
B. A positive correlation (p b 0.001, Pearson's r 0.67) was observed between HSP70 energy signal in the cortex (section bregma +1) and corresponding infarct volume. C. A negative
correlation (p b 0.05, Pearson's r −0.49) was observed between HSP70 energy signal in the cortex (section bregma +1) and corresponding neuroscore. D. A positive correlation
(p b 0.05, Pearson's r 0.47) was observed between HSP70 energy signal in the striatum (section bregma +1) and corresponding infarct volume. E. A negative correlation (p b 0.01,
Pearson's r −0.54) was observed between HSP70 energy signal in the striatum (section bregma +1) and corresponding neuroscore. IHC = immunohistochemistry.

in a signiﬁcant amount of brain tissue, expanding the therapeutic effect
of recanalization therapies and reducing their risks.
The study of intracranial collaterals and cerebral hemodynamic
changes in experimental ischemic stroke remains largely unexplored
(Sutherland et al., 2011), mostly because of the technical difﬁculties
in obtaining a quantitative assessment of the dynamic response of
collateral vessels. Our group recently developed an optimized system
for cerebral perfusion monitoring in rats (Beretta et al., 2013), demonstrating that leptomeningeal collateral ﬂow showed signiﬁcant variability
during MCAO in rats and is a strong predictor of “hard outcomes” such as
infarct size and functional deﬁcit (Riva et al., 2012), while its relationship
to the penumbra remained to be explored.
Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the utility of multi-site LD monitoring in the
central and peripheral MCA territories as an easy and reliable method
to quantify cerebral collateral ﬂow during proximal MCA occlusion. A
gradient of severity between the two probes was observed either by
relative perfusion deﬁcit or biosignal ﬂuctuation analysis. In particular,
hemodynamic monitoring in LD Probe 2, in the territory of MCA–ACA
leptomeningeal branches, showed a cortical area with a lower perfusion
deﬁcit, higher inter-individual variability and larger ﬂuctuations of the
biosignal, compared to LD Probe 1 in the central MCA territory.

In most animals the topographical mapping of molecular penumbra
(HSP70 positive areas after 24 h of reperfusion) revealed multiple
patchy areas with irregular distribution, not limited to the perilesional zone; this is in contrast with the ﬁnal infarct, which invariably
consisted in a single lesion of variable size. Our results conﬁrmed that
HSP70-stained neurons are a separate population from neurons undergoing selective cell death (TUNEL-stained neurons), in agreement with
previous reports (Del Zoppo et al., 2011).
Surprisingly, we observed a striking correlation between the extent
of molecular penumbra and stroke severity, in terms of both infarct
volume and neuroscore. Notably, small infarcts (mostly limited to the
striatum) were associated with little (if any) penumbral tissue, whereas
larger infarcts involving the striatum and cortex were associated with
larger areas of molecular penumbra. No animals exhibited a pattern of
small ischemic core surrounded by large penumbral areas.
A strong correlation was observed between the extent of molecular
penumbra and the severity of perfusion deﬁcit in the peripheral MCA
territory (Probe 2), which reﬂects intracranial collateral perfusion.
Interestingly, no correlation was observed in the extent of molecular
penumbra and perfusion deﬁcit in the central MCA territory (Probe 1).
In other terms, the presence of good collaterals reduced the extent of

312

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313

Fig. 6. Correlation between HSP70 energy signal and hemodynamic monitoring in Probe 1 (central MCA territory) and Probe 2 (MCA–ACA borderzone territory). A. No correlation was
observed between perfusion values in Probe 1 during MCA occlusion and HSP70 energy signal in the cortex (bregma section +1). B. No correlation was observed between perfusion values
in Probe 1 during MCA occlusion and HSP70 energy signal in the striatum (bregma section +1). C. A negative correlation (p b 0.01, Pearson's r −0.54) was observed between perfusion
values in Probe 2 during MCA occlusion and HSP70 energy signal in the cortex (bregma section +1). D. A negative correlation (p b 0.05, Pearson's r −0.42) was observed between
perfusion values in Probe 2 during MCA occlusion and HSP70 energy signal in the striatum (bregma section +1). IHC = immunohistochemistry. P.U. = perfusion units. MCA = middle
cerebral artery. ACA = anterior cerebral artery.

both molecular penumbra and ischemic core at 24 h, increasing the
amount of uninjured (completely “saved”) cerebral tissue.
Two additional results strengthen the speciﬁcity of these ﬁndings:
ﬁrst, the correlation between perfusion deﬁcit in Probe 2 and HSP70stained areas is stronger at level bregma +1 (the nearest to the Probe
2 position) and gradually diminishes with distance, i.e. bregma − 1
and − 3; second, arterial blood pressure neither showed signiﬁcant
changes during the ischemic phase (90 min) nor correlated with the
ﬁnal stroke outcome in our series.
The major limitation of our study is that acute penumbral MRI
imaging using DWI–PWI mismatch has not been performed and
molecular penumbra was assessed 24 h after reperfusion, as this was
necessary to obtain a useful HSP70 staining. However, cerebral collateral
ﬂow was the main focus of the study and this can be quantiﬁed more
reliably with multi-site LD monitoring than with current MRI technology
in small animals. The relationship between acute penumbral MRI
imaging and molecular penumbra assessed by HSP70 staining is beyond
the scope of this study and is currently being explored in new experiments. Although acute MRI-deﬁned penumbra could be expected to
be larger than molecular penumbra after 24 h of reperfusion (due to
the progressive recruitment of penumbra into infarct core), this is
unlikely to change the major ﬁndings of the present study.
Conclusions
The degree of cerebral collateral perfusion inversely correlated with
both ischemic core and molecular penumbra during transient proximal
MCA occlusion. Our ﬁndings prompt the development of collateral
therapeutics to provide tissue-saving strategies in the hyper-acute
phase of ischemic stroke prior to recanalization therapy.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.11.019.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Virginia Rodriguez Menendez for the technical
assistance with immunohistochemistry and Miss Elena Pirovano for
the ﬁgure preparation. This study was supported by the Italian Ministry
of University and Research (MIUR, FAR12-01-138-2002100) and
Université Lyon 1. These funding sources were not involved in the
study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, writing of
the report or decision to submit the present article for publication.
References
Armitage, G.A., Todd, K.G., Shuaib, A., Winship, I.R., 2010. Laser speckle contrast imaging
of collateral blood ﬂow during acute ischemic stroke. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
30, 1432–1436.
Bang, O.Y., Saver, J.L., Buck, B.H., Alger, J.R., Starkman, S., Ovbiagele, B., et al., 2008. Impact
of collateral ﬂow on tissue fate in acute ischaemic stroke. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 79 (6), 625–629.
Bang, O.Y., Saver, J.L., Kim, S.J., Kim, G.M., Chung, C.S., Ovbiagele, B., et al., 2011. Collateral
ﬂow predicts response to endovascular therapy for acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 42
(3), 693–699.
Baron, J.C., 1999. Mapping the ischaemic penumbra with PET: implications for acute
stroke treatment [Review]. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 9, 193–201.
Beretta, S., Riva, M., Carone, D., Cuccione, E., Padovano, G., Rodriguez Menendez, V., et al.,
2013. Optimized system for cerebral perfusion monitoring in the rat stroke model of
intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion. J. Vis. Exp. 72. http://dx.doi.org/10.
3791/50214 (pii: 50214).
Branston, N.M., Symon, L., Crockard, H.A., Pasztor, E., 1974. Relationship between the
cortical evoked potential and local cortical blood ﬂow following acute middle cerebral
artery occlusion in the baboon. Exp. Neurol. 45, 195–208.
Brunner, F., Tomandl, B., Hanken, K., Hildebrandt, H., Kastrup, A., 2012. Impact of collateral
circulation on early outcome and risk of hemorrhagic complications after systemic
thrombolysis. Int. J. Stroke http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-4949.2012.00922.x
(Oct 23).
Cortijo, E., Calleja, A.I., García-Bermejo, P., Mulero, P., Pérez-Fernández, S., Reyes, J., et al.,
2014. Relative cerebral blood volume as a marker of durable tissue-at-risk viability in
hyperacute ischemic stroke. Stroke 45 (1), 113–118.

S. Beretta et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 74 (2015) 305–313
del Zoppo, G.J., Sharp, F.R., Heiss, W.D., Albers, G.W., 2011. Heterogeneity in the
penumbra. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 1836–1851 (Review).
Duong, T.Q., 2012. Multimodal MRI of experimental stroke. Transl. Stroke Res. 3, 8–15.
Garcia, J.H., Wagner, S., Liu, K.F., Hu, X.J., 1995. Neurological deﬁcit and extent of neuronal
necrosis attributable to middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Statistical validation.
Stroke 26, 627–634.
Heiss, W.D., 2011. The ischemic penumbra: correlates in imaging and implications for
treatment of ischemic stroke. The Johann Jacob Wepfer Award 2011. Cerebrovasc.
Dis. 32, 307–320.
Hossmann, K.A., 1994. Viability thresholds and the penumbra of focal ischemia. Ann.
Neurol. 36, 557–565.
Humeau-Heurtier, A., Guerreschi, E., Abraham, P., Mahé, G., 2013. Relevance of laser
Doppler and laser speckle techniques for assessing vascular function: state of the
art and future trends. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 60, 659–666.
Humeau, A., Fizanne, L., Roux, J., Asfar, P., Cales, P., Rousseau, D., et al., 2008. Linear, nonlinear analyses of laser Doppler ﬂowmetry signals recorded during isoﬂuraneinduced anaesthesia in healthy rats. J. Vasc. Res. 45 (Suppl. 2), 82.
Jung, S., Gilgen, M., Slotboom, J., El-Koussy, M., Zubler, C., Kiefer, C., et al., 2013. Factors
that determine penumbral tissue loss in acute ischaemic stroke. Brain 136, 3554–3560.
Lansberg, M.G., Straka, M., Kemp, S., Mlynash, M., Wechsler, L.R., Jovin, T.G., et al., 2012.
MRI proﬁle and response to endovascular reperfusion after stroke (DEFUSE 2): a
prospective cohort study. Lancet Neurol. 11, 860–867.
Liebeskind, D.S., 2003. Collateral circulation. Stroke 34, 2279–2284 (Review).
Liebeskind, D.S., 2012. Collateral perfusion: time for novel paradigms in cerebral ischemia.
Int. J. Stroke 7, 309–310.
Liebeskind, D.S., 2013. Trials of endovascular therapies or collaterals? Int. J. Stroke 8,
258–259.
Liu, W., Xu, G., Yue, X., Wang, X., Ma, M., Zhang, R., et al., 2011. Hyperintense vessels on
FLAIR: a useful non-invasive method for assessing intracerebral collaterals. Eur. J.
Radiol. 80, 786–791.
Maas, M.B., Lev, M.H., Ay, H., Singhal, A.B., Greer, D.M., Smith, W.S., 2009. Collateral vessels
on CT angiography predict outcome in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 40, 3001–3005.
Manning, N.W., Campbell, B.C., Oxley, T.J., Chapot, R., 2014. Acute ischemic stroke: time,
penumbra, and reperfusion. Stroke 45, 640–644.
Matkowskyj, K.A., Schonfeld, D., Benya, R.V., 2000. Quantitative immunohistochemistry
by measuring cumulative signal strength using commercially available software
photoshop and matlab. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 48, 303–312.

313

Menon, B.K., Smith, E.E., Modi, J., Patel, S.K., Bhatia, R., Watson, T.W., et al., 2011. Regional
leptomeningeal score on CT angiography predicts clinical and imaging outcomes
in patients with acute anterior circulation occlusions. Am. J. Neuroradiol. 32,
1640–1645.
Miteff, F., Levi, C.R., Bateman, G.A., Spratt, N., McElduff, P., Parsons, M.W., 2009. The
independent predictive utility of computed tomography angiographic collateral
status in acute ischaemic stroke. Brain 132, 2231–2238.
Olivot, J.M., Mlynash, M., Thijs, V.N., Purushotham, A., Kemp, S., Lansberg, M.G., et al.,
2009. Geography, structure, and evolution of diffusion and perfusion lesions in
Diffusion and perfusion imaging Evaluation For Understanding Stroke Evolution
(DEFUSE). Stroke 40, 3245–3251.
The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. In: Paxinos, G., Watson, C. (Eds.), 6th edition
Academic Press, San Diego.
Qureshi, A.I., El-Gengaihi, A., Hussein, H.M., Suri, M.F., Liebeskind, D.S., 2008. Occurence
and variability in acute formation of leptomeningeal collaterals in proximal middle
cerebral artery occlusion. J. Vasc. Interv. Neurol. 1, 70–72.
Reid, E., Graham, D., Lopez-Gonzalez, M.R., Holmes, W.M., Macrae, I.M., McCabe, C., 2012.
Penumbra detection using PWI/DWI mismatch MRI in a rat stroke model with and
without comorbidity: comparison of methods. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32,
1765–1777.
Riva, M., Pappadà, G.B., Papadakis, M., Cuccione, E., Carone, D., Menendez, V.R., et al., 2012.
Hemodynamic monitoring of intracranial collateral ﬂow predicts tissue and functional
outcome in experimental ischemic stroke. Exp. Neurol. 233, 815–820.
Schlaug, G., Benﬁeld, A., Baird, A.E., Siewert, B., Lovblad, K.O., Parker, R.A., et al., 1999. The
ischemic penumbra: operationally deﬁned by diffusion and perfusion MRI. Neurology
53, 1528–1537.
Sharp, F.R., Lu, A., Tang, Y., Millhorn, D.E., 2000. Multiple molecular penumbras after focal
cerebral ischemia [Review]. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 20, 1011–1032.
Shuaib, A., Butcher, K., Mohammad, A.A., Saqqur, M., Liebeskind, D.S., 2011. Collateral
blood vessels in acute ischaemic stroke: a potential therapeutic target [Review].
Lancet Neurol. 10, 909–921.
Sutherland, B.A., Papadakis, M., Chen, R.L., Buchan, A.M., 2011. Cerebral blood ﬂow
alteration in neuroprotection following cerebral ischemia. J. Physiol. 589, 4105–4114.
Wheeler, H.M., Mlynash, M., Inoue, M., Tipirneni, A., Liggins, J., Zaharchuk, G., et al., 2013.
Early diffusion-weighted imaging and perfusion-weighted imaging lesion volumes
forecast ﬁnal infarct size in DEFUSE 2. Stroke 44, 681–685.

