Neuroscience Letters 597 (2015) 127–131

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neuroscience Letters
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neulet

Research article

Novel microcatheter-based intracarotid delivery approach for
MCAO/R mice
Qiang Cai a,b , Zhibiao Chen a , Derek Kai Kong b , Jun Wang a , Zhou Xu a , Baohui Liu a ,
Qianxue Chen a,∗ , Jiangbing Zhou b
a
b

Department of Neurosurgery, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan City, Hubei Province, 430060, China
Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University, 333 Cedar Street, FMB 410, New Haven, CT 06520, USA

h i g h l i g h t s
• It is a novel model to study stroke in mice.
• It is the ﬁrst time to combine the two techniques in mice.
• It is the ﬁrst time to describe and classify the variation of occipital artery in mice.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 3 February 2015
Received in revised form 15 April 2015
Accepted 17 April 2015
Available online 18 April 2015
Keywords:
Middle cerebral artery occlusion
Carotid artery
Animal model
Mice

a b s t r a c t
The intra-arterial (IA) model by microcatheter administration was an effective way to deliver drugs or cells
to the brain. All of these models were carried out introduced in rat rather than mice for the difﬁcult and
technically challenging due to their small caliber. In 2014, Alejandro Santillan ﬁrst introduced this model
in mice and we found that most of the operational steps were similar with the middle cerebral artery
occlusion and reperfusion (MCAO/R) model. We attempted to combine these two techniques into a single
model in mice and discovered that this technique was indeed possible. In our work, 12C57Bl/6J male mice
were carried on middle cerebral artery occlusion for 60 min and then the intra-arterial microcatheter was
placed into the internal carotid artery (ICA) from the external carotid artery (ECA). GFP-Luc-Pro labeled
mNSCs were infused through the microcatheter and then the blood ﬂow perfusion was reestablished
subsequently. The results showed that all 12 mice were carried on successfully the model of middle cerebral artery occlusion, and the placement of the microcatheter and the mNSCs perfusion were completed
smoothly without exception. Which means that it is logical to combine the two models into one in order
to facilitate studying of stroke. Meanwhile, during the dissection, we found the variation of occipital
artery (OA) was noticeable and we classiﬁed ﬁrst time this variation into four categories to attempt to
protect the OA.
© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Ischemic stroke is a devastating disease while the therapy is
limited. Treatment through intra-arterial (IA) administration is
an effective way to deliver drugs or cells in high concentrations
with low systemic side effects [1]. However, all of the experiment models are carried out in rats rather than in mice because
operation on mouse vessels is technically challenging due to their
small caliber [6,8,9,12,14,17–19]. Still this model in mice is needed
due to the large number of existing disease models and take the

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 13607141618.
E-mail address: chenqx666@sohu.com (Q. Chen).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2015.04.029
0304-3940/© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

advantage of transgenic and knockout strains in mice [2]. Previously
described techniques for internal carotid artery (ICA) administration are placement of 30 or 33 G needle to the common carotid
artery (CCA). This direct puncture affect ICA blood ﬂow due to
the large size of the needle and is difﬁcult to be used multiple.
Recently, Santillan developed a novel minimally invasive technique
for the intra-arterial delivery of therapeutics to the mouse brain by
microcatheter [15]. The route of the microcatheter is from external
carotid artery (ECA) to ICA and we ﬁnd that most of operational
steps are similar with the middle cerebral artery occlusion and
reperfusion (MCAO/R) model. So, we tried to develop a method
to combine these two models into one and discovered that this
technique is indeed possible.

128

Q. Cai et al. / Neuroscience Letters 597 (2015) 127–131

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Microcatheter fabrication
Single-thickness polyimide tubing with an OD 201 ␮m/ID
180 ␮m (Polymide Tubing, Microlumen, USA) was cut to 15 cm
lengths. One end of each segment was glued into a 50 ␮l Hamilton
syringe.

2.2. Cell culture and transduction
A mouse neural stem cells (mNSCs) line derived from the cells in
the embryonic mouse brain was used in these experiments. Cells
were thawed at passage 5 and thereafter cultured in neuro-stem
cell medium containing EGF and bFGF at 37 ◦ C and 5% CO2 .
Cells were transduced with a lentivirus system. Brieﬂy, a fusion
construct containing ﬁreﬂy luciferase (Fluc), EGFP and Puromycin
(FLuc-EGFP-Pro) was inserted into a lentiviral vector. Viral particles
were produced in 293T cells and mNSCs were suspended with hightiter viral supernatants, and incubated overnight at 37 ◦ C and 5%
CO2 . Cell clones were gain by puromycin selection and successfully
transduced cells stably expressed GFP.

Fig. 1. The anatomy of carotid triangle and the CCA and it is branches. A: The neck
region was scrubbed with iodine and covered with a polylined sterile ﬁeld, cut a
hole in the surgical area. B: The carotid triangle bounded by the sternocleidomastoid
muscle (STM), the stylohyoid muscle (SHM) and the posterior belly of the digastric
muscle (DM). C: The anatomy of right CCA and it is adjacent.

3. Surgical procedure
2.3. Bioluminescence imaging
3.1. Middle cerebral artery occlusion
Bioluminescence imaging (BLI) was conducted using the in vivo
imaging system (IVIS). Mice were given an intraorbital injection of
100 ␮l d-luciferin (15 mg/ml) and the images were acquired over
1 min.

2.4. Animals
12C57Bl/6J male mice at 10 weeks, weighing 20–25 g were used
in this study. Mice were subjected to transient 1-h MCAO followed
by reperfusion. All mouse protocols procedures were approved by
the Animal Care and Use Committee of Yale University.

Mice were anesthetized with 5.0% isoﬂurane and maintained on
1.5% isoﬂurane in 70% N2 O and 30% O2 using a small-animal anesthesia system (VetEquip, Pleasanton, CA). Before starting surgery,
the depth of anesthesia was assessed by toe pinch. If no response
was elicited, the surgery was started. First, the animal was placed
on the operating table in supine position under an operating microscope. Then the neck region was scrubbed with iodine and covered
with a polylined sterile drape (Fig. 1A). After cutting the neck, blunt
dissection was used to expose carotid triangle (Fig. 1B) carotid
bifurcation, ECA and ICA. Further tracing the ECA, the occipital
artery (OA), superior thyroid artery (STA) were identiﬁed (Fig. 1C).

Fig. 2. Route of the monoﬁlament. A: The nylon monoﬁlament suture with a silicon coated tip. B: The monoﬁlament inserted into the ECA. C: The monoﬁlament went into
the ICA and passed the ﬁrst temporarily ligature on ICA. D: The monoﬁlament passed the second temporarily ligature on ICA and came to front of bifurcation on ICA. E: The
monoﬁlament bypassed the PPA and went into the terminal ICA. F: The monoﬁlament went into the middle cerebral artery (MCA).

Q. Cai et al. / Neuroscience Letters 597 (2015) 127–131

129

Fig. 3. Variation and classiﬁcation of OA. A and E: OA originate from the trunk of ICA. B and F: OA originate from the bifurcation of CCA. C and G: OA originate from the root
of ECA. D and H: OA originate from the trunk of ECA. E–H: Diagram of the A–D, green line represent the OA, blue line represent ICA.

The CCA was temporarily ligated with a 6/0 suture and a permanent ligature was tied around the ECA. The OA and STA were
then coagulated and cut. Then, the ECA was coagulated and cut
immediately distal to the ligature and retracted caudally. Then
pterygopalatine artery (PPA) was identiﬁed and temporarily tied.
Two temporary ligatures were prepared around ICA: one distal to
the bifurcation and the other immediately above the bifurcation.
An arteriotomy was performed in ECA stump and a monoﬁlament suture (Cat No. 602,156PK5Re, Doccol co, USA) (Fig. 2A) was
inserted in ECA and further to ICA (Fig. 2B). Once monoﬁlament
tip passed proximal ligature (Fig. 2C), this ligature was tightened
and the distal ligature on the ICA was loosened. The ﬁlament was
slowly advanced to pass the distal ligature to reach the bifurcation of PPA and terminal ICA (Fig. 2D). The tip of the ﬁlament was
directed medially toward the trachea to occlude the lumen of the
terminal ICA, avoiding the PPA (Fig. 2E). The occlude was advanced
through the terminal ICA until a mild resistance was felt and then
ligatures on ICA were tightened (Fig. 2F). The incision was closed
temporarily and the animal was placed back in the cage.
3.2. Placement of intra-arterial microcatheter and cell infusion
After 60 min of occlusion, the animals were re-anaesthetized.
The monoﬁlament was gently removed from MCA and the ligatures on ICA were tightened again. The microcatheter was then
introduced into the ECA from the primary hole and gently advanced
to the ICA. Labeled mNSCs (5 × 105 ) in 20 ␮l saline were slowly
infused through the microcatheter. After microcatheter removed,
the hole was closed using electrocautery and normal blood ﬂow
perfusion was reestablished.

and the mNSCs perfusion were completed smoothly without exception. Meanwhile, during the dissection, we found the variation of
OA was noticeable and we classiﬁed this variation into four categories to attempt to protect the OA.
4.1. Variation and classiﬁcation of OA
During the operation, we found gross variations of the OA. These
variations were necessary to consider when deciding whether the
OA could be preserved. We classiﬁed ﬁrst time these variations into
four categories by the origination of the OA: (1.) OA originating
from the trunk of ICA (1/12, 8.3%); (2.) OA originating from the
bifurcation of CCA (3/12, 25%); (3.) OA originating from the root of
ECA (4/12, 33.3%); (4.) OA originating from the trunk of ECA (4/12,
33.3%) (Fig. 3A–H).
For the fourth variation, the OA needed to be cut for the ECA to
be pulled down and facilitate the insertion of the ﬁlament whereas
for the last three categories, the OA did not impair the shift of the
ECA and the artery could be preserved. Usually, we temporarily
ligated the OA with ICA using the same suture on the ICA to prevent
possible retrograde ﬂow of blood.
4.2. In vivo assessment of mNSC biodistribution
Successfully transduced and puromycin-selected mNSC
expressed GFP (Fig. 4A) whereas the wild-type parental cell line
demonstrated no signal (Fig. 4B). Immediately after GFP-Luc-Pro
labeled mNSC infusion, BLI demonstrated a biodistribution of NSCs
in the ipsilateral hemisphere as the intra-artery perfusion (Fig. 4C).
5. Discussion

4. Results
All 12 mice were carried on successfully the model of middle
cerebral artery occlusion, and the placement of the microcatheter

Stroke is among the most frequent causes of death and adult
disability. Since ischemic stroke in patients is mostly (∼80%)
caused by the occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA),

130

Q. Cai et al. / Neuroscience Letters 597 (2015) 127–131

Failure to occlude these branches may result in up to 29% reduction
of agents delivered to the intracerebral circulation [3].
6. Conclusions
In summary, the intra-arterial microcatheter delivery model
shares many operational steps with the MACO/R model. So, it is
logical to combine the two models into one, in order to facilitate studying of stroke. In this study, we used this new method
to successfully induce brain ischemia and deliver mNSCs to the
brain. Some limitations of this approach include the increased time
required to adequately expose the ECA, STA, OA, ICA, and PPA
and the technical challenges that these operational steps pose.
However, we believe that a technically skilled neurosurgeon can
complete this surgery in a timeframe comparable to that required
for the MCAO/R and intra-arterial delivery models with improved
results.
Conﬂict of interest
Fig. 4. In vivo assessment of mNSC biodistribution. A: Successfully transduced
mNSC were expressed GFP. B: The wild-type NSCs growth into a sphere. C: A biodistribution of NSCs in the ipsilateral hemisphere of the intra-artery perfusion.

The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Funding

intraluminal suture MCA occlusion (MCAO) has become the most
commonly used model in the investigation of stroke in rodents
[5,10]. This model was ﬁrst introduced by Koizumi et al., and further
modiﬁed by Longa et al [7,11]. And during the operation, we choose
a silicon rubber-coated monoﬁlament (Cat No. 602,156PK5Re, Doccol Co., USA) rather than a heat-blunted nylon suture for the reason
it will create a smooth and manageable suture for occluding the
MCA with decreased damage damage to endothelium and perforation risk.
Knowledge of the anatomy and microsurgical skill are especially
important in this mouse model. The method of Koizumi introduce
the ﬁlament from CCA while the Longa’s method insert the suture
from ECA which could preserve the CCA. However, the two main
branches of the ECA (STA and OA) need to be cauterized and cut
to facilitate rollback of the ECA. The STA is a small artery that
arises from the trunk of ECA with little variation in origin and
direction. Unilaterally sacriﬁcing the STA does not produce serious adverse reactions, while the OA is much big and damage it
may cause ischemia and necrosis of the muscles on the occiput
and potentially increase the risk for postoperative mortality. Most
of the mouse models rarely take into account the origination of OA
and anatomic variations of the OA have not been classiﬁed [2]. We
classiﬁed variations into four categories according the origin of the
OA and attempted to preserve this artery. In our experiments, we
found that nearly 67% of OA could be preserved. In one case, the
OA even arose from the ICA. Care should be exercised in order to
dissect the ICA for it may be confused with the bifurcation of the
real PPA and the terminal ICA.
Neural stem cells demonstrated profound potential in the repair
and regeneration of ischemic brain tissue [5]. Several routes such as
intravenous, intra-arterial, and intra-cerebral administration have
been used to deliver stem cells to brain injuries in previous studies.
The intra-cerebral approach involves more invasive and complicated procedures and intravenous injections are subject to the
ﬁrst-pass effect through the liver and clearance by the lungs [4].
Intra-arterial administration can bypass these organs and lead to a
higher and more sustained cell presence at the ischemic site compared to intravenous approach [13,16].
For more efﬁcient delivery and accumulation of higher concentrations of therapeutic agents in the ischemic brain, the best
intra-arterial approach is through direct delivery into the ICA from
the CCA or ECA after transiently occluding both the PPA and OA.

This work is supported by Hubei Province health and family
planning scientiﬁc research project (WJ2015MB092) and the foundation of China Scholarship Council.
References
[1] L. Angelov, N.D. Doolittle, D.F. Kraemer, T. Siegal, G.H. Barnett, D.M.
Peereboom, G. Stevens, J. McGregor, K. Jahnke, C.A. Lacy, N.A. Hedrick, E.
Shalom, S. Ference, S. Bell, L. Sorenson, R.M. Tyson, M. Haluska, E.A. Neuwelt,
Blood–brain barrier disruption and intra-arterial methotrexate-based therapy
for newly diagnosed primary CNS lymphoma: a multi-institutional
experience, J. Clin. Oncol.: Off. J. Am. Soc. Clin. Oncol. 27 (2009) 3503–3509.
[2] S. Ansari, H. Azari, D.J. McConnell, A. Afzal, J. Mocco, Intraluminal middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model for ischemic stroke with laser
doppler ﬂowmetry guidance in mice, J. Vis. Exp.: JoVE 51 (2011) 2879.
[3] D.E. Bullard, S.C. Saris, D.D. Bigner, Carotid artery injections in 40- to 99-g
Fischer rats: technical note and evaluation of blood ﬂow by various injection
techniques, Neurosurgery 14 (1984) 406–411.
[4] L. Chen, K.R. Swartz, M. Toborek, Vessel microport technique for applications
in cerebrovascular research, J. Neurosci. Res. 87 (2009) 1718–1727.
[5] L. Guo, J. Ge, S. Wang, Y. Zhou, X. Wang, Y. Wu, A novel method for efﬁcient
delivery of stem cells to the ischemic brain, Stem Cell Res. Ther. 4 (2013) 116.
[6] L. Guo, J. Ge, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, R.C. Zhao, Y. Wu, Three-dimensional
spheroid-cultured mesenchymal stem cells devoid of embolism attenuate
brain stroke injury after intra-arterial injection, Stem Cells Dev. 23 (2014)
978–989.
[7] A. Guzel, R. Rolz, G. Nikkhah, U.D. Kahlert, J. Maciaczyk, A microsurgical
procedure for middle cerebral artery occlusion by intraluminal monoﬁlament
insertion technique in the rat: a special emphasis on the methodology, Exp.
Transl. Stroke Med. 6 (2014) 6.
[8] S. Ishizaka, N. Horie, K. Satoh, Y. Fukuda, N. Nishida, I. Nagata, Intra-arterial
cell transplantation provides timing-dependent cell distribution and
functional recovery after stroke, Stroke 44 (2013) 720–726.
[9] J. Khabbal, E. Kerkela, B. Mitkari, M. Raki, J. Nystedt, V. Mikkonen, K.
Bergstrom, S. Laitinen, M. Korhonen, J. Jolkkonen, Differential clearance of rat
and human bone marrow–derived mesenchymal stem cells from the brain
after intra-arterial infusion in rats, Cell Transplant. (2014),
http://dx.doi.org/10.3727/096368914×096679336.
[10] F. Liu, L.D. McCullough, Middle cerebral artery occlusion model in rodents:
methods and potential pitfalls, J. Biomed. Biotechnol. 2011 (2011) 464701.
[11] E.Z. Longa, P.R. Weinstein, S. Carlson, R. Cummins, Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats, Stroke 20 (1989) 84–91.
[12] B. Mitkari, F. Nitzsche, E. Kerkela, K. Kuptsova, J. Huttunen, J. Nystedt, M.
Korhonen, J. Jolkkonen, Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem/stromal
cells produce efﬁcient localization in the brain and enhanced angiogenesis
after intra-arterial delivery in rats with cerebral ischemia, but this is not
translated to behavioral recovery, Behav. Brain Res. 259 (2014) 50–59.
[13] A.V. Pendharkar, J.Y. Chua, R.H. Andres, N. Wang, X. Gaeta, H. Wang, A. De, R.
Choi, S. Chen, B.K. Rutt, S.S. Gambhir, R. Guzman, Biodistribution of neural
stem cells after intravascular therapy for hypoxic–ischemia, Stroke 41 (2010)
2064–2070.
[14] S. Rosenblum, T.N. Smith, N. Wang, J.Y. Chua, E. Westbroek, K. Wang, R.
Guzman, BDNF pre-treatment of human embryonic–derived neural stem cells

Q. Cai et al. / Neuroscience Letters 597 (2015) 127–131
improves cell survival and functional recovery after transplantation in
hypoxic–ischemic stroke, Cell Transplant. (2014),
http://dx.doi.org/10.3727/096368914×096679354.
[15] A. Santillan, D.G. Rubin, C.P. Foley, D. Sondhi, R.G. Crystal, Y.P. Gobin, D.J.
Ballon, Cannulation of the internal carotid artery in mice: a novel technique
for intra-arterial delivery of therapeutics, J. Neurosci. Methods 222 (2014)
106–110.
[16] P. Walczak, J. Zhang, A.A. Gilad, D.A. Kedziorek, J. Ruiz-Cabello, R.G. Young,
M.F. Pittenger, P.C. van Zijl, J. Huang, J.W. Bulte, Dual-modality monitoring of
targeted intraarterial delivery of mesenchymal stem cells after transient
ischemia, Stroke 39 (2008) 1569–1574.

131

[17] J. Woitzik, L. Schilling, A new method for superselective middle cerebral
artery infusion in the rat, J. Neurosurg. 106 (2007) 872–878.
[18] B. Yang, E. Migliati, K. Parsha, K. Schaar, X. Xi, J. Aronowski, S.I. Savitz,
Intra-arterial delivery is not superior to intravenous delivery of autologous
bone marrow mononuclear cells in acute ischemic stroke, Stroke 44 (2013)
3463–3472.
[19] D.R. Yavagal, B. Lin, A.P. Raval, P.S. Garza, C. Dong, W. Zhao, E.B. Rangel, I.
McNiece, T. Rundek, R.L. Sacco, M. Perez-Pinzon, J.M. Hare, Efﬁcacy and
dose-dependent safety of intra-arterial delivery of mesenchymal stem cells in
a rodent stroke model, PLoS One 9 (2014) e93735.

