MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 3734-3738, 2015

3734

Protective effects of allicin against ischemic stroke in
a rat model of middle cerebral artery occlusion
BENPING ZHANG1, FENG LI1, WEIJIANG ZHAO2, JIEBING LI3, QINGSONG LI1 and WEIZHI WANG1
1

Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086;
Center for Neuroscience, Medical College of Shantou University, Shantou, Guangdong 515041; 3Department of Ultrasound,
The Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, P.R. China

2

Received August 28, 2014; Accepted May 13, 2015
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3883
Abstract. Allicin, a molecule predominantly responsible for
the pungent odor and the antibiotic function of garlic, exhibits
various pharmacological activities and has been suggested
to be beneficial in the treatment of various disorders. The
present study aimed to elucidate the effect of allicin in
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury in rats. Rats were
subjected to 1.5 h of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO), followed by 24 h of reperfusion. Rats were randomly
assigned to the sham surgery group, the MCAO group and the
MCAO + allicin group. Neurological score, cerebral infarct
size, brain water content, neuronal apoptosis, serum tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)‑α and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity
were measured. The results suggested that allicin reduced cerebral infarction area, brain water content, neuronal apoptosis,
TNF‑α levels and MPO activity in the serum. The results of
the present study indicated that allicin protects the brain from
cerebral I/R injury, which may be ascribed to its anti‑apoptotic
and anti‑inflammatory effects.
Introduction
Acute ischemic stroke has high rates of mortality and morbidity
and is a major cause of mortality globally (1). Ischemic stroke
accounts for almost 80% of all types of stroke, usually caused
by a thrombotic or embolic occlusion of the middle cerebral
artery or its branches (2). This occlusion triggers brain injury
via a complex series of pathophysiological processes, resulting
in neuronal death or neuronal apoptosis and subsequent
development of neurological disorders. There is an urgent
requirement for the development of neuroprotective therapies for acute cerebral ischemia, which salvage the ischemic

Correspondence to: Dr Weizhi Wang, Department of Neurology,
The Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University,
248 Xuefu Road, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150086, P.R. China
E‑mail: wangweizhi2009@126.com

Key words: allicin, cerebral ischemic stroke, middle cerebral artery
occlusion, tumor necrosis factor‑α, myeloperoxidase

penumbra. This strategy is reflected by the increasing use of
acute re‑canalization therapies, including thrombolysis (3) and
the mechanical removal of clots (4). Various neuroprotective
compounds have been developed to treat ischemic damage (5);
however, satisfactory drug treatments in clinical practice are
limited.
Allium sativum, commonly known as garlic, has been
widely utilized globally as a condiment. Previous studies have
suggested possible medicinal applications and health benefits
of garlic (6,7). In addition, garlic has been used for a long time
in Traditional Chinese Medicine in the treatment of various
diseases (8).
Allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate), known as one of the most
active components of garlic, is responsible for the typical
smell and numerous beneficial functions of garlic (9). Previous
studies have demonstrated that allicin possesses a wide spectrum of pharmacological effects, including anti‑inflammatory,
anti‑fungal, anti‑oxidant and anti‑tumoral activities (10,11).
Allicin has also been reported to exhibit protective effects on
the brain. It has been suggested that allicin mitigates traumatic
brain injury (12). However, whether allicin protects the brain
from ischemic injury remains to be elucidated. Therefore, the
present study aimed to elucidate the effect of allicin and its
underlying mechanisms of action in a rat model middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO).
Materials and methods
Reagents. Allicin (purity, >98%) was purchased from the
National Institute for the Control of Pharmaceutical and
Biological Products (Beijing, China). A tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)‑α ELISA kit was purchased from Beyotime Institute
of Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). A myeloperoxidase
(MPO) assay kit was purchased from Nanjing Jiancheng
Bioengineering Institute (Nanjing, China). 2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) was purchased from Sigma‑Aldrich
(St. Louis, MO, USA).
Animals. A total of 60 adult male Sprague‑Dawley rats
(250‑300 g; 6‑8 weeks‑old) were purchased from the
Experimental Animal Center of Harbin Medical University
(Harbin, China). All animals were maintained under a 12‑h
light/dark regime with ad libitum access to food and water.

ZHANG et al: ALLICIN AND CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC STROKE

The rats were housed at 22˚C with 50% relative humidity. The
animals were maintained in accordance with the Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the United
States' National Institutes of Health (publication no. 85‑23,
revised 1996; Bethesda, MD, USA). The protocol was approved
by the Committee of Experimental Animals of Harbin Medical
University (Harbin, China).
Preparation of MCAO model. Rats were randomly assigned to
three groups: Sham‑surgery group (n=20), MCAO group (n=20)
and MCAO + allicin group (n=20). The rats were anesthetized
intraperitoneally (i.p.) with chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg;
Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology). Subsequently, the rat
was fixed in a supine position and a midline skin incision was
made to expose the right common carotid artery, the internal
carotid artery (ICA) and the external carotid artery (ECA). The
MCAO was performed as described previously (13). Briefly,
a 4‑0 nylon monofilament (Sunbio Biotech, Beijing, China)
with a head‑rounded tip was inserted into the ECA and gently
advanced into the ICA for ~20 mm to obstruct the blood flow
of the right middle cerebral artery. After a 90‑minute occlusion, the filament was withdrawn, allowing for the reperfusion
for 24 h. The rectal temperature of the rat was maintained
at 37˚C±0.5˚C using a heating pad. Rats in the sham group
were subjected to the same procedure, with the exception of
the MCAO. Allicin was administered at a dose of 50 mg/kg i.p.
3 h after reperfusion daily for five consecutive days. Allicin was
dissolved in 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Sigma‑Aldrich).
Rats in the sham and MCAO groups were injected with an
equal volume of DMSO.
Neurological score. The neurological score was assessed by an
observer blinded to the animal groups after 24 h reperfusion
according to previously described methods (14). The neurological deficits were evaluated on a five‑point scale as follows: No
neurological deficits = 0; failure to fully extend left paw = 1;
circling to the left = 2; falling to the left = 3; no spontaneous
walking and depressed levels of consciousness = 4.
Evaluation of brain water content. At 24 h after MCAO, the
brain water content was detected according to a previously
described method (15). The rats were sacrificed by deep
anesthesia with chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.) and brains
were immediately removed and placed on a frozen plate.
Tissue samples were collected from infarct areas of ischemic
rats and from the corresponding areas in the sham‑surgery
rats. The samples were weighed to determine the wet weight.
Subsequently, samples were dried in a desiccating oven
at  110˚C for 24  h and then weighed to determine the dry
weight. The brain water content was calculated using the
following formula: brain water content (%) = (wet weight ‑ dry
weight) x100%/wet weight.
Evaluation of infarct size. The animals were sacrificed 24 h
after reperfusion (n=6 in each group) by deep anesthesia with
chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.). The brains were rapidly
removed and cut into five coronal sections (2 mm). The
sections were incubated in a solution of 2% TTC at 37˚C for
30 min. The infarct sizes were measured using ImageJ software version 1.6 (National Institutes of Health).

3735

Immunohistochemistry. At 24 h after reperfusion, the rats were
anesthetized and transcardially perfused with saline, followed by
4% paraformaldehyde (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology
Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) in phosphate‑buffered saline.
Subsequently, the samples were dehydrated in a graded series of
ethanol and embedded in paraffin (Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar,
Germany). Following epitope retrieval at 120˚C for 5‑10 min
using citrate buffer (10 mM citric acid, 0.05% Tween 20;
pH 6.0), the sections were incubated with 3% H2O2 for 15 min
and then with 5% bovine serum albumin (Beyotime Institute of
Biotechnology) for 1 h. The sections were then incubated with
primary mouse monoclonal neuronal nuclei (NeuN) antibody
(1:100; cat. no. MAB377; EMD Millipore, Billerica, MD, USA)
overnight at 4˚C, followed by incubation with goat anti‑mouse
secondary antibody (1:1,000; P044701; Dako, Carpinteria, CA,
USA) for 30 min at 37˚C. The immunoreactivity was visualized using a Dako Envision system‑horseradish peroxidase kit
(Dako). Finally, counterstaining was performed using hematoxylin (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology). NeuN‑positive
staining in the cortex was identified by the presence of deep
brown staining of cells specifically localized to the nucleus
(TI‑S; Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). The images were
analyzed using the Image‑Pro plus 6.0 image analysis system
(Media Cybernetics, Inc., Rockville, MD, USA).
Western blot analysis. Total proteins of the cortex were extracted
and quantified according to the bicinchoninic acid protein
assay kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology). The protein
samples were subjected to 8% SDS‑PAGE (Beijing Solarbio
Science & Technology Co., Ltd.) followed by electrotransfer
onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore, Boston,
MA, USA). Subsequently, the membranes were blocked with
5% non‑fat milk for 2 h at room temperature. The membranes
were then incubated overnight at 4˚C with the rabbit anti‑cleaved
caspase‑3 polyclonal antibody (1:1,000; cat.  no.  9661; Cell
Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) and with rabbit
anti‑β‑actin polyclonal antibody (1:3,000; sc‑7210; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, TX, USA), followed by three washes
with Tris‑buffered saline with Tween‑20 (TBST; Beijing Solarbio
Science & Technology Co., Ltd.). Subsequently, the membranes
were incubated with the secondary antibody (1:5,000; Sc-2004;
goat anti‑rabbit immunoglobulin G‑horseradish peroxidase;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) for 2 h at room temperature,
followed by three washes with TBST. Finally, the bands were
detected via chemiluminescence with the ECL Plus western
blotting detection kit (EMD Millipore). Blots were analyzed
using the Bio‑Rad Imaging software (Bio‑Rad Laboratories,
Inc., Hercules, CA, USA) and Quantity One software package
version 4.6.2 (Bio‑Rad Laboratories).
Measurement of serum TNF‑α. At 24 h after the MCAO, blood
samples (1 ml) were harvested from the femoral vein. Following
centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 15 min, the supernatant was
collected and stored at ‑80˚C. Serum TNF‑α was assayed using
a TNF‑α ELISA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Evaluation of MPO. Following reperfusion, brain tissue from
the penumbral cortex was immediately harvested and stored
at  ‑80˚C. The brain tissue was homogenized in ice‑cold

3736

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 3734-3738, 2015

A

Figure 1. Effect of allicin on neurological deficits. Allicin significantly
improved neurological recovery compared with that in the MCAO group at
24 h after reperfusion. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (n=6). *P<0.05 versus the sham group; #P<0.05 versus the MCAO group.
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

B

Figure 2. Allicin reduces brain edema at 24 h after MCAO in rats. The brain
water content of rats is shown. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation (n=6). *P<0.05, versus the sham group; #P<0.05, versus the MCAO
group. MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

phosphate‑buffered saline. Subsequently, the homogenate was
centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 15 min. MPO was detected using
an MPO kit according to manufacturer's instructions (Nanjing
Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute).
Statistical analysis. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analyses were performed using the
SPSS 16.0 software package (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
Data analysis was performed by one‑way analysis of variance,
followed by a least significant difference‑t‑test for inter‑group
comparisons. P<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically
significant difference.
Results
Allicin ameliorates neurological deficits following MCAO. As
shown in Fig. 1, the rats in the sham group did not exhibit any
neurological deficits, while the MCAO rats exhibited severe
neurological deficits according the neurological scoring system.
Allicin treatment markedly ameliorated the neurological deficits
compared with those in the MCAO group (P<0.05).
Allicin decreases brain edema following MCAO. At 24 h after
MCAO, the brain water content of the MCAO rats was markedly
higher than that of the sham‑surgery rats. Treatment with allicin

Figure 3. Allicin reduces the infarct volume in an MCAO model.
(A) Representative images of 2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazolium chloride‑stained
cerebral sections in each group. The normal tissue was stained dark red, while
the infarct tissue was white. (B) Quantitative analysis of the infarct volume.
Values are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (n=6). *P<0.05, versus
the sham group; #P<0.05, versus the MCAO group. MCAO, middle cerebral
artery occlusion.

significantly decreased brain edema compared with those in the
MCAO group (P<0.05; Fig. 2).
Allicin reduces the brain infarct volume following MCAO.
The rats in the sham group did not exhibit any infarct area in
the brain, while in the MCAO group, a clear infarction was
observed. Following treatment with allicin, the infarct volume
in the MCAO + allicin group was significantly lower compared
with that in the MCAO group (P<0.05; Fig. 3).
Allicin rescues neuronal survival following MCAO. Compared
with the sham group, the number of NeuN‑positive neurons
was significantly decreased in the MCAO group. The decrease
of NeuN‑positive neurons was attenuated by allicin treatment
(P<0.05; Fig. 4).
Allicin inhibits cerebral ischemia‑induced neuronal apop‑
tosis. To identify whether the neuroprotective effect of allicin
was associated with its anti‑apoptotic activity, the levels of
cleaved caspase‑3 were assessed. Compared with those in the
sham group, the levels of cleaved caspase‑3 were significantly
increased in the MCAO group. Of note, allicin markedly
decreased the levels of cleaved caspase‑3 (P<0.05; Fig. 5).

ZHANG et al: ALLICIN AND CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC STROKE

3737

D

Figure 4. Allicin decreases neuronal apoptosis during MCAO. (A‑C) NeuN (neuronal marker) immunohistochemical staining in the sham, MCAO and
MCAO + allicin groups (scale bar, 50 µm). (D) Quantitative analysis of the mean optical density values for NeuN. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation (n=6). *P<0.05, vs. sham group; #P<0.05, vs. MCAO group. MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; NeuN, neuronal nuclei; OD, optical density.

A

B

Figure 5. Allicin attenuates neuronal apoptosis induced by cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury. (A) Representative western blot showing the levels
of cleaved caspase‑3. (B) Relative density of cleaved caspase‑3 (fold of sham)
in the experimental groups. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard
deviation (n=6). *P<0.05, versus the sham group; #P<0.05, versus the MCAO
group. MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Figure 7. Comparison of MPO activity in each group. Compared with the
MCAO group, the MPO activity in the MCAO + allicin group was markedly
decreased. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (n=6).
*
P<0.05, versus the sham group; #P<0.05, versus the MCAO group. MCAO,
middle cerebral artery occlusion; MPO, myeloperoxidase.

Allicin attenuates increases in serum levels of TNF‑α following
MCAO. A cerebral ichemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury causes the
production of TNF‑α  (16). Thus, the levels of serum TNF‑α
were assessed. Fig. 6 shows that, compared with the MCAO
group, allicin significantly decreased the serum levels of TNF‑α
(P<0.05).
Allicin attenuates increases in MPO activity following MCAO.
As indicated in Fig. 7, the MPO activity in the sham group was
at a normal level, while that in the MCAO group was markedly
elevated (P<0.05). Of note, treatment with allicin significantly
lowered cerebral MPO activity (P<0.05).

Figure 6. Serum levels of TNF‑α in each group. Compared with the MCAO
group, allicin significantly reduced TNF‑ α levels in the MCAO + allicin
group. Values are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (n=6). *P<0.05,
versus the sham group; #P<0.05, versus the MCAO group. MCAO, middle
cerebral artery occlusion; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.

Discussion
In the present study, it was demonstrated that allicin exerted a
neuroprotective effect against cerebral I/R injury. Treatment
with allicin significantly ameliorated neurological deficits,

3738

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 3734-3738, 2015

decreased the cerebral infarct area, as well as attenuated
neuronal death, apoptosis and inflammation. Therefore, the
results of the present study suggested that allicin may be of
therapeutic value in the treatment of ischemic stroke.
In the signaling pathways involved in apoptosis, ischemia
induces the translocation of B‑cell lymphoma 2‑associated
X protein into the outer membrane of the mitochondria, leading
to the release of cytochrome C from the mitochondria to the
cytoplasm. This process causes the activation of pro‑caspase‑3
into active caspase‑3 (cleaved caspase‑3), a critical executioner
of apoptosis (17), triggering apoptosis (18,19).
Apoptosis, induced by cerebral I/R injury, is one of the major
causes of cell death in the ischemic penumbra (20). The infarct
size is determined by the number of apoptotic neurons in the
penumbra (21). Therefore, inhibiting apoptosis in the ischemic
penumbra may be a promising therapeutic target for mitigating
cerebral infarct size following cerebral I/R injury. In the present
study, the number of NeuN‑positive cells in the MCAO group
was significantly decreased, while it was markedly increased
following allicin treatment. In addition, cleaved caspase‑3 levels
were increased in rats subjected to MCAO, which was attenuated by allicin treatment. Therefore, the results of the present
study demonstrated that allicin has anti‑apoptotic effects.
In addition, inflammation is critical in brain injury and
infarction induced by cerebral ischemia. During inflammation, inflammatory cytokines and cells are of great
significance. Inflammation‑associated cytokines include pro‑
and anti‑inflammatory cytokines according to their ability to
activate or inhibit inflammation (22). Important pro‑inflammatory cytokines, including TNF‑α, interleukin (IL)‑1β and
IL‑6, are responsible for the initiation of inflammatory reactions and inducing the expression of other cytokines following
I/R injury (23). In the present study, allicin markedly reduced
TNF‑α and MPO activity, indicating that allicin protects the
brain from ischemia via an anti‑inflammatory pathway.
In conclusion, the present study indicated that allicin has
a protective effect against cerebral I/R injury in rats, which
may be ascribed to its anti‑inflammatory and anti‑apoptotic
properties. The findings of the present study provided further
insight into the mechanism by which allicin exerts its neuroprotective effects and paved a way for the development of a
novel therapeutic target in the clinical treatment of cerebral
ischemic stroke.
References
 1.	Saito T, Nito C, Ueda M, et al: Continuous oral administration
of atorvastatin ameliorates brain damage after transient focal
ischemia in rats. Life Sci 94: 106‑114, 2014.
 2.	Durukan A and Tatlisumak T: Acute ischemic stroke: Overview
of major experimental rodent models, pathophysiology, and
therapy of focal cerebral ischemia. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 87: 179‑197, 2007.

 3.	Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, et al; ECASS Investigators:
Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med 359: 1317‑1329, 2008.
 4.	Smith WS, Sung G, Saver J, et al; Multi MERCI Investigators:
Mechanical thrombectomy for acute ischemic stroke: Final
results of the Multi MERCI trial. Stroke 39: 1205‑1212, 2008.
 5.	Katsura K, Suda S, Abe A, Kanamaru T, Toda Y and Katayama Y:
Brain protection therapy in acute cerebral infarction. J Nippon
Med Sch 79: 104‑110, 2012.
 6.	Asdaq SM: Antioxidant and hypolipidemic potential of aged
garlic extract and its constituent, s‑allyl cysteine, in rats. Evid
Based Complement Alternat Med 2015: 328545, 2015.
 7.	A r r e o l a R , Q u i n t e r o ‑ Fa b i á n S, L ó p e z ‑ R o a R I ,
Flores‑Gutiérrez EO, Reyes‑Grajeda JP, Carrera‑Quintanar L and
Ortuño‑Sahagún D: Immunomodulation and anti‑inflammatory
effects of garlic compounds. J Immunol Res 2015: 401630, 2015.
 8.	Ginter E and Simko V: Garlic (Allium sativum L.) and cardiovascular diseases. Bratisl Lek Listy 111: 452‑456, 2010.
  9.	Lawson LD and Gardner CD: Composition, stability, and
bioavailability of garlic products used in a clinical trial. J Agric
Food Chem 53: 6254‑6261, 2005.
10.	Hunter R, Caira M and Stellenboom N: Thiolsulfinate allicin
from garlic: Inspiration for a new antimicrobial agent. Ann NY
Acad Sci 1056: 234‑241, 2005.
11.	 Chan JY, Tsui HT, Chung IY, Chan RY, Kwan YW and Chan SW:
Allicin protects rat cardiomyoblasts (H9c2 cells) from hydrogen
peroxide‑induced oxidative injury through inhibiting the
generation of intracellular reactive oxygen species. Int J Food Sci
Nutr 65: 868‑873, 2014.
12.	Zhou YF, Li WT, Han HC, et al: Allicin protects rat cortical
neurons against mechanical trauma injury by regulating nitric
oxide synthase pathways. Brain Res Bull 100: 14‑21, 2014.
13.	Ye R, Yang Q, Kong X, et al: Ginsenoside Rd attenuates early
oxidative damage and sequential inflammatory response after
transient focal ischemia in rats. Neurochem Int 58: 391‑398, 2011.
14.	Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R: Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20: 84‑91, 1989.
15.	Hatashita S, Hoff JT and Salamat SM: Ischemic brain edema and
the osmotic gradient between blood and brain. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 8: 552‑559, 1988.
16.	Saad MA, Abdelsalam RM, Kenawy SA and Attia AS:
Montelukast, a cysteinyl leukotriene receptor‑1 antagonist
protects against hippocampal injury induced by transient global
cerebral ischemia and reperfusion in rats. Neurochem Res 40:
139‑150, 2015.
17.	Fer na ndes‑A lnem r i T, Litwack G a nd A lnem r i ES:
CPP32, a novel human apoptotic protein with homology to
Caenorhabditis elegans cell death protein Ced‑3 and mammalian
interleukin‑1 beta‑converting enzyme. J Biol Chem  269:
30761‑30764, 1994.
18.	Lee Y and Gustafsson AB: Role of apoptosis in cardiovascular
disease. Apoptosis 14: 536‑548, 2009.
19.	Crow MT, Mani K, Nam YJ and Kitsis RN: The mitochondrial
death pathway and cardiac myocyte apoptosis. Circ Res  95:
957‑970, 2004.
20.	Mattson MP, Duan W, Pedersen WA and Culmsee C:
Neurodegenerative disorders and ischemic brain diseases.
Apoptosis 6: 69‑81, 2001.
21.	Broughton BR, Reutens DC and Sobey CG: Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia. Stroke 40: e331‑e339, 2009.
22.	Chen T, Liu W, Chao X, et al: Salvianolic acid B attenuates brain
damage and inflammation after traumatic brain injury in mice.
Brain Res Bull 84: 163‑168, 2011.
23.	Yasuda Y, Shimoda T, Uno K, et al: Temporal and sequential
changes of glial cells and cytokine expression during
neuronal degeneration after transient global ischemia in rats.
J Neuroinflammation 8: 70, 2011.

