MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1321-1327, 2015

Anti-inflammatory effects of Gualou Guizhi decoction
in transient focal cerebral ischemic brains
HAI XIA HU1,2, RU HUI LIN1,2, XIAO QIN ZHU1,2, ZUAN FANG LI1,2 and LI DIAN CHEN3
1

Academy of Integrative Medicine; 2Fujian Key Laboratory of Integrative Medicine on Geriatrics;
College of Rehabilitation Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, P.R. China

3

Received December 31, 2014; Accepted February 20, 2015
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3511
Abstract. The aim of the present study was to explore the
neuroprotective effects of Gualou Guizhi decoction (GLGZD)
in a rat model of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO).
Sprague‑Dawley rats were divided into three groups: Sham
(no MCAO), MCAO (MCAO with no GLGZD treatment) and
GLGZD (MCAO with GLGZD treatment). Rats in the MCAO
and GLGZD groups were subjected to permanent occlusion of
the left middle cerebral artery. Neurological function and infarct
volume were measured. Microglial activation and inflammatory
cell accumulation were measured using immunohistochemistry.
mRNA and protein expression of inflammatory mediators were
examined using reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase
chain reaction and an enzyme‑linked immunosorbent assay.
The expression of proteins associated with the nuclear factor κ‑B
(NF‑κ B) inflammation signaling pathway was analyzed using
western blotting. The results of the present study suggested that
infarct size was significantly reduced and neurological behavior
function was improved in rats with MCAO treated with GLGZD
compared with rats in the MCAO group. Amoeboid microglial
expansion and inflammatory cell migration were observed in the
infarcted areas of rats in the GLGZD group and were not identified in those of the MCAO group. Target mRNA and protein
levels, and inflammatory cell infiltration were significantly
reduced in the GLGZD group compared with the MCAO model
group. Notably, GLGZD treatment induced neuroprotective
effects, reducing inflammation and inhibiting NF‑κB signaling

Correspondence to: Dr Li Dian Chen, College of Rehabilitation
Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
1 Qiuyang Road, Fuzhou, Fujian 350108, P.R. China
E‑mail: cld@fjtcm.edu.cn

Abbreviations: GLGZD, gualou guizhi decoction; MCAO, middle

cerebral artery occlusion; TNF‑α, tumor necrosis factor‑α; IL‑1β,
interleukin 1β; MCP‑1, monocyte chemotactic protein 1; Mac‑2,
macrophage galactose‑specific lectin‑2; MPO, myeloperoxidase;
NeuN, neuronal nuclei; NF‑κ B, nuclear factor κ‑B; Iκ Bα,
inhibitor κ B‑α; ANOVA, analysis of variance

Key words: gualou guizhi decoction, middle cerebral artery occlusion,
cerebral infarction, inflammation, microglia, nuclear factor κ-B

compared with the MCAO group. Therefore, GLGZD may
exhibit anti‑inﬂammatory effects against ischemia‑reperfusion
brain injury and may be a therapeutic target for ischemic stroke.
Introduction
Stroke is the one of leading causes of morbidity and mortality
worldwide (1,2). Ischemic stroke is a sudden interruption of
blood supply to the brain caused by the blockage of an artery,
which may result in brain damage and neurologic dysfunction (3). The suppression of brain damage resulting from
ischemic stroke is essential in order to prevent a decrease
in the quality of life for patients. However, a therapeutic
strategy for cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury has yet to
be established (4‑6). Neuroinflammation following ischemia
is characterized by the rapid activation of resident microglia
and the infiltration of inflammatory cells. Neuroinflammation
causes an increase in the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species, and may lead to blood‑brain
barrier disruption, brain edema, and cell necrosis and apoptosis.
Recent studies have demonstrated that reactive microglia
express inﬂammatory mediators that may increase the risk of
stroke in patients with permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and transient ischemia (7‑9). The maintenance of
microglial function during focal stroke may be more important
than that of neurons. The mechanisms of microglial activation involve nuclear factor‑κB (NF‑κB) and mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK) signaling pathways. The inflammatory
responses to brain injury are associated with the pathogenesis
of stroke (10‑12). The selective inhibition of inflammatory
cytokine activity is important for the development of effective
treatments for brain ischemia and reperfusion injury (13).
Gualou Guizhi decoction (GLGZD), a traditional Chinese
medicine, has been widely used in China for the treatment of
stroke‑induced spasticity (14,15). A previous study has demonstrated that GLGZD treatment may inhibit spasticity resulting
from ischemia by modulating glutamate levels in an experimental rat model (16). Furthermore, previous studies have
suggested that GLGZD may exhibit anti‑neuroinflammatory
effects by suppressing microglial activation in a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)‑induced microglial cell culture experimental
model (17,18). In light of the results of previous studies, it
is hypothesized that GLGZD may be used for the treatment
of cerebral ischemia injury via a number of pathological

1322

HU et al: ANTI-INFLAMMATORY EFFECT OF GLGZD

pathways. The present study investigated the underlying regulatory effects of GLGZD in an experimental rat model. In the
present study, transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced in
rats using a MCAO model and one group of the rats received
GLGZD treatment. Inflammatory cytokine expression levels,
microglial activation and neutrophil infiltration were measured,
which are associated with the NF-κ B signaling pathway and
are indicative of a neuroinflammatory response. The aim of
the present study was to investigate whether GLGZD exerted
an anti‑inflammatory and protective effect via the NF‑κ B
signaling pathway, following cerebral ischemic injury.
Materials and methods
Animals. Male Sprague‑Dawley rats (age, 6 weeks; weight,
200‑250 g), were obtained from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory
Animal Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Rats were housed at
constant temperature and relative humidity and exposed to a
12 h light and darkness cycle. They were treated according
to the animal facility guidelines of Fujian University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine (Fuzhou, China). The animals
were fed standard rodent food and pure water, ad libitum.
Experimental procedures were conducted strictly in accordance with international ethical guidelines and the National
Institutes of Health Guide concerning the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals. This protocol was approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine.
Preparation of herbal extracts. Medicinal plants were
obtained from Guo Yi Tang Chinese Herbal Medicine Store
(Fujian, China) for the preparation of the GLGZD extract.
The preparation included a mixture of six crude plant extract
ingredients: Trichosanthis radix, Ramulus cinnamomi,
Paeonia lactiflora, Glycyrrhiza radix, Zingiber officinale
Roscoe and Fructus jujubae in a ratio of 3:3:3:2:3:3. The
mixture was incubated in double distilled water for 30 min,
and then heated to 100˚C and refluxed twice for 2  h.
Subsequently, the mixture was filtered and concentrated using
a rotary evaporator (RE‑2000; Shanghai Yarong Biochemistry
Instrument Factory, Shanghai, China) to a final concentration
of 1.16 g/ml (16,17).
Rat model and experimental grouping. The MCAO rat model
was established according to the methods of a previous
study (16). Briefly, the rats were anesthetized using 10% chloral
hydrate (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Shanghai,
China), subsequently the left common carotid artery (CCA), the
left external carotid artery and the internal carotid artery (ICA)
were isolated and exposed. A monofilament nylon suture coated
with poly-L-lysine (Beijing Sunbio Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing,
China) was inserted though the CCA into the ICA (~8‑20 mm
beyond the carotid artery bifurcation) until resistance was felt.
The neck incision was then closed. Blood flow to the brain was
blocked for 2 h in order to induce ischemia, subsequently the
suture was withdrawn slowly by ~10 mm in order to permit
perfusion. Rats that exhibited hemiparesis or an increase in
body temperature were used for the experiments. Rats were
then randomly divided into three groups (n=15 per group):
Sham group, rats received sham surgery (not MCAO); MCAO

model group, rats were subjected to MCAO with no GLGZD
treatment. GLGZD group, rats were subjected to MCAO and
treated daily with GLGZD (1.16 g/ml) for seven days.
Behavioral examination. Following 2 h and 7 days of perfusion, blinded observer evaluations of neurological deficits
were conducted for eight rats per group. The criteria for the
neurological severity score was graded from 0‑4 (19): 0, rat
movement without any neurological deficit; 1, complete failure
to move the right forepaw; 2, repeated circling to the right
when crawling; 3, falling to the right; 4, complete loss of the
ability to walk. Rats with score 0 or 4 were excluded from the
subsequent stages of the investigation (20).
Assessment of cerebral infarct volume. Following the evaluation of neurological deficits, the rats were anesthetized using an
intraperitoneal injection of 10% chloral hydrate (100 g/0.3 ml)
and then decapitated. Brains were removed and placed on ice
for isolation of the cerebral cortex, subsequently 2‑mm coronal
sections were prepared. The sections were stained using tetrazolium chloride (TTC; 20 g/l, Sigma‑Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA) with phosphate‑buffered saline (PBS), for 30 min at
37˚C, in order to measure brain cell death. TTC is converted
into a red dye when taken up by living cells. Therefore,
ischemic brain cells appeared white and non‑ischemic brain
cells appeared red. Images of the sections were captured
using a digital camera (SX20; Canon Inc., Tokyo, Japan).
Infarct volume was measured using Image analysis software
(Image J 1.37, National Institutes of Health, Betheseda, MA,
USA) and calculated as the percentage of infarcted volume of
the total cortex volume.
Tissue collection. At the end of treatment, rats (n=6 per group)
were sacrificed and brains were rapidly removed for TTC
staining. Then, nine other rats in each group were anesthetized using an intraperitoneal injection of 10% chloral hydrate
(100 g/0.3 ml) and then perfused transcardially with saline
(250  ml) and 4% paraformaldehyde (250  ml), followed by
rapid removal of the brain. The cortex was then dissected for
immunohistochemistry, RNA isolation and protein extraction.
Blood was collected via cardiac puncture using a heparinized
syringe (Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Nanjing, China)
and centrifuged at 1,625 x g for 20 min in order to obtain the
plasma that was subsequently stored at ‑80˚C.
Enzyme‑immunosorbent assay (ELISA) cytokine analysis.
Cytokine production in the plasma samples [tumor necrosis
factor‑α (TNF‑α), interleukin 1β (IL‑1β), interleukin 6 (IL‑6)
and monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP‑1)] were measured
using ELISA kits (R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN,
USA), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Microwell
absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader
(BioTek 8008, Bad Friedrichshall, Germany).
Hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) staining. H&E histology was
conducted in order to examine the histopathological alterations in ischemic brain samples. Brains were dissected and
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4˚C for 72  h, and then
dehydrated and embedded in paraffin blocks. Coronal sections
(3‑mm) were cut backward from the optic chiasma. Sections

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1321-1327, 2015

were deparaffinized and hydrated with decreasing concentrations of alcohol, stained with H&E, and photographed under a
microscope (DFC310 FX; Leica, Wetzlar, Germany).
Immunohistochemistry. Brains were dissected and fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature. Tissue blocks
were then dehydrated, embedded in paraffin and cut into 5‑µm
coronal sections. The paraffin sections were gently washed
with PBS for 15 min followed by blocking with normal horse
serum (containing 0.3% H 2O2; Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Inc., Dallas, TX, USA) in PBS for 30 min. The sections
were then incubated overnight at 4˚C with anti‑neuronal
nuclei (anti‑NeuN; cat. no. bs‑1613R), anti‑macrophage
galactose‑specific lectin‑2 (anti‑Mac2; cat. no. bs‑9505R) and
anti‑myeloperoxidase (anti‑MPO; cat. no. bs‑4943R) primary
monoclonal antibodies (Beijing Biosynthesis Biotechnology
Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). Sections were then rinsed with 0.1%
PBS Tween‑20® and incubated with a secondary antibody (antirabbit IgG; cat. no. SP-9001; Beijing ZSGB Biotechnology
Co., Ltd., Beijing, China), for 1 h at room temperature.
Subsequently, they were treated with a DAB peroxidase
substrate kit (Maixin Bio, Fuzhou, China) at 4˚C in order to
visualize the immunoreaction. Brain sections were observed
and photographed under a microscope, and the percentage of
positively stained cells was measured using Image J software
for a semi‑quantitative evaluation.
Reverse transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(RT‑qPCR). RNA was isolated from ipsilateral cortical tissue
(n=3 rats per group) using TRIzol® (Invitrogen Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). RNA was then reverse‑transcribed
(PrimeScriptTM II 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis kit; Takara Bio,
Inc., Otsu, Japan) from 2 µg of total RNA, in order to generate
cDNA, and amplified with an SYBR Green I quantitative PCR
kit (Takara Bio, Inc.) using Applied Biosystems Prism 7500
(7500 software v2.0.5; Applied Biosystems Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). Quantitative PCR was performed using
the following primers (Takara Bio, Inc.): Forward:
5'‑CACCACGCTCTTCTGTCTACTG‑3' and reverse:
5'‑GTACTTGGGCAGATTGACCTC‑3' for TNF‑α; forward:
5'‑GTAATGATCGTCAACGGGGGAGGAC‑3' and reverse:
5'‑CCAGCAAGCCTTGCAACCTTAACCTTAACCA‑3' for
IL‑1β; forward: 5'‑CCACCACTACAGCAAGGG‑3' and
reverse: 5'‑GAACTGGGCAGACTCAAA‑3' for IL‑6; forward:
5'‑TCGGAACCAAATGAGATCAGAAC‑3' and reverse:
5'‑GAGGTGGTTGTGGAAAAGGTAGTG‑3' for MCP‑1; and
forward: 5'‑TGGAGTCTACTGGCGTCTT‑3' and reverse:
5'‑TGTCATATTTCTCGTGGTTCA‑3' for GAPDH, which was
used as an internal control. Results were normalized to GAPDH
expression and the fold change in relative mRNA levels of the
gene of interest was determined using the 2‑∆∆Ct method.
Western blot analysis. Brain samples were dissected from
the ipsilateral cortex and extractions were conducted using
a lysis buffer (Beijing Solarbio Science & Technology
Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) containing the protease inhibitor
phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride. Protein concentrations were
determined using the bicinchoninic acid method Beijing
Solarbio Science & Technology Co., Ltd.). Samples (50 µg)
were denatured at 100˚C for 5  min and separated by 10%

1323

SDS‑PAGE. Proteins were then transferred to polyvinylidene
fluoride membranes (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA),
blocked with 5% non‑fat milk and detected using the following
primary antibodies: Mouse monoclonal p65 (cat. no. sc‑8008),
rabbit polyclonal phosphor‑p65 (p‑p65; cat. no. sc‑33020),
rabbit polyclonal inhibitor κ B‑ α (Iκ B‑ α; cat. no. sc‑847),
mouse monclonal phosphor‑Iκ B‑α (p‑Iκ B‑α; cat. no. sc‑8404)
or goat polyclonal β‑Actin (cat. no. sc‑1616) (1:1,000) (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.) at 4˚C, overnight. Membranes were
incubated with horseradish peroxidase‑conjugated secondary
antibodies (anti-rabbit IgG, cat. no. ZB-2301; and anti-mouse
IgG, cat. no. ZB-2305; Beijing ZSGB Biotechnology Co., Ltd.)
for 1 h at room temperature. Protein immunoblots were detected
using enhanced chemiluminescence (RPN2132; GE Healthcare
Bio‑Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) for 1 min, chemiluminescent bands were exposed to a Kodak film (Eastman Kodak,
Rochester, NY, USA) in a dark room and the densitometry of
the gel bands was measured using Image J software.
Statistical analysis. All results are represented as the
mean ± standard error of the mean. Data were analyzed using
one‑way analysis of variance using SPSS 15.0 (SPSS, Inc.,
Chicago, IL, USA). P<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
Results
GLGZD reduces cerebral infarction in rats. Brain infarct
volume was determined in order to investigate the therapeutic
effects of GLGZD on ischemic injury in rats that had experienced MCAO. According to the TTC staining, brain ischemia
was not observed in rats in the sham group (Fig. 1). Infarct
volume was significantly greater in rats in the MCAO group
compared with those in the sham group. Infarct volume was
significantly smaller in the GLGZD treatment group compared
with those in the MCAO group (Fig. 1).
GLGZD treatment reduces neurological deficit in rats in the
MCAO group. In order to confirm the therapeutic effects of
GLGZD on ischemia‑induced spasticity, neurological deficit
was examined. Rats in the MCAO group demonstrated motor
functional disability, resulting in a higher neurological behavior
score compared with the sham group (Fig. 2). GLGZD treatment led to a decrease in the neurological deficit score in rats
following seven days of treatment. The results of the present
study demonstrated that GLGZD treatment may reduce spasticity in rats following ischemic injury.
GLGZD suppresses inflammatory cytokine expression in rats
in the MCAO group. Protein and mRNA expression levels
of the following cytokines: TNF‑α, IL‑1β, IL‑6 and MCP‑1,
which are involved in neuroinflammation post‑ischemia, were
measured using ELISA and RT‑qPCR. The results suggested
that the cytokine expression levels were significantly greater
in plasma samples from rats in the MCAO group, compared
with those in the sham group. By contrast, GLGZD treatment
exhibited significant inhibitory effects on cytokine expression
compared with the MCAO group (Fig. 3A). These results were
in accordance with the results of protein expression analyses.
Cytokine mRNA levels were upregulated in rats in the MCAO

1324

HU et al: ANTI-INFLAMMATORY EFFECT OF GLGZD

A

Figure 1. Effect of GLGZD treatment on cerebral infarction according to
TTC staining. GLGZD was administered to rats in the GLGZD group for
seven days following ischemia. Brain samples were then dissected and stained
with TTC solution. Representative images of infarcted areas in coronal sections were visualized by TTC staining and infarct volumes are presented as
the mean ± standard error of the mean (n=6). **P<0.01 vs. the sham group
and #P<0.05 vs. the MCAO group. GLGZD, Gualou Guizhi decoction; TTC,
tetrazolium chloride; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

B
Figure 2. Effect of GLGZD on neurological deficits induced by MCAO
using neurological deficit scores. The evaluation of neurological deficits was
measured according to a four‑point scale (0‑4). Data are presented as the
mean ± standard errors of the mean (n=5). *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 vs. the sham
group; #P<0.05 vs. the MCAO group. GLGZD, Gualou Guizhi decoction;
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

group compared with those in the sham group, and GLGZD
treatment led to significantly lower cytokine mRNA expression levels compared with the MCAO group (Fig. 3B).
GLGZD attenuates the inflammatory reaction and neuronal
injury in rats in the MCAO group. Microglial activation,
neutrophil infiltration and neuronal damage in the brain
tissues were evaluated by analyzing cerebral histology using
H&E and immunohistochemical staining with anti‑NeuN,
anti‑Mac‑2 and anti‑MPO antibodies. H&E and NeuN staining
were performed in order to detect neuronal loss and nuclear

Figure 3. Effects of GLGZD treatment on cytokine protein and mRNA
expression. (A) TNF‑ α, IL‑1β, IL‑6 and MCP‑1 production in peripheral blood was quantified using enzyme‑linked immunosorbent assay.
(B) Induction of mRNA expression in the cerebral cortex was assessed using
reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Quantitative
data are represented as the mean ± standard error of the mean of at least
three independent experiments. *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 vs. the sham group,
and #P<0.05 and ##P<0.01 vs. the MCAO group. GLGZD, Gualou Guizhi
decoction; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; TNF‑α, tumor necrosis
factor‑α; IL‑1β, interleukin 1β; IL‑6, interleukin‑6; MCP‑1, monocyte chemotactic protein 1.

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1321-1327, 2015

1325

A

B

C

Figure 4. Effects of GLGZD treatment on neuronal damage and inflammatory responses in the ischemic contex were evaluated using H&E staining and
immunohistological analysis. Histopathological changes were measured using (A) H&E staining (x200 magnification) (black arrows indicate nuclear
shrinkage) and NeuN immunostaining, and (B) Mac2 and MPO immunostaining were performed in order to visualize the neurons, activated microglia
and neutrophils, (x400 magnification). (C) Quantitative analyses of Mac2 and MPO are provided. Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the
mean of five randomly selected microscope fields. *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 vs. the sham group and #P<0.05 vs. the MCAO group. GLGZD, Gualou Guizhi
decoction; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; H&E, hematoxylin & eosin; Mac‑2, macrophage galactose‑specific lectin‑2; MPO, myeloperoxidase;
NeuN, neuronal nuclei.

shrinkage. According to H&E staining, the nuclei of neurons
in the cerebral hemisphere of rats in the sham group were
healthy, round and aligned. By contrast, the nuclei of neurons
in the MCAO model group were pyknotic and few healthy
neurons were observed in the core ischemic zone. Furthermore,
the results of NeuN staining demonstrated marked neuronal
shrinkage and reduction in rats in the MCAO group compared
with the sham group. By contrast, GLGZD treatment led
to lower levels of neuron death compared with the MCAO
group (Fig. 4A). In order to demonstrate the anti‑inflammatory
effects of GLGZD treatment in rats that underwent MCAO,
representative images of Mac‑2 (an indicator of activated

microglia) and MPO (an indicator of neutrophil infiltration)
are shown in Fig. 4B. Low levels of activated microglia and
neutrophil infiltration were observed in the cerebral cortex of
rats in the sham group, compared with those in the MCAO
group, as demonstrated by MPO and Mac‑2. By contrast, lower
levels of microglial activation and neutrophil infiltration were
observed in the cerebral cortex of MCAO rats in the GLGZD
group compared with those in the MCAO group (Fig. 4C).
GLGZD induces the reduction of inflammatory mediators
associated with NF‑κB signaling in rats in the MCAO group.
In order to further investigate whether NF‑κ B signaling is

1326

HU et al: ANTI-INFLAMMATORY EFFECT OF GLGZD

A

group. Furthermore, Iκ Bα degradation was markedly blocked
through suppressing the phosphorylated forms of Iκ Bα in rats
following treatment with GLGZD.
Discussion

B

Figure 5. Effect of GLGZD treatment on the expression and phosphorylation
of proteins associated with nuclear factor κ‑B signaling. p65, phosphorylated
p65, IKBα and phosphorylated Iκ Bα expression levels were determined
using western blot analysis. β ‑actin was used as an endogenous control.
(A) Representative photographs are presented. (B) Denstitometric data are
expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean. *P<0.05 and **P<0.01
vs. the sham group and #P<0.05 and ##P<0.01 vs. the MCAO group. GLGZD,
Gualou Guizhi decoction; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; p‑p65,
phosphor‑p65; p‑Iκ Bα, phosphor‑inhibitor κ B‑α.

associated with the anti‑inflammatory effects of GLGZD,
western blot analyses were performed. p‑p65 expression was
lower in the sham group compared with the MCAO group, and
was significantly higher in the MCAO group compared with
the GLGZD group. As shown in Fig. 5, Iκ Ba phosphorylation
was significantly higher in the MCAO group compared with
the sham group, whereas treatment with GLGZD resulted in a
decrease in Iκ Ba phosphorylation, compared with the MCAO

Previous studies have demonstrated that the duration of ischemic stroke is associated with motor function disorders, such
as spasticity (21,22). A number of pathological events are associated with brain damage, including ischemic injury‑induced
neuroinflammation, which leads to tissue damage as indicated by the results of the present study. Microglia are the
resident innate immune cells of the central nervous system
(CNS) (23) and they are involved in host defense of the CNS.
Inflammation in ischemic stroke is characterized by the rapid
activation of resident microglia and the infiltration of inflammatory cells, including MPO+ neutrophils and leukocytes.
Following cerebral ischemia, neutrophils invade the cerebral
parenchyma through the brain endothelium, and subsequently
induce the inflammatory process. A number of inflammatory
mediators, such as TNF‑α, IL‑1β, IL‑6 and MCP‑1, which are
indicators of neuroinflammation, are secreted by activated
microglia (24). Inflammatory responses are associated with
the NF‑κ B signaling pathway activation, which is involved in
microglial activation (25). Upon NF‑κ B signaling activation,
Iκ Bα phosphorylation leads to Iκ Bα degradation, causing
NF‑κ B to translocate from the cytoplasm to the nucleus,
resulting in the expression of the target genes (26). A number
of studies have reported that the inhibition of inflammatory
processes, for example via the production of inflammatory
mediators, may reduce infarct area in MCAO models (27,28).
GLGZD is a traditional Chinese medicine, consisting of
a combination of six herbs, including Trichosanthis radix,
Ramulus cinnamomi, Paeonia lactiflora, Glycyrrhiza radix,
Zingiber officinale Roscoe and Fructus jujubae. GLGZD, an
alternative therapy that may complement conventional medicine, has long been used in China to clinically treat post‑stroke
disabilities, such as muscular spasticity (14,15). Studies have
demonstrated that GLGZD treatment may contribute to the
anti‑inflammatory effects in LPS‑induced microglial activation. To the best of our knowledge, the underlying mechanisms
involved in of GLGZD neuroprotection are yet to be elucidated.
Based on previous in vitro results, it is hypothesized that GLGZD
may protect the brain from further neuronal damage in vivo by
inhibiting microglial activation and inflammatory action (17,18).
In the present study, an MCAO model was established in
order to measure the anti‑inflammatory effects of GLGZD on
cerebral infarction and neurological deficit in rats with cerebral ischemia (29).
The effects of seven days of GLGZD treatment on ischemic‑induced infarction and the level of neurological deficit in
rats was investigated. GLGZD treatment significantly reduced
the infarction volume and improved the neurological function in rats compared with rats without GLGZD treatment.
Transcriptional and translational levels of inflammatory cytokines were measured using RT‑qPCR and ELISA. Seven days
of GLGZD treatment resulted in a reduction in the expression
of neuroinflammation‑associated mediators compared with the
MCAO group. Cytokine and chemokine expression levels are
associated with inflammatory cascade signaling, such as the

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1321-1327, 2015

NF‑κB signaling pathway. GLGZD treatment led to a reduction
in p‑p65 (NF‑κB subunit) and p‑IκBα expression levels, and an
increase in p65 expression compared with the MCAO group.
In order to further examine neuronal morphologic changes
and inflammatory responses in ischemic brain samples,
neuron morphology, microglia activation and neutrophil infiltration were observed, using H&E and immunohistochemical
staining for NeuN, Mac‑2 and MPO, seven days after treatment. Neuron loss and injury were lower in the GLGZD group
compared with the MCAO group. In addition, the activation
of Mac‑2 and MPO observed in rats in the MCAO group was
inhibited following GLGZD treatment, which suggests that
GLGZD may exhibit an inhibitory effect on microglia activation and neutrophil infiltration.
In conclusion, the results of the present study demonstrate
that GLGZD exhibits a therapeutic effect on ischemic injury in
rats. Molecular mechanisms underlying these effects include
the reduction of cytokine expression and inactivation of NF‑κ B
signaling pathway. The present study provides novel insights
into the molecular mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective effects of GLGZD and its potential as a novel therapeutic
target for ischemic stroke.
Acknowledgements
The present study was supported by Natural Science
Foundation of China (grant no. 81403265), The Guidance
Project of the Fujian Provincial Department of Science &
Technology (grant no. 2012D012) and the Key Project of
Department of Health of Fujian Province (grant no. zlckf01).
References
 1.	Lloyd‑Jones D, Adams R, Carnethon M, De Simone G, Ferguson TB,
Flegal K, Ford E, Furie K, Go A, Greenlund K, et al; American
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics
Subcommittee: Heart disease and stroke statistics ‑ 2009 update: A
report from the American heart association statistics committee and
stroke statistics subcommittee. Circulation 119: e21‑e181, 2009.
 2.	Durai Pandian J, Padma V, Vijaya P, Sylaja PN and Murthy JM:
Stroke and thrombolysis in developing countries. Int J Stroke 2:
17‑26, 2007.
 3.	Sims NR and Muyderman H: Mitochondria, oxidative metabolism
and cell death in stroke. Biochim Biophys Acta 1802: 80‑91, 2010.
 4.	Hishida R, Kamatani D, Kitaura H, Kudoh M and Shibuki K:
Functional local connections with differential activity‑dependence
and critical periods surrounding the primary auditory cortex in
rat cerebral slices. Neuroimage 34: 679‑693, 2007.
 5.	Ginsberg LD: Impact of drug tolerability on the selection of antidepressant treatment in patients with major depressive disorder.
CNS Spectr 14 (Suppl 12): 8‑14, 2009.
 6.	Tuma RF and Steffens S: Targeting the endocannabinod system
to limit myocardial and cerebral ischemic and reperfusion injury.
Curr Pharm Biotechnol 13: 46‑58, 2012.
 7.	Kim HJ and Chuang DM: HDAC inhibitors mitigate
ischemia‑induced oligodendrocyte damage: Potential roles of
oligodendrogenesis, VEGF, and anti‑inflammation. Am J Transl
Res 6: 206‑223, 2014.
 8.	Xie L, Sun F, Wang J, Mao X, Xie L, Yang SH, Su DM,
Simpkins JW, Greenberg DA and Jin K: mTOR signaling
inhibition modulates macrophage/microglia‑mediated neuroinflammation and secondary injury via regulatory T cells after
focal ischemia. J Immunol 192: 6009‑6019, 2014.
 9.	Sheridan GK and Murphy KJ: Neuron‑glia crosstalk in health
and disease: Fractalkine and CX3CR1 take centre stage.
Open Biol 3: 130181, 2013.

1327

10.	Vartanian KB, Stevens SL, Marsh BJ, Williams‑Karnesky R,
Lessov NS and Stenzel‑Poore MP: LPS preconditioning redirects
TLR signaling following stroke: TRIF‑IRF3 plays a seminal role
in mediating tolerance to ischemic injury. J Neuroinflammation 8:
140, 2011.
11.	 Sladojevic N, Stamatovic SM, Keep RF, Grailer JJ, Sarma JV,
Ward PA and Andjelkovic AV: Inhibition of junctional adhesion
molecule‑A/LFA interaction attenuates leukocyte trafficking
and inf lammation in brain ischemia/reperfusion injury.
Neurobiol Dis 67: 57‑70, 2014.
12.	Chen S, Yin ZJ, Jiang C, Ma ZQ, Fu Q, Qu R and Ma SP:
Asiaticoside attenuates memory impairment induced by
transient cerebral ischemia‑reperfusion in mice through
anti‑inflammatory mechanism. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 122:
7‑15, 2014.
13.	Liu Y, Lian Z, Zhu H, Wang Y, Yu S, Chen T, Qu J, Li J, Ma S and
Chen X: A systematic, integrated study on the neuroprotective
effects of hydroxysafflor yellow A revealed by (1)H NMR‑based
metabonomics and the NF‑κ B pathway. Evid Based Complement
Alternat Med 2013: 147362, 2013.
14.	Zhang L and Ai H: Effects of Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction on
c‑fos and c‑jun on epileptic rats. Sichuan J Tradit Chin Med 23:
21‑22, 2005 (In Chinese).
15.	Yang C, Chen L and Tao J: New usage of a classical
formula‑Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction. Liaoning J Tradit Chin
Med 39: 1599‑1600, 2012 (In Chinese).
16.	Huang J, Tao J, Xue X, Yang S, Han P, Lin Z, Xu W, Lin J, Peng J
and Chen L: Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction exerts neuroprotective
effects on post‑stroke spasticity via the modulation of glutamate
levels and AMPA receptor expression. Int J Mol Med 31: 841‑848,
2013.
17.	Hu H, Li Z, Zhu X, Lin R, Lin J, Peng J, Tao J and Chen L:
Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction suppresses LPS‑induced activation
of the TLR4/NF‑κ B pathway in BV‑2 murine microglial cells.
Int J Mol Med 31: 1327‑1332, 2013.
18.	Hu H, Li Z, Zhu X, Lin R, Peng J, Tao J and Chen L: GuaLou
GuiZhi decoction inhibits LPS‑induced microglial cell motility
through the MAPK signaling pathway. Int J Mol Med 32:
1281‑1286, 2013.
19.	Xue X, You Y, Tao J, Ye X, Huang J, Yang S, Lin Z, Hong Z,
Peng J and Chen L: Electro‑acupuncture at points of Zusanli
and Quchi exerts anti‑apoptotic effect through the modulation
of PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. Neurosci Lett 558: 14‑19,
2014.
20.	Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R: Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20: 84‑91, 1989.
21.	Jiang B, Wang WZ, Chen H, Hong Z, Yang QD, Wu SP, Du XL
and Bao QJ: Incidence and trends of stroke and its subtypes in
China: Results from three large cities. Stroke 37: 63‑68, 2006.
22.	Guo JM, Liu AJ and Su DF: Genetics of stroke. Acta Pharmacol
Sin 31: 1055‑1064, 2010.
23.	Zhang L, Dong LY, Li YJ, Hong Z and Wei WS: The microRNA
miR‑181c controls microglia‑mediated neuronal apoptosis by
suppressing tumor necrosis factor. J Neuroinflammation 9: 211,
2012.
24.	Lu X, Ma L, Ruan L, Kong Y, Mou H, Zhang Z, Wang Z, Wang JM
and Le Y: Resveratrol differentially modulates inflammatory
responses of microglia and astrocytes. J Neuroinflammation 7:
46, 2010.
25.	Kim JB, Yu YM, Kim SW and Lee JK: Anti‑inflammatory
mechanism is involved in ethyl pyruvate‑mediated efficacious
neuroprotection in the postischemic brain. Brain Res 1060:
188‑192, 2005.
26.	Perkins ND: Integrating cell‑signalling pathways with
NF‑kappaB and IKK function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8: 49‑62,
2007.
27.	Guo RB, Wang GF, Zhao AP, Gu J, Sun XL and Hu G:
Paeoniflorin protects against ischemia‑induced brain damages
in rats via inhibiting MAPKs/NF‑κ B‑mediated inflammatory
responses. PLoS One 7: e49701, 2012.
28.	Dejda A, Seaborn T, Bourgault S, Touzani O, Fournier A,
Vaudry H and Vaudry D: PACAP and a novel stable analog
protect rat brain from ischemia: Insight into the mechanisms of
action. Peptides 32: 1207‑1216, 2011.
29.	Gibson CL: Cerebral ischemic stroke: Is gender important?
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33: 1355‑1361, 2013.

