J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161
DOI 10.1007/s11481-014-9571-z

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Erythropoietin Delivered via Intra-Arterial Infusion Reduces
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress in Brain Microvessels of Rats
Following Cerebral Ischemia and Reperfusion
Haiping Zhao & Rongliang Wang & Xiaoning Wu &
Jia Liang & Zhifeng Qi & Xiangrong Liu & Lianqiu Min &
Xunming Ji & Yumin Luo

Received: 24 March 2014 / Accepted: 18 November 2014 / Published online: 28 January 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015

Abstract Local infusion of low dose erythropoietin (EPO)
alleviates cerebral ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) injury in
rats; however, the underlying molecular mechanisms are still
unclear. The present study investigated the effect of low dose
EPO treatment on I/R-induced endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress in brain tissue and isolated microvessels in rodents.
Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to 2 h ischemia/24 h
reperfusion by middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion, then
administered fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled EPO via
MCA infusion (MCAI) or subcutaneous injection (SI) to
compare the efficiency of two modes of delivery. Neurobehavioral deficits and infarct volume, and the expression of ER
stress-associated proteins and apoptosis in brain tissue or
isolated microvessels, as well as the transcriptional activity
of 16 factors involved in ER stress and the unfolded protein
response in brain tissue was asscessed. A higher EPO level in
cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissue was observed in rats
H. Zhao : R. Wang : X. Wu : J. Liang : Z. Qi : X. Liu : L. Min :
X. Ji : Y. Luo (*)
Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute, Xuanwu Hospital of
Capital Medical University, 45 Changchun Street, Beijing 100053,
China
e-mail: yumin111@ccmu.edu.cn
H. Zhao : R. Wang : X. Wu : J. Liang : Z. Qi : X. Liu : L. Min :
X. Ji : Y. Luo
Key Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Beijing, China
H. Zhao : R. Wang : X. Wu : J. Liang : Z. Qi : X. Liu : L. Min :
X. Ji : Y. Luo
Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Liaoning
Medical University, Jinzhou 121001, Liaoning Province, China
H. Zhao : R. Wang : X. Wu : J. Liang : Z. Qi : X. Liu : L. Min :
X. Ji : Y. Luo
Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China

treated with EPO by MCAI (800 IU/kg) than by SI
(5000 IU/kg). Moreover, neurobehavioral deficits and infarct
volume were reduced in rats treated with EPO by MCAI and
salubrinal. EPO suppressed the expression of ER stress signals
glucose-regulated protein 78, activating transcription factor
(ATF) 6α, and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein homologous
protein (CHOP), as well as that of the pro-apoptotic protein
caspase-3 in brain microvessels, and decreased the number of
CHOP-positive, apoptotic neurons. EPO treatment also reduced the transcriptional activities of CHOP, forkhead box
protein O1, and ATF4. These results provide evidence that
low dose EPO treatment via MCAI provides neuroprotection
following acute ischemic stroke by inhibiting the ER stress
response.
Keywords Erythropoietin . Brain ischemia . Microvessels .
Endoplasmic reticulum stress . Middle cerebral artery

Introduction
Acute stroke is a major cause of mortality worldwide and to
date, recombinant tissue plasminogen activator is the only
effective drug approved for clinical use in its treatment. Although most treatment strategies are still in the experimental
phase, erythropoietin (EPO) is a promising agent with reported neuroprotective effects in animal models (Subirós et al.
2012) that functions through activation of anti-apoptotic,
−oxidant, and -inflammatory pathways as well as by stimulating angiogenic and neurogenic processes (Villa et al. 2003;
Iwai et al. 2007; Velly et al. 2010). Results from pre-clinical
trials suggest that EPO can be used not only for treating
anemia, but also to limit organ injury/dysfunction associated
with stroke, myocardial infarction, trauma, hemorrhage, and
sepsis (McCook et al. 2012). However, in clinical trials, the

154

administration of high doses of EPO has been linked to red
cell aplasia, arterial hypertension, and increased risk of thrombosis. One solution for circumventing these undesirable side
effects is to alter the route of administration. In our previous
study (Dang et al. 2011), low dose EPO administration via the
middle cerebral artery (MCA) showed neuroprotective effects
against cerebral ischemia and reperfusion (I/R) injury.
Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress contributes to cell death
following cerebral ischemia. EPO reportedly prevented pathological changes after severe spinal cord injury by reducing
the expression of CCAAT enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP) in the ER (Hong et al. 2012), but it
remains unclear whether the neuroprotective mechanism of
EPO after cerebral I/R injury involves modulation of ER
stress. The present study investigated whether local intraarterial infusion of low dose EPO via the MCA can protect
the brain against ischemic stroke and whether this involves
mechanisms that modulate ER stress in brain microvessels
and neurons.

Material and Methods
Animal Model of Focal Cerebral Ischemia
Male Sprague-Dawley rats (280–300 g) were purchased from
Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co. Ltd (Beijing,
China). Experimental protocols in this study were approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Capital Medical University. Focal cerebral ischemia was induced
by transient MCA occlusion (MCAO), as previously described (Dang et al. 2011). Briefly, rats were anaesthetized
by enflurane inhalation; the right common carotid artery was
exposed, and the external carotid artery was ligated and
transected. A 3-cm length of 3/0 nylon filament with a tip that
was rounded by silicone (tip diameter: 0.38 mm) was inserted
through the puncture in the external carotid artery and gently
advanced along the internal carotid artery to a point 18–
19 mm from the bifurcation. The thread was removed 2 h
after ischemia to allow reperfusion. In the sham group, rats
were exposed to the same surgical procedure but without
filament insertion. To confirm occlusion, the local cerebral
blood flow in the area supplied by the MCA was evaluated by
a PeriFlux System 5000 transcranial LDF laser Doppler
(Perimed, Järfälla, Sweden). Body temperature was monitored
continuously with a rectal probe and maintained at 37.0±
0.5 °C during the procedure using a heating lamp.
EPO Labeling With Fluorescein Isothiocyanate (FITC)
For FITC labeling of EPO, 1 ml EPO solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA; 10,000 IU/ml in 0.1 M NaOH,
pH 9.0) was mixed with 50 μl FITC (Sigma-Aldrich) solution

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

(1 mg/ml in anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide), and stirred gently
and continuously in the dark for 8 h at 4 °C. NH4Cl was added
to the mixture to a final concentration of 50 mM and the
solution was incubated for 2 h at 4 °C. FITC-conjugated
EPO was separated using Sephadex 25G in Tris-EDTA buffer
(pH 7.6) (SBH-Bio, Japan), and the flow-through was collected in the dark, and bovine serum albumin was added to a final
concentration of 1 %. The solution was stored at 4 °C
until use.

EPO Administration
EPO-FITC solution was administered at the onset of reperfusion by two different methods: MCA infusion (MCAI;
800 IU/kg) and subcutaneous injection (SI; 5000 IU/kg), with
six animals in each group. To compare the efficiency of the
two methods, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was collected and the
brains were removed 1 h after EPO administration. The CSF
was centrifuged at 5000×g for 10 min at 4 °C and the
supernatant was collected. Brain tissue was gently homogenized and then centrifuged at 12,000×g for 10 min at 4 °C and
the supernatant was collected. EPO-FITC content in the supernatants was determined using a microplate reader at
emission/absorption wavelengths of 485/525 nm (Tecan Infinite F200, Männedorf, Switzerland). In a separate set of
experiments, brains were quickly removed from rats under
euthanasia and processed for cryostat sectioning. Frozen sections were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde, dehydrated in 30 %
sucrose solution following by three washes in phosphatebuffered saline (PBS), and counterstained with 4’,6diaminido-2-phenylidole (DAPI). Fluorescence images were
acquired using a FluoView FV1000 microscope with FV10ASW 2.0 software (Olympus, Center Valley, PA, USA).

Animal Grouping
A total of 54 male rats were randomly divided into the following four groups (n=9 in each). Rats in the sham group
underwent the same procedure as those in other groups but
without suture insertion. In the vehicle group, rats were subjected to MCAO followed by MCAI with saline. In the EPO
group, rats were subjected to MCAO followed by MCAI with
800 IU/kg EPO. Rats in the salubrinal group received 1 mg/kg
salubrinal via SI 30 min before MCAO. In each group, three
rats were used for brain infarction and edema analyses, and six
were used for histological and western blot assessment. Six
2 mm-thick coronal sections were cut 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and 13 mm
posterior to the olfactory bulb. Brain slices #1 and # 2 were
used for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, #3 was used
for western blotting, and slices #4–#6 were used for
immunocytochemistry.

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

Evaluation of Neurological Deficits
Neurological deficits were assessed 24 h after reperfusion
using the forelimb foot fault test (Dang et al. 2011). Rats were
placed on and traversed along a 110-cm-long platform with
9×9 cm2 grids composed of wires with diameters of 1.0 mm.
The number of contralateral forelimb foot faults made per
meter within 1 min was scored as deficits in neurological
function.

155

CHOP (1:500; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA,
USA), and caspase-3 (1:1000; Abcam). Following three
washes in Tris-buffered saline with Tween-20, membranes
were incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:5000; Abgent, San Diego, CA,
USA) for 1 h at room temperature; immunoreactivity was
visualized with an enhanced chemiluminescence reagent kit
(Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The integrated density value
was calculated with Quantity One software and normalized to
β-actin (1:1000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology).

Determination of Infarct Volume
Rats were deeply anesthetized 24 h after MCAO and brains
were quickly removed and cut into six 2-mm-thick sections
that were stained with 1.5 % 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride. The border between the infarct and healthy tissue was
outlined using Image-Pro Plus analysis software (Media Cybernetics, San Diego, CA, USA). Infarct and edema volumes
were expressed as a percentage of the contralateral area for
each section. The infarct volume was calculated with the
following formula: (contralateral hemisphere volume −
nonlesioned ipsilateral hemisphere volume)/contralateral
hemisphere volume.
Isolation of Brain Microvessels
Cerebral microvessels were isolated from the rat cortex in the
ischemic region as previously described (Biegel et al. 1995),
with minor modifications. Briefly, rats were intracardially
perfused with 0.1 M PBS under deep anesthesia. Brains were
removed and the tissue was homogenized with a Dounce
homogenizer (Kimble Chase, Vineland, NJ, USA) at 4 °C
and filtered through a 40-μm nylon mesh (Spectrum Labs,
Irving, TX, USA). Microvessels retained on the mesh were
resuspended in PBS and centrifuged for 10 min at 3500×g.
The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was resuspended in 15 % dextran T-500, centrifuged for 10 min at 25,000×g,
and collected as microvessels.
Western Blot Analysis
Rats were deeply anesthetized 24 h after MCAO, intracardially perfused with cold PBS, and their brains removed and
homogenized in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors
with further sonication and centrifugation at 18,000×g for
30 min. Total protein content in the supernatant was quantified
using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL,
USA). Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and western blotting were carried out as previously
described (Yin et al. 2006) using antibodies against glucoseregulated protein (GRP) 78 (1:2000; Abcam, Cambridge,
MA, USA), activating transcription factor (ATF)-6α
(1:1000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA),

Immunocytochemistry and Terminal Deoxyribonucleotide
Transferase dUTP Nick end Labeling (TUNEL)
Rats were deeply anesthetized, then perfused with cold PBS
and 4 % paraformaldehyde. The brain was postfixed in 4 %
paraformaldehyde for 24 h, then immersed in 30 % sucrose in
PBS for 24 h. Coronal brain sections were cut at a thickness of
10 μm using a cryostat vibratome (Ultrapro 5000, Kingston,
RI, USA) at −25 °C. Frozen sections were fixed in acetone at
−20 °C for 20 min, and endogenous peroxidase activity was
inactivated by incubation in 3 % H2O2 solution diluted in
methanol for 20 min at room temperature (25 °C). Sections
were blocked in 0.3 % bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich)
in PBS at room temperature for 1 h, and incubated with a
primary antibody against CHOP (1:50 in PBS) overnight at
4 °C, with PBS used as a negative control. Following three
washes in PBS, sections were incubated with fluorescently
labeled secondary antibodies. Sections were then stained
using the TUNEL assay kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, and then counterstained with DAPI and mounted. Images were acquired using
a Fluoview FV1000 microscope with FV10-ASW 2.0
software.
Nuclear Extraction
Nuclear proteins were extracted using a kit (Signosis, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s directions.
Briefly, 20–100 mg soft tissue were cut into small pieces that
were placed in a microcentrifuge tube, washed with PBS, and
centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was
discarded and 1.5–3 ml Buffer I working reagent was added
to the tube, and the tissue was homogenized on ice until a
single cell suspension was obtained. The homogenate was
transferred to a fresh tube and centrifuged at 500×g for
5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the pellet
was resuspended in 1 ml Buffer I in a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge
tube. The tube was laid flat on ice and agitated for 10 min on a
shaking platform at 200 rpm. Cells were transferred to a fresh
1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for
5 min at 4 °C. After discarding the supernatant, 250 μl Buffer
II working reagent was added to 100 mg nuclear pellets and

156

agitated on ice at 200 rpm for 2 h. Samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C to obtain the supernatant
containing the nuclear extract.

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

efficient mode of EPO administration, and MCAI was therefore used in subsequent experiments.
Low Dose EPO Attenuates Cerebral I/R Injury

ER Stress Transcription Factor Activation Profiling Plate
Array
Activation profiles of transcription factors involved in ER
stress in ipsilateral brain tissue was determined using a Transcription Factor Activation Profiling Plate Array (Signosis)
following the manufacturer’s instructions, which simultaneously monitored 16 ER stress/unfolded protein response
(UPR)-related factors, including X-box-binding protein
(XBP)-1, ATF4 and 6, CHOP/GADD153, CCAAT-binding
factor (CBF)/NFY, sterol regulatory element-binding transcription factor (SREBP) 1, Y-box proteins YB-1 (YY1),
estrogen-related receptor, ATF3, activator protein (AP)-1,
forkhead box protein (FOX) O1, interferon regulatory factor
(IRF), p53, nuclear factor (NF)-κB, NF-E2-related factor
(NRF)2/antioxidant response element (ARE), and hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 4. The nuclear extract (5 μg) was hybridized with 16 different biotin-labeled probes containing
consensus sequences of the transcription factor binding sites.
The transcription factor-bound probes were captured by sequences complementary to the probes coated on a 96-well
plate and were detected with streptavidin-HRP. The luminescence level of each well was quantitatively analyzed using a
Spectramax M5 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and is reported as relative light units.
Statistical Analysis
Results between two groups were compared with the Student’s t test. Multiple comparisons were carried out using
one-way analysis of variance followed by the Tukey posthoc test. Data are presented as mean±SEM. P<0.05 was
considered statistically significant.

Results

The neuroprotective effects of low dose EPO treatment via
MCA infusion has been previously reported by our group
(Dang et al. 2011); these effects were confirmed in the present
study. EPO treatment reduced the neurological deficits associated with I/R injury compared to the vehicle group (Fig. 2e),
and decreased infarct volume by 43 % (Fig. 2a–d). Similar
improvements were observed by treatment with salubrinal—a
specific inhibitor of ER stress—confirming that I/R causes
cellular injury via a mechanism that involves activation of the
ER stress response.
Low Dose EPO Suppresses ER Stress Signals in Brain
Microvessels and Neurons Following I/R Injury
EPO bound to its receptors in brain microvascular endothelial
cells (Fig. 1b, c), raising the possibility that downstream
signaling in endothelial cells may be activated and to provide
vascular protection and neuroprotection. To test whether EPO
can inhibit ER stress signals in brain microvessels, the expression of GRP78, ATF-6α, and the downstream target CHOP
(Sari et al. 2010), was detected in isolated microvessels by
western blotting. I/R markedly increased the expression of all
three factors, which were downregulated upon EPO treatment
(P<0.05) (Figs. 3a, b, and 4a), implying that EPO inhibits the
ER stress response in brain microvessels. In addition, the
increased level of activated caspase-3 in brain microvessels
after I/R was also reversed by EPO treatment (P<0.05)
(Fig. 4b), indicating that EPO suppresses ER stress and consequent apoptosis in brain microvessels following I/R.
Similarly, in neurons the expression of the ER stress signals
GRP78, ATF-6α, and CHOP was markedly upregulated by
I/R, and effect that was reversed by EPO treatment (P<0.05)
(Figs. 5a, b, and 6a). EPO also decreased the fraction of
neurons that were CHOP/TUNEL double positive (Fig. 5b–
m), indicating that EPO has the same protective effects in
neurons as in blood vessels and that these are exerted through
inhibition of ER stress.

MCAI is More Efficient Than SI for EPO Administration
The efficiency of EPO delivery by MCAI vs. SI was determined by labeling EPO with FITC. FITC-labeled EPO levels
in CSF and especially in brain tissue were higher when administered by MCAI than by SI (P<0.05), even though a 6fold lower dose of FITC-labeled EPO was delivered by MCAI
than by SI (Fig. 1a). Furthermore, FITC-labeled EPO was
localized in both microvascular endothelial cells and neurons,
with a higher content observed in the MCAI than in the SI
group (Fig. 1b–e). These results indicate that MCAI is a more

Effect of EPO Treatment on Transcriptional Activity of ER
Stress/UPR-Related Transcription Factors
The ER Stress Transcription Factor Activation Profiling Plate
Array was used to investigate the effect of EPO treatment on
ER stress during cerebral I/R. Altogether, the expression of 16
ER stress/UPR-related transcription factors were monitored in
parallel and compared between sham, vehicle, and EPO treatment groups (Fig. 7a). Differences in transcription factor
activation profiles were quantitatively analyzed by measuring

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

157

Fig. 1 A low dose of EPO administered via MCAI is detected at a higher
level in brain tissue and CSF than a standard dose delivered via SI. Rats
were subjected to MCAO and EPO-FITC solution was administered via
MCAI (800 IU/kg) or SI (5000 IU/kg) when reperfusion was initiated.
CSF and brain tissue were collected 1 h after reperfusion. a Quantitative

analysis of EPO-FITC fluorescence intensity in brain tissue and CSF. b–e
Analysis of EPO-FITC (green) and DAPI (blue) fluorescence in
microvessels and neurons in frozen brain sections. Data are expressed
as mean±SEM (n=6). *P<0.05 vs. MACI group

luminescence intensity relative to the sham-operated group
(Fig. 7b). Of the examined factors, 12 had at least 1.5-fold
higher DNA-binding activity in the vehicle (I/R) compared to
the sham group, while EPO treatment decreased the activity of
three of these, i.e., FOXO1, ATF4, and CHOP (Fig. 7b). In
addition, the transcriptional activities of YY1, IRF-1, AP-1,
and ATF6 were also reduced by EPO treatment, but the
decreases were not statistically significant (Fig. 7b). The increases in the transcriptional activities of CBF/NFY, ATF3,
PGC-1α, SREBP1, and XBP-1 induced by I/R were unaffected by EPO treatment (Fig. 7b).

of 800 IU/kg administered by MCAI at the onset of reperfusion reduced brain infarct volume and neurological deficits
following I/R, and decreased the ER stress response in neurons and microvessels. Of note, EPO behaved like the ER
stress inhibitor salubrinal in attenuating I/R-induced injury,
suggesting the involvement of ER stress inhibition in the
protective effects of EPO. Since the dosage of EPO used in
this study was much lower than those typically used (2500–
5000 IU/kg), it may be useful for clinical applications where
undesirable side effects should be minimized.
EPO binds its cognate receptors in hematopoietic tissue
and in neurons, gliocytes, and endothelial cells. Previous
studies showed that EPO can cross the blood-brain barrier
and protects against experimentally induced brain injury
(Brines et al. 2000), although <1 % of systemically administered EPO penetrated the barrier (Nguyen et al. 2014). Consistent with these results, EPO was detected in the CSF and
brain tissue irrespective of the route of administration,

Discussion
In the present study, the dosage and route of administration for
EPO to treat I/R-induced injury were optimized. EPO at a dose

Fig. 2 EPO treatment via MCAI reduces brain infarct volume and
neurological deficits following I/R in rats. a–c Representative coronal
sections from different groups stained with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride. d Quantitative analysis of brain infarct volume in different

groups. e Neurological function as evaluated by the forelimb foot fault
test. Sal, salubrinal. Data are expressed as mean±SEM (n=3). *P<0.05
vs. vehicle group

158

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

Fig. 3 EPO treatment via MCAI
suppresses the upregulation of ER
stress signals in brain
microvessels induced by I/R
injury. Brain microvessels
isolated from different groups
were probed for expression of a
GRP78 and b ATF-6α by western
blotting with β-actin used as a
loading control. Data are
expressed as mean±SEM (n=6).
*P<0.05 vs. sham group,
#
P<0.05 vs. vehicle group

although a much higher concentration was observed when
MCAI was used. The absorption of EPO was slower when
administered by SI than by intra-arterial infusion, and the
bioavailability of EPO delivered by SI was lower due to
hepatic clearance. Similarly, a low dose of N-methyl-daspartate receptor MK-801 antagonist delivered to the ischemic area via MCA resulted in a reduced infarct volume in a rat
ischemic stroke model, but systemic application of a comparable dose did not significantly alleviate brain damage
(Woitzik and Schilling 2007), demonstrating that MCA
infusion is a superior method for selective delivery
when investigating the effects of drugs or other agents
in ischemic cerebral tissue.
To gain insight into the mechanism underlying the beneficial effects of EPO treatment via MCAI in cerebral I/R injury,
ER stress was examined in brain microvessels and neurons.
The ER stress marker GRP78 was upregulated in isolated
brain microvessels following cerebral I/R, but returned to a
baseline level after low dose EPO treatment, suggesting that
EPO can antagonize the ER stress response elicited by I/R
Fig. 4 EPO treatment via MCAI
suppresses the upregulation of ER
stress signals and apoptosis in
brain microvessels induced by I/R
injury. Brain microvessels
isolated from different groups
were probed for expression of a
CHOP and b activated caspase-3
by western blotting with β-actin
used as a loading control. Data are
expressed as mean±SEM (n=6).
*P<0.05 vs. sham group,
#
P<0.05 vs. vehicle group

injury. GRP78 regulates three distinct ER stress pathways
involving XBP1, ATF6, or elf2α (Hashida et al. 2012).
ATF6 is a membrane-bound transcription factor; when
misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER, ATF6 moves to
the Golgi apparatus where it is cleaved by proteases, liberating
an activated form of the protein that translocates to the nucleus
and regulates CHOP gene transcription, which induces apoptosis. EPO suppressed the I/R-induced upregulation of
ATF6α and CHOP in isolated brain microvessels, indicating
that blocking this pathway of the ER stress response may be
one important mechanism of vascular protection by EPO.
Similar effects were observed in brain tissue, as evidenced
by the decrease in I/R-induced apoptosis in neurons. These
data show that EPO provides protection against brain injury
following I/R by inhibiting ER stress-induced apoptosis.
A number of transcription factors were activated by ER
stress resulting from I/R injury. However, EPO treatment
reduced the activation of three of these factors—that is,
CHOP, FOXO1, and ATF4, and suppressed CHOP and
ATF6 expression. These results confirm that EPO functions

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

159

Fig. 5 EPO treatment via MCAI
suppresses the upregulation of ER
stress signals in brain tissue
induced by I/R injury. Brain tissue
collected from different groups
was probed for the expression of a
GRP78 and b ATF-6α by western
blotting with β-actin used as a
loading control. Data are
expressed as mean±SEM (n=6).
*P<0.05 vs. sham group,
#
P<0.05 vs. vehicle group

in neuroprotection by blocking the ATF6-CHOP ER stress
response pathway in the brain. FOXO1 is activated by c-Jun
N-terminal kinase during ER stress (Martinez et al. 2008);
FOXO1-mediated transcriptional activation required for apoptosis was inhibited by blocking the nuclear translocation of
FOXO1 (Tang et al. 1999). In this study, I/R-induced FOXO1
activation in the brain was attenuated by EPO treatment.
However, ATF4 has contradictory roles in neuronal survival
and death (Wu et al. 2014; Fan et al. 2013); as such, further
study is needed in order to determine whether the inhibition of
ATF4 transcriptional activity by EPO treatment contributed to
the observed neuroprotective effects.
Except for the significantly reduced protein expression of
ATF6 and CHOP, and the significantly decreased transcriptional activities of ATF4, CHOP, and FOXO1, the activation
of ATF6, YY1, AP-1 and IRF were also partly decreased by

EPO treatment (Fig. 8). YY1 is an essential coactivator of
ATF6, and YY1 regulates the c-fos promoter through direct
interaction with ATF/CREB, as well as stimulate the grp78
promoter activity in stressed cells (Li et al. 2000; Schardt et al.
2010). We found that EPO reduced the activity of both ATF6
and YY1. New observations suggest that the unfolded-protein
response (UPR) can initiate inflammation. In response to ER
stress, the cytoplasmic domain of phosphorylated IRE1α
(Inositol-requiring enzyme-1α) recruit tumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor (TRAF2) to form a complex that
activate JNK, which phosphorylates AP1 and then induce the
transcription of genes involved in the inflammatory response
(Zhang and Kaufman 2008). In addition, different ER
stressors utilized distinct mechanisms to activate IRF3 to
primes macrophage to respond to innate immune stimuli
(Liu et al. 2012), and activated IRF3 associated with the

Fig. 6 EPO treatment via MCAI suppresses the upregulation of ER stress
signals and apoptosis in brain tissue induced by I/R injury. Brain tissue
collected from different groups was probed for a CHOP expression by
western blotting, and b–m CHOP expression and apoptosis by combined

immunocytochemistry and TUNEL staining. Data are expressed as mean
±SEM (n=6). *P<0.05 vs. sham group, #P<0.05 vs. vehicle group. Scale
bar=80 μm

160

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

Fig. 7 EPO treatment via MCAI
suppresses the upregulation of ER
stress signals in brain tissue
induced by I/R injury. Brain tissue
was collected and processed for
nuclear extraction and ER stress
transcription factor activation
profiling using an array. a 16 ER
stress/UPR-related transcription
factors examined in this study. b
Transcription factor activation
was determined by measuring
relative luminescence intensity
(n=4). *P<0.05 vs. sham group,
#
P<0.05 vs. vehicle group

proapoptotic molecule Bax and contributed to hepatocyte
apoptosis (Petrasek et al. 2013). IRF1 plays a central role in
ER stress-mediated modulation of VCAM-1 expression in
human arterial endothelial cell (Wang et al. 2013). Therefore,
Fig. 8 Scheme of the possible
mechanism by which EPO
reduces endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. The transcriptional
activation of 12 ER stress/UPRrelated transcription factors was
up-regulated (red font) after
ischemia and reperfusion in the
brain tissue of rats. Three of them
(FOXO1, ATF4 and CHOP) were
significantly depressed (blue
frame) by EPO treatment. Four of
them (YY1, ATF6, AP-1 and
IRF) were lessened without
statistical significance (green
frame) after EPO treatment. The
black arrows indicate an
activation effect. The purple
arrows indicate activation of
transcription

the inhibitory effect of EPO treatment on AP1 and IRF activation could reduce the inflammatory response in the brain,
which probably is the consequent function of depression of
ER stress (Fig. 8).

J Neuroimmune Pharmacol (2015) 10:153–161

In summary, the administration of a low dose of EPO via
MCAI at the onset of reperfusion following ischemia had
neuroprotective effects, which may be attributable to the ability of EPO to antagonize the ER stress response—specifically
the ATF6-CHOP pathway—in brain tissue and microvessels.
These findings indicate that EPO administration by MCAI can
serve as a therapeutic strategy for patients after acute ischemic
stroke.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Jinhuan Gao (Xuanwu Hospital
of Capital Medical University) for her excellent technical assistance. This
project was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (nos.
81071058, 30670725, 81271461, and 81201028).
Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of
interest.

References
Biegel D, Spence DD, Pachter JS (1995) Isolation and culture of human
brain microvessel endothelial cells for the study of blood-brain
barrier properties in vitro. Brain Res 692:183–189
Brines ML, Ghezzi P, Keenan S, Agnello D, de Lanerolle NC, Cerami C,
Itri LM, Cerami A (2000) Erythropoietin crosses the blood-brain
barrier to protect against experimental brain injury. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 97:10526–10531
Dang S, Liu X, Fu P, Gong W, Yan F, Han P, Ding Y, Ji X, Luo Y (2011)
Neuroprotection by local intra-arterial infusion of erythropoietin
after focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Neurol Res 33:520–528
Fan J, Long H, Li Y, Liu Y, Zhou W, Li Q, Yin G, Zhang N, Cai W (2013)
Edaravone protects against glutamate-induced PERK/EIF2α/ATF4
integrated stress response and activation of caspase-12. Brain Res
1519:1–8
Hashida K, Kitao Y, Sudo H, Awa Y, Maeda S, Mori K, Takahashi R,
Linuma M, Hori O (2012) ATF6alpha promotes astroglial activation
and neuronal survival in a chronic mouse model of Parkinson’s
disease. PLoS ONE 7:e47950
Hong Z, Hong H, Chen H, Wang Z, Hong D (2012) Protective
effects of erythropoietin in experimental spinal cord injury by
reducing the C/EBP-homologous protein expression. Neurol
Res 34:85–90
Iwai M, Cao G, Yin W, Stetler RA, Liu J, Chen J (2007) Erythropoietin
promotes neuronal replacement through revascularization and
neurogenesis after neonatal hypoxia/ischemia in rats. Stroke 38:
2795–2803
Li M, Baumeister P, Roy B, Phan T, Foti D, Luo S, Lee AS
(2000) ATF6 as a transcription activator of the endoplasmic
reticulum stress element: thapsigargin stress-induced changes
and synergistic interactions with NF-Y and YY1. Mol Cell
Biol 20:5096–5106

161
Liu YP, Zeng L, Tian A, Bomkamp A, Rivera D, Gutman D, Barber GN,
Olson JK, Smith JA (2012) Endoplasmic reticulum stress regulates
the innate immunity critical transcription factor IRF3. J Immunol
189:4630–4639
Martinez SC, Tanabe K, Cras-Meneur C, Abumrad NA, Bernal-Mizrachi
E, Permutt MA (2008) Inhibition of Foxo1 protects pancreatic islet
beta-cells against fatty acid and endoplasmic reticulum stressinduced apoptosis. Diabetes 57:846–859
McCook O, Georgieff M, Scheuerle A, Möller P, Thiemermann C,
Radermacher P (2012) Erythropoietin in the critically ill: do we
ask the right questions? Crit Care 16:319
Nguyen AQ, Cherry BH, Scott GF, Ryou MG, Mallet RT (2014)
Erythropoietin: powerful protection of ischemic and post-ischemic
brain. Exp. Biol. Med. (Maywood)
Petrasek J, Iracheta-Vellve A, Csak T, Satishchandran A, Kodys K, KurtJones EA, Fitzgerald KA, Szabo G (2013) STING-IRF3 pathway
links endoplasmic reticulum stress with hepatocyte apoptosis in
early alcoholic liver disease. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110:
16544–16549
Sari FR, Watanabe K, Thandavarayan RA, Harima M, Zhang S, Muslin
AJ, Kodama M, Aizawa Y (2010) 14-3-3 protein protects against
cardiac endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) and ERS-initiated apoptosis in experimental diabetes. J Pharmacol Sci 113:325–334
Schardt JA, Eyholzer M, Timchenko NA, Mueller BU, Pabst T (2010)
Unfolded protein response suppresses CEBPA by induction of
calreticulin in acute myeloid leukaemia. J Cell Mol Med
14:1509–1519
Subirós N, Del Barco DG, Coro-Antich RM (2012) Erythropoietin: still
on the neuroprotection road. Ther Adv Neurol Disord 5:161–173
Tang ED, Nunez G, Barr FG, Guan KL (1999) Negative regulation of the
forkhead transcription factor FKHR by Akt. J Biol Chem 274:
16741–16746
Velly L, Pellegrini L, Guillet B, Bruder N, Pisano P (2010) Erythropoietin
2nd cerebral protection after acute injuries: a double-edged sword?
Pharmacol Ther 128:445–459
Villa P, Bigini P, Mennini T, Agnello D, Laragione T, Cagnotto A, Viviani
B, Marinovich M, Cerami A, Coleman TR, Brines M, Ghezzi P
(2003) Erythropoietin selectively attenuates cytokine production
and inflammation in cerebral ischemia by targeting neuronal apoptosis. J Exp Med 198:971–975
Wang YI, Bettaieb A, Sun C, DeVerse JS, Radecke CE, Mathew S,
Edwards CM, Haj FG, Passerini AG, Simon SI (2013)
Triglyceride-rich lipoprotein modulates endothelial vascular cell
adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 expression via differential regulation
of endoplasmic reticulum stress. PLoS ONE 8:e78322
Woitzik J, Schilling L (2007) A new method for superselective middle
cerebral artery infusion in the rat. J Neurosurg 106:872–878
Wu L, Luo N, Zhao HR, Gao Q, Lu J, Pan Y, Shi JP, Tian YY, Zhang YD
(2014) Salubrinal protects against rotenone-induced SH-SY5Y cell
death via ATF4-parkin pathway. Brain Res 1549:52–62
Yin W, Cao G, Johnnides MJ, Signore AP, Luo Y, Hickey RW, Chen J
(2006) TAT-mediated delivery of Bcl-xL protein is neuroprotective
against neonatal hypoxic—ischemic brain injury via inhibition of
caspases and AIF. Neurobiol Dis 21:358–371
Zhang K, Kaufman RJ (2008) From endoplasmic-reticulum stress to the
inflammatory response. Nature 454:455–462

