Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454
DOI 10.1007/s11302-015-9471-6

REVIEW ARTICLE

Supportive or detrimental roles of P2Y receptors in brain
pathology?—The two faces of P2Y receptors in stroke
and neurodegeneration detected in neural cell and in animal
model studies
Daniel Förster 1 & Georg Reiser 1

Received: 17 June 2015 / Accepted: 14 September 2015 / Published online: 25 September 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2015

Abstract This review describing the role of P2Y receptors in
neuropathological conditions focuses on obvious differences
between results demonstrating either a role in neuroprotection
or in neurodegeneration, depending on in vitro and in vivo
models. Such critical juxtaposition puts special emphasis on
discussions of beneficial and detrimental effects of P2Y receptor agonists and antagonists in these models. The mechanisms
reported to underlie the protection in vitro include increased
expression of oxidoreductase genes, like carbonyl reductase
and thioredoxin reductase; increased expression of inhibitor of
apoptosis protein-2; extracellular signal-regulated kinase- and
Akt-mediated antiapoptotic signaling; increased expression of
Bcl-2 proteins, neurotrophins, neuropeptides, and growth factors; decreased Bax expression; non-amyloidogenic APP
shedding; and increased neurite outgrowth in neuronal cells.
Animal studies investigating the influence of P2Y receptors in
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) models for stroke
prove beneficial effects of P2Y receptor antagonists. In
MCAO mice and rats, the application of broad-range P2 receptor antagonists decreased the infarct volume and improved
neurological outcome. Moreover, antagonists of the P2Y1 receptor, one of the most abundant P2Y receptor subtypes in
brain tissue, decreased neuronal loss and improved spatial
memory in rats after traumatic brain injury (TBI). Currently

* Georg Reiser
georg.reiser@med.ovgu.de
1

Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg, Medizinische Fakultät,
Institut für Neurobiochemie (Institut für Inflammation und
Neurodegeneration), Leipziger Straße 44,
39120 Magdeburg, Germany

available data show a discrepancy between in vitro and in vivo
models concerning the benefits of P2Y receptor activation in
pathological conditions. In vitro models demonstrate protection by P2Y receptor agonists, but in vivo P2Y receptor activation deteriorates the outcome after MCAO and controlled
cortical impact brain injury, a TBI model. To broaden the
scope of the review, we additionally discuss publications that
demonstrate detrimental effects of P2Y receptor agonists
in vitro and publications showing protective effects of agonists in vivo. All these studies help to better understand the
significant role of P2Y receptors especially in stroke models
and to develop pharmacological strategies for the treatment of
stroke.
Keywords Apoptosis . Astrocytes . Brain . Neurons .
Neuroinflammation . Neuroprotection . MCAO . P2Y
receptor

Abbreviations
2MeSADP 2-Methyl-thio-ADP
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
ATPγS
Adenosine 5′(γ-thio)triphosphate
APP
Amyloid precursor protein
BBB
Blood-brain barrier
ERK
Extracellular-signal-regulated kinase
GFAP
Glial fibrillary acidic protein
HO-1
Heme oxygenase-1
MCAO
Middle cerebral artery occlusion
MCAT
Middle cerebral artery transection
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
NGF
Nerve growth factor
OGD
Oxygen glucose deprivation

442

PPADS
Nrf2
PD
PTP
qEEG
ROS
SOD
TBI
TNFα
TTC

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

Pyridoxalphosphate-6-azophenyl-2′,4′-disulfonic acid
Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2
Parkinson’s disease
Permeability transition pore
Quantitative electroencephalography
Reactive oxygen species
Superoxidedismutase
Traumatic brain injury
Tumor necrosis factor α
2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride

Introduction
ATP was discovered many decades ago as the universal cellular energy reservoir for metabolism [1]. About in 1972, ATP
was postulated to be a neurotransmitter in the so-called nonadrenergic-non-cholinergic neurotransmission [2]. With rapid
development of molecular biological methods, purinergic receptors were cloned in the 1990s and subsequently characterized [3]. As of today, ATP is generally accepted as a transmitter in its own right and a cotransmitter. There are four P1
receptors, seven P2X receptors, and eight P2Y receptors
known in the human genome. P2X receptors are ion channels,
which support fast synaptic transmission [4]. P1 receptors are
G protein-coupled receptors activated by adenosine [5]. The
P2Y receptors, on which this review concentrates, are G
protein-coupled receptors involved mainly in long-term effects. P2Y1, P2Y2, P2Y4, and P2Y6 receptors activate phospholipase C and increase the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration.
The P2Y11 receptor is coupled to Gs and Gq and raises the
cAMP level and the Ca2+ concentration. P2Y12, P2Y13, and
P2Y14 receptors inhibit the adenylyl cyclase and decrease the
cAMP concentration. Prominent natural agonists of the P2Y1
receptors are ADP and ATP. The human P2Y2 receptor is
equally activated by ATP and UTP. The P2Y4 receptor has
UTP as agonist, and the P2Y6 receptor prefers UDP over
UTP. The human P2Y11 receptor is mainly activated by ATP.
The human P2Y12 and P2Y13 receptors are both activated by
ADP. Having ADP-glucose and ADP-galactose as natural agonist makes the human P2Y14 receptor outstanding (for reviews, see [6–9]. Chemical modifications to nucleotides were
applied to increase their resistance to hydrolysis. A prominent
example is adenosine 5′(γ-thio)triphosphate (ATPγS).
Furthermore, subtype-selectivity was increased, like in
2-methyl-thio-ADP (2MeSADP), which is a highly potent
and selective P2Y1 receptor agonist. Intensive molecular analysis of the binding sites of the P2Y receptors led to the development of a set of non-nucleotide-based subtype-selective
agonists and antagonists, which were used to analyze subtypespecific effects [10, 11]. The agonist preference of P2Y receptor subtypes may vary between species, as differences

between humans, mice, and rats have been reported. Comparative analysis of the amino acid sequences of the P2Y receptor family revealed two phylogenetic subgroups. The first
group consists of P2Y1, P2Y2, P2Y4, P2Y6, and P2Y11 receptors, and the second group consists of P2Y12, P2Y13, and
P2Y14 receptors [12].
Degradation of the nucleotide agonists of P2Y receptors
after release occurs by ectonucleotidases, a group of enzymes
consisting of several families widely distributed in human
tissues. Ectonucleotidases, which regulate the activity of nucleotides by dephosphorylation [13], shape the purinergic signal. In human tissue, all eight subtypes of P2Y receptors are
found with various functions. Pharmacologically important
are P2Y1 and P2Y12 receptors, which are involved in platelet
aggregation, and P2Y4 receptors, which mediate ion fluxes.
Drugs activating the P2Y12 receptor are used for antithrombotic therapy and P2Y4 receptor agonists are used to
treat the dry-eye disease [14, 15]. So far, only P2Y12 and
P2Y4 receptor agonists are in clinical use. Besides that, other
P2Y receptors are regarded as potential drug targets [16].
In the human brain, P2Y1, P2Y6, P2Y11, P2Y12, and P2Y13
receptors were found on the mRNA level [17]. Moreover, the
immunohistochemical analysis showed a localization of the
P2Y1 receptor in neuronal structures in the cerebral cortex,
cerebellar cortex, caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus,
subthalamic nucleus, red nucleus, hippocampus, and midbrain
[18]. Besides neuronal localization, also in astrocytes and oligodendrocytes of the white matter, the presence of P2Y1 receptors was shown by immunohistochemistry in rats [19].
Additionally, upregulation of P2Y2 receptor mRNA expression in rat primary cortical neurons after stimulation with IL1β was demonstrated [20]. There is a wealth of data
concerning the pharmacological relevance of P2Y receptors
in stroke, or oxidative stress in neurodegenerative disease.
The aim of this review is to evaluate effects mediated by
P2Y receptors in vitro and in vivo, in order to understand the
potential role of P2Y receptors as targets for neuroprotection.
We analyze in detail the question of why conclusions derived
from in vitro models are not fully consistent with conclusions
obtained from in vivo models. We critically consider the possibilities for future clinical developments of P2Y receptortargeting drugs and treatment regimes.

Apoptosis, oxidative stress, and microglia as targets
for neuroprotection
Neuroprotection includes pharmaceutical or physical procedures to avoid neuronal cell loss in neurodegenerative diseases, stroke, or traumatic brain injury (TBI). Neuroprotection
further includes the protection of glial cells, which maintain
and support the functionality and viability of neurons.

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

Cells may die by apoptosis or necrosis. Necrosis in brain
occurs after traumatic injury or in the core of stroke tissue,
where occlusions lead to stark limitation in supply of oxygen
and glucose. Breakdown of ion gradients causes osmotic
swelling and finally permeabilization of cells and subsequent
inflammation [21–23]. Apoptosis leads to controlled degradation of cells and avoids further damage in the surrounding area
by inflammation. Apoptosis is a hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases and also takes place in the penumbra surrounding
the ischemic core in stroke.
Many factors shift the cell fate between apoptosis or survival. A widespread approach for neuroprotection by pharmacological intervention prevents apoptosis. There are two pathways of apoptosis: the extrinsic and the intrinsic pathways
with possible cross talk. The extrinsic pathway is mediated
by cytokine receptors activated by tumor necrosis factor α
(TNFα) leading to activation of caspase 8. The intrinsic pathway involves the permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial
membrane and the release of pro-apoptotic factors, like cytochrome C, smac/Diablo, HtrA2, AIF, and Endo G, leading to
the formation of the apoptosome and activation of caspase 9.
The initiator caspases 8 and 9 activate the effector caspase 3,
which cleaves its target proteins leading to degradation of the
cytoskeleton and fragmentation of DNA [24–26]. Finally, the
cell breaks apart into vesicles which are phagocytosed.
Several factors lead to mitochondria permeabilization. The
formation of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore
(PTP) triggered by Ca2+ overload or reactive oxygen is well
documented [27–30]. This might happen by excitotoxicity
including excessive glutamate release from depolarized neurons or dead cells, which causes permanent activation of glutamate receptors and persistent increase in the cytosolic Ca2+
concentration [31–33]. Pro-apoptotic proteins like Bak and
Bax promote the permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial
membrane and release pro-apoptotic factors from the mitochondrial intermembrane space. Anti-apoptotic proteins like
Bcl-2, Bcl-w, and Bcl-XL inhibit the pro-apoptotic proteins
and support survival [25].
Oxidative stress, the overproduction of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), is associated with neurodegenerative diseases
and ischemic episodes. Mitochondria are regarded as a major
source of ROS, especially complex I and complex III. ROS
are side-products of redox reactions [34, 35].
Especially in respiratory chain complexes of mitochondria, but also in oxidoreductases, electrons are partially
transferred to oxygen instead of the regular substrate,
leading to the formation of superoxide (O2·-). Superoxide
dismutases (SODs) convert superoxide to hydrogen peroxide. Finally, hydrogen peroxide in turn is degraded to
water and oxygen by glutathione peroxidase or catalases.
In the presence of iron ions, hydrogen peroxide can be
converted to highly toxic hydroxyl radicals (·OH) via
the Fenton reaction [36].

443

Excessive ROS production leads to damage of proteins and
nucleic acids. Oxidative stress is regarded as a factor contributing to inducement of the PTP and apoptosis [35, 37, 38].
Cells have antioxidant tools to degrade ROS, including SOD,
catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and thioredoxins [39–42]. In
many cases, it is still under debate whether ROS are the cause
or consequence of neurodegenerative diseases.
A major pathological mechanism in neurodegenerative diseases that has gained much attention is the immune activation.
The brain features a phenomenon called Bimmune privilege.^
Here, specific immune cells called microglia are responsible
for scavenging plaques and infectious agents. In contrast to
other tissues, the blood-brain barrier (BBB) largely avoids the
infiltration of T cells from capillaries. Moreover, astrocytes
and neurons are able to suppress T cell activation and even
induce apoptosis in T cells [43]. The reason for this Bimmune
privilege^ in the brain is attributed to its sensitivity and restricted regenerative capacity compared to other tissues. However, the adaptive immune response plays a role in stroke or
TBI, when BBB might become permeable for T cells [44].
Neurons and astrocytes may upregulate toll-like receptors
and release pro-inflammatory cytokines [45]. Consequently,
there is a complex interplay of neurons, astrocytes, endothelial
cells, microglia, and T cells.
In the past years, an important role of P2Y receptors in
microglia emerged. The activation of P2Y12 and P2Y1 receptors of resting microglia causes their migration along a concentration gradient of ATP/ADP towards the injury. Phagocytosis of injured cells is induced by P2Y6 receptors activated by
UTP/UDP [46–48]. Considering this model, P2Y receptors
became a pharmacological target for neuroinflammation.
Reactive astrogliosis is important for the outcome after
pathological conditions in the brain. ATP is one of many factors that induce reactive astrogliosis in the injured CNS. This
involves proliferation, remodeling, and migration of astrocytes and finally the formation of a glial scar [49]. Theoretically, this will protect and support CNS tissue by formation of
a barrier [50]. Otherwise possibly repair processes like axonal
outgrowth are inhibited [51]. In neurodegenerative diseases,
such as Alzheimer’ disease (AD), a chronic inflammatory
response with persistent reactive astrogliosis might contribute
to damage [52].
Acute brain inflammation is the result of physical trauma,
bacterial meningitis, or primary intracerebral hemorrhage. In
this case, microglia and blood-derived immune cells respond
by eliminating the invading pathogens, clearing foreign bodies, and then tissue repair and regeneration are initiated [53,
54]. Chronic inflammation is considered as permanent activation of the immune response in the CNS responding to a range
of pathological processes involving multiple cell types. Intensive research focuses on the aspects of chronic immune responses in AD, Parkinson’s disease (PD), and stroke in order
to support survival and to avoid detrimental effects [55].

444

Taken together, the neuroprotective intervention includes
all procedures which target pathways to avoid apoptosis,
dampen the excessive Ca2+ entry, limit the inflammatory damage, and decrease oxidative stress, finally conserving the neuronal networks and their functionality as much as possible.

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

P2Y receptors, in primary neural cells and cell lines, mediate
several beneficial effects preventing apoptosis and consequences of oxidative stress. Primary rat astrocytes, which
were preincubated with ATP or 2MeSADP for at least 12 h,
were protected against hydrogen peroxide-induced cytotoxicity. The protection was mediated via P2Y1 receptors as demonstrated by application of a specific P2Y1 receptor antagonist. Furthermore, functional protein biosynthesis, intracellular Ca2+ rise, and phospholipase C activity were necessary for
this protective effect. Upregulation of oxidoreductase genes
like carbonyl reductase, schlafen 4 (SHL4), an enzyme similar
to superoxide dismutase 2, and thioredoxin reductase were
found to be mediated by the P2Y1 receptor and responsible
for the increased tolerance to hydrogen peroxide [56].
Figure 1 schematically summarizes the protective pathways
induced by nucleotides activating P2Y receptors in astrocytes

and 1321N1 astrocytoma cells. In this scheme, pathway
➀ presents the induction of antioxidant enzymes by
P2Y1 receptors.
Oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) is a frequently used
model to simulate stroke-like conditions in vitro and to analyze its outcome. Exposure to a short period of sublethal OGD
was shown in rat astrocytes to increase the tolerance to lethal
OGD. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a transiently
increased expression of P2Y1 and P2Y2 receptors after sublethal OGD. Blockade of ATP release by heptanol, a
hemichannel antagonist, abolished the protective effect of
the sublethal OGD. The pathway which provides ischemic
tolerance by sublethal OGD involved the phosphorylation of
extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK). The protective
effect was not observed in the presence of suramin, a broadrange P2 receptor antagonist, and MRS2179 (2′-Deoxy-N6methyladenosine 3′,5′-bisphosphate tetrasodium salt), an adenine nucleotide bisphospate-based P2Y1 receptor-specific antagonist [57].
Figure 1, pathway ➁, illustrates that the activation of P2Y1
receptors in primary astrocytes or the astrocyte-derived astrocytoma cell line 1321N1 favors survival by activation of ERK.
The P2Y2 receptor was shown to inhibit trauma-induced
apoptosis in 1321N1 astrocytoma cells. Characteristic hallmarks of cell death including DNA fragmentation and increased Bax/Bcl-2 gene expression were investigated after

Fig. 1 Protective pathways induced by nucleotides activating P2Y
receptors (P2YR) in astrocytes and 1321N1 astrocytoma cells. The
P2Y1 receptor increases the expression of oxidoreductases to block
oxidative stress ➀. Antiapoptotic proteins are upregulated via P2Y1,2
receptors to block apoptosis ➁,➂. Activation of P2Y6 receptor and
P2Y12 receptor leads to phosphorylation of ERK and inhibits the
apoptotic cell death ➃,➄. P2Y receptors increase the cytosolic Ca2+

concentration. Ca2+ induces activity of the tricarboxylic acid cycle
which leads to increased amounts of ATP ➅. Oxidative stress is
reduced by ATP which inhibits Fenton reaction and maintains
antioxidant defense ➆. The respective references giving the background
information for this scheme are given in the text. Here and in the other
figures, hammerhead symbols/arrows signify stimulation/inhibition of a
process, or activity or expression level, as explained in details

Protective effects of P2Y receptors in vitro
in astrocytes

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

traumatic injury. The trauma was caused in a model of transient deformation of a flexible membrane. Cells grown on this
flexible membrane were stretched by applications of controlled gas pressure pulses in a standardized manner and thus
underwent traumatic damage [58]. 1321N1 Astrocytoma cells
lack endogenous P2 receptor and serve as a model for P2
receptor-related signaling after transfection with specific P2
receptors. In contrast to the wild-type cells, the P2Y 2
receptor-transfected 1321N1 astrocytoma cells did not show
DNA fragmentation or increased Bax/Bcl-2 gene expression
after stretch injury. Already the basal nucleotide release was
able to mediate this protective effect via P2Y2 receptors. Activation of ERK 1/2 and Akt in P2Y2 receptor-transfected
1321N1 astrocytoma was shown after stretch injury by western blot analysis [59]. It was demonstrated earlier that the
application of UTP to P2Y2 receptor-transfected 1321N1 astrocytoma cells activated pro-survival pathways, like upregulation of Bcl-2, Bcl-xl, neurotrophins, neuropeptides,
growth factors, and the downregulation of Bax [60]. In
this context, Fig. 1, pathway ➂, summarizes how we postulate that P2Y2 receptors can activate ERK, increase the
amount of antiapoptotic proteins, and thereby inhibit
apoptosis.
A model for inducing the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis is
based on the application of TNFα. The cytokine TNFα is
secreted under proinflammatory conditions and may increase
cell death in neurodegenerative diseases. The P2Y6 receptor
subtype was shown to inhibit TNFα-induced apoptosis in
1321N1 cells via PKC and phosphorylation of ERK, but without involvement of Akt [61]. We visualize in Fig. 1, pathway
➃, the P2Y6 receptors activating the ERK and supporting
survival via ERK.
Another role for the P2Y6 receptor was demonstrated in
microglia, astrocytes, and cortical slices from rats. Application
of UDP increased the expression of monocyte chemotactic
protein 1 and macrophage inflammatory protein-1α. The transcription factor nuclear factor of activated T cells was shown
to be responsible for the P2Y6 receptor-induced change of the
chemokine expression pattern [62]. Protective effects of
monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in mixed cortical cultures
from mice against NMDA-induced cytotoxicity have been
reported [63]. In conclusion, the P2Y6 receptor provides a
therapeutic target for protection by modulation of the chemokine expression.
A protective role of the P2Y12 receptor was shown in
1321N1 astrocytoma cells where it inhibited the TNFαinduced apoptosis by phosphorylation of ERK1/2 [64]. Pathway ➄ in Fig. 1 demonstrates the anti-apoptotic action of the
P2Y12 receptor via ERK1/2.
However, there are also reports of detrimental P2Y
receptor-mediated effects in vitro. In 1321N1 astrocytoma
cells expressing the P2Y 1 receptor, incubation with
2MeSADP caused increased activity of caspase 3. The

445

increase of this apoptosis marker was mediated by the stressactivated protein kinase family [65].
Besides the nucleotide-induced P2Y receptor-related protective effects, nucleotides might also act positively as chemical antioxidants. This process involves the chelation of iron
ions by nucleotides, thereby inhibiting the Fenton reaction
which produces highly toxic hydroxyl radicals from hydrogen
peroxide. As shown in cell-free systems, nucleotide analogues
concentration-dependently inhibit the Fenton reaction. Primary cortical neurons from rats were protected by nucleotide
analogues from iron-induced oxidative stress [66]. The inhibition of the Fenton reaction is a pharmacological target to
reduce oxidative stress. Generally, all P2Y receptors that raise
intracellular Ca2+ induce the tricarboxylic acid cycle and increase the ATP production. An increased amount of ATP generally supports the maintenance of the ion homeostasis and the
antioxidant defense, and inhibits the Fenton reaction. In Fig. 1,
pathway ➅ shows how increased Ca2+ elevates the ATP level
to inhibit the Fenton reaction. The paradigm of the Fenton
reaction as a target for neuroprotection by pharmacologically
designed nucleotides is given by pathway ➆ in Fig. 1.

Protective effects of P2Y receptors in vitro in neurons
Little is known about the possible protective effects of P2Y
receptor activation in neurons. An indirect protection of neurons by astrocytes via purinergic signaling was described.
Nucleotide-conditioned astrocytes may protect neurons
against hydrogen peroxide via interleukin-6 release. In this
study, the P2Y1 receptor-specific agonist 2MeSADP was
used. The pathway of interleukin-6-mediated protection remains unsolved, but induction of antioxidative proteins has
been suggested [67]. Figure 2 schematically summarizes the
mechanisms by which P2Y receptor signaling in neurons
counteracts oxidative stress. In this scheme, pathway ➀ shows
the indirect protection of neurons via astrocytic P2Y 1
receptors.
A direct protective function of the P2Y2 receptor was demonstrated in mouse primary cortical neurons. Under inflammatory conditions, the P2Y2 receptor is upregulated by interleukin-1β. Microscopic imaging demonstrated that activation
of the P2Y2 receptor in mouse primary cortical neurons by
UTP increased neurite outgrowth. This effect was regulated
by phosphorylation of the actin-depolymerizing factor cofilin.
Neurite extension is regarded as a protective pathway, which
maintains neuronal networks or even regenerates damaged
tissue after stroke or in neurodegenerative diseases, like AD,
PD, and multiple sclerosis [68]. Induction of neurite outgrowth by the P2Y2 receptor in neurons is illustrated in
Fig. 2, pathway ➁.
The balance between cell survival and cell death is critically regulated by trophic and apoptotic factors. Obstruction of

446

Fig. 2 P2Y receptor (P2YR) signaling in neurons counteracts oxidative
stress and Alzheimer’s pathology. Astrocytes release interleukin-6 after
P2Y1 receptor activation. Interleukin-6 protects neurons from oxidative
stress by an unknown pathway involving the Il-6 receptor ➀. Activation
of P2Y 2 receptors induces protective neurite outgrowth ➁. P2Y2
receptors inhibit apoptosis via ERK ➂. P2Y 2 receptors induce
ADAM10/17 activity to cleave APP to the soluble non amyloidogenic
sAPP ➃. The P2Y13 receptor protects against oxidative stress by
upregulation of HO-1 via Nrf-2 ➄. Activation of the P2Y13 receptor
leads to activation of ERK and blocks apoptosis ➅

brain vessels by blood clots causes OGD and depletion of
trophic factors, which induces apoptosis. Cultured cells are
starved of serum to mimic the condition of apoptosis induced
by trophic factor deprivation. A role in apoptosis was suggested for the P2Y2 receptor in PC12 cells and dorsal root
ganglion neurons. A period of 12 h of serum starvation in
PC12 cells leads to DNA fragmentation and caspase 3 activation. These events are features of apoptosis, which were
shown to be inhibited by treatment with both NGF (nerve
growth factor) and the P2Y receptor agonist ATPγS.
Silencing-RNA experiments to knock down the P2Y2 receptor
revealed that the P2Y2 receptor subtype is responsible for the
ATPγS-mediated protection. Application of inhibitors of
ERK, U0126, and Akt, LY294002 showed that inhibition of
apoptosis by ATPγS involved ERK and Akt, but not TrkA
which is part of the NGF-mediated antiapoptotic signaling. In
dorsal root ganglion neurons from wild-type but not from
P2Y2−/− knockout mice, the P2Y receptor agonist ATPγS
inhibited serum starvation-induced apoptosis [69]. Pathway

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

➂ in Fig. 2 represents the antiapoptotic action of P2Y2 receptors in neurons by activation of ERK and Akt.
Ischemic conditions can be mimicked chemically by application of an inhibitor of complex IV, KCN, which leads to cell
death. Such experiments were carried out with rat primary
cortical neurons and showed that preincubation with ATP for
3 to 8 h before the 3-h KCN treatment significantly increased
the viability of the cells, when measured at 12 h after the
insult. The application of the P2 receptor antagonist suramin
blocked the protection from KCN treatment. Furthermore, the
protection by ATP was absent in neurons from a mutant
mouse model, which did not express the transcription cofactor
LMO4. The incubation with ATP upregulated the expression
of the inhibitor of apoptosis protein 2. Upregulation of LMO4
was mediated by CREB and ERK [70].
AD is a widespread neurodegenerative disease featuring increased amyloid β release and formation of senile
plaques leading to gradual dementia. A possible role for
P2Y2 receptors in the treatment of AD was first suggested, when in 1321N1 astrocytoma cells the activation
of P2Y2 receptors was shown to increase the release of
the non-toxic soluble amyloid precursor protein (sAPPα)
[71]. Generally, the non-amyloidogenic cleavage of APP
to the sAPPα is regarded as a potential mechanism to
reduce the risk of AD. The idea was pursued, when rat
primary cortical neurons were treated with interleukin-1β,
a proinflammatory cytokine that caused an increase in
P2Y2 receptor mRNA expression. Treatment of rat primary cortical neurons with UTP led to increased sAPPα
secretion by the α-secretase ADAM10/17, which was
not dependent on Gq/11 activity [20]. In a later work,
which was also carried out in N2A cells, α-secretase activity was shown to be increased by the P2Y2 receptor
[72]. The TgCRND8 mouse model of AD, which was
used in [73], studies animals containing Swedish and Indiana mutations in the APP gene leading to AD pathology. The work showed increased expression of the P2Y2
receptor mRNA in the brain of TgCRND8 animals within
10 and 25 weeks of age compared to littermate controls.
TgCRND8 mice with heterozygous or homozygous deletion of the P2Y2 receptor had a survival time after birth of
less than 4 and 12 weeks, respectively. Additionally, heterozygous deletion of the P2Y2 receptor in TgCRND8
mice increased the amyloid β plaque load and decreased
the expression of the microglial marker CD11b. This
study strongly indicates a neuroprotective role of the
P2Y2 receptor in the removal of amyloid β plaques via
microglial cells [73].
Besides the avoidance of amyloid β deposit formation,
the clearance of amyloid β deposits by microglia could
significantly contribute to protection in AD. Treatment of
primary mouse microglia with oligomeric and fibrillar
amyloid β solutions caused ATP release and increased

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

P2Y2 receptor expression. Activation of the P2Y2 receptor
with ATP or UTP increased amyloid β uptake of
microglial cells from wild-type mice but not from P2Y2
receptor−/− mice. UTP also enhanced the amyloid β degradation in wild-type mice [74]. The possible involvement
of the P2Y2 receptor in preventing the AD pathology is
included in Fig. 2 as pathway ➃.
A protective role was proposed for the P2Y13 receptor in cerebellar granule neurons. Incubation with
2MeSADP, an ADP analogue and agonist of P2Y receptors, induced the expression of the cytoprotective protein heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). The transcription factor
nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (Nrf2) was
critical for the activation of HO-1. Preincubation with
2MeSADP attenuated the hydrogen peroxide-induced
cytotoxicity, but protection did not occur in the presence
of MRS2211 (2-[(2-chloro-5-nitrophenyl)azo]-5hydroxy-6-methyl-3-[(phosphonooxy)methyl]-4
pyridinecarboxaldehyde disodium salt), which is a specific non-nucleotide P2Y13 receptor antagonist. These
results suggest that the P2Y 13 receptor is useful to
counteract oxidative stress in neurons [75]. Antioxidant
signaling in neurons by P2Y13 receptors via Nrf2 and
HO-1 is presented in Fig. 2, pathway ➄. Another protective action of the P2Y13 receptor in neurons was
shown in cerebellar granule neurons from rats. Cells
were treated with 2MeSADP for 2 h before addition
of excitotoxic glutamate (100 μM). Significant protection was observed by live/dead staining and shown to
be mediated by phosphorylation of Erk1/2. This
antiapoptotic action of the P2Y13 receptor in neurons
is depicted in Fig. 2 in pathway ➅ [76].
In mixed neuronal/glial cultures, it was shown that
lipopolysaccharide- or lipoteichoic acid-induced neuronal loss
was prevented by MRS2578 (1-(3-isothiocyanatophenyl)3-[4-[(3 isothiocyanatophenyl)carbamothioylamino]
butyl]thiourea), a P2Y6 receptor antagonist or by apyrase,
which degrades natural P2Y receptor agonists. Treatment with
the P2Y6 receptor agonist induced phagocytosis of neurons.
The viability of the cultures was assessed by propidium iodide
staining and, moreover, morphological changes were determined [77]. In this study, protection of neurons by P2Y receptor antagonism has been found. Protection occurs by inhibition of microglial P2Y6 receptor-mediated phagocytosis of
neurons, but not by activation of neuronal P2Y receptors.
The neuroprotective potential of microglial P2Y12 receptors was also investigated [78]. Increased neurotoxicity after OGD in neurons-astrocytes cocultures by addition of microglia was mitigated by P2Y12 receptor
knockdown [78]. Neuronal viability was determined by
detection of microtubule-associated protein-2. This study
strongly suggests a role of microglial P2Y12 receptors in
neuroprotection.

447

Protective effects of P2Y receptors in vivo in animal
models of stroke and traumatic brain injury
In vivo experiments provide the opportunity to test whether
agents have protective effects in the context of the whole
organism to better understand diseases and find treatments
for human diseases. By genetic engineering, mice or rats are
generated that feature the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases, like AD or PD. Animals may also be exposed to
standardized procedures to mimic stroke or TBI. Present research concerning P2Y receptors in pathophysiology in animal models focuses on stroke and TBI. Stroke is a major cause
of death in the modern civilization, but its clinical treatment is
largely restricted to thrombolysis by plasminogen activator.
Yet there is no neuroprotective pharmaceutical intervention
which precludes the neurodegeneration after stroke. This urgent need induced intensive research in this field.
A very well-established animal model of stroke is the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) usually accomplished
with mice or rats. Different MCAO models differ by duration
of interrupting the blood flow, ranging from transient to permanent or the method of introducing the occlusion. The latter
can be caused by the vasoconstrictive peptide endothelin-1,
clot injection, surgical filaments, or transection followed by
electrocauterization or ligation.
Several studies investigated the role of P2 receptors in
MCAO models. The influence of suramin, a general P2 receptor antagonist, on the infarct size was analyzed in mice subjected to focal cerebral ischemia [79]. In this model, focal
brain ischemia was induced by middle cerebral artery transection (MCAT) and bilateral occlusion of the common carotid
arteries. Six hours after ischemia, the neurological status was
measured by motor tests and the infarct volume was analyzed
by microtubule-associated protein 2 immunostaining. The rats
which received 30 min before MCAT an intravenous injection
of suramin (100 mg/kg) showed an improved neurological
score and a decreased infarct volume. The estimated end concentration in the brain after 100 mg/kg intravenous injection
of suramin is 10 μM. At a concentration of 10 μM, mainly
P2X receptors but not P2Y receptors are inhibited, and the
blockade of P2X receptors may inhibit excessive intracellular
Ca2+ rise leading to apoptosis. At higher concentrations, that
are >100 μM, interaction of suramin with P2Y receptors is
possible. Interestingly, the group of animals pretreated with
250 mg/kg did not show a decreased infarct volume. This loss
of protection could be due to inhibition of beneficially acting
P2Y receptors at this concentration. The study investigated the
outcome with mice at 6 h after onset of MCAT, which is a
relatively short term [79].
Another study investigated the long-term effects of
pyridoxalphosphate-6-azophenyl-2′,4′-disulfonic acid
(PPADS) on recovery from MCAO in mice [80]. The MCAO
was caused by electrocauterization of the middle cerebral

448

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

artery. PPADS was administered with an implanted osmotic
pump 15 min prior to the MCAO and until day 7 after the
injury. After MCAO, the clinical outcome was investigated by
behavioral tests, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG), and histological analysis at different days until the maximum of 28 days after
MCAO. The functional recovery of the PPADS-treated group
compared to the control group was improved as monitored by
qEEG. Mice treated with PPADS showed improved motor
abilities in rotarod and beam walk tests after MCAO. Investigation of the infarct volume by MRI showed significant reduction in the PPADS-treated animals compared to the control
group from day 1 until day 7, but not after 28 days. Generally,
the study suggests that early inhibition of P2 receptors could
be beneficial for the motoric and functional recovery after
stroke [80].
The exact mechanism how broad range P2Y receptor antagonists, like suramin or PPADS, reduce infarct size and improve motor and functional recovery is unknown. Figure 3
summarizes the frequently proposed mechanisms of protection. In pathway ➀, inhibition of P2Y receptors on astrocytes
could reduce the glutamate release and thereby decrease the
excitotoxic cell death of neurons. In pathway ➁, inhibition of
P2Y receptors could reduce the TNFα release from astrocytes
avoiding the extrinsic pathway of apoptosis in neurons. Ca2+induced ATP release from astrocytes which exacerbates the
aforementioned toxic effects could be blocked by general
P2Y receptor agonists in pathway ➂.
It has been described that increased intracellular Ca2+ in
astrocytes leads to release of proinflammatory cytokines, glutamate, and ATP that exacerbates the release by further stimulation of intracellular Ca2+ rise [81–86]. Especially under

pathological conditions, this contributes to cellular damage,
as can be seen in the model systems.
Another hypothesis concerning the mechanism of protection in MCAO models could be the inhibition of P2Y receptors in microglia. Activation followed by migration and
phagocytosis of target cells by microglia is controlled by
P2Y12 and P2Y6 receptors. ATP and ADP leak from cells to
activate the P2Y12 receptors on microglia and the ensuing
P2Y12 receptor activity contributes to shift of cellular phenotype and migration towards the damaged cells. Phagocytosis
of damaged cells is stimulated by UDP activating the P2Y6
receptors on microglia. Microglial expression of the P2Y12
receptor is decreased and expression of the P2Y6 receptor is
increased in this process [46, 87, 88]. This immunological
response is necessary for the restoration of tissue integrity.
However, viable or salvageable cells may become victims of
phagocytosis exacerbating damage under pathological condition. This might explain the reduced infarct volume after
MCAO in P2Y receptor antagonist-treated animals.
Protective effects of P2Y receptor antagonist on microglia
in animal models are illustrated in the summary in Fig. 4.
Indeed, a few studies prove the neuroprotective potential of
microglial P2Y6 and P2Y12 receptors in animal models.
Microglial P2Y6 receptor-related protection was observed
in vivo when rats showed decreased neuronal loss as a response to lipopolysaccharide injection into the striatum by
application of the P2Y6 receptor antagonist MRS2578. Neuronal loss was determined with confocal microscopy by immunohistochemical staining of sections using NeuN antibodies [77]. Another study focused on the function of the
microglial P2Y12 receptors during ischemia [78]. Here, ischemia was induced by bilateral carotid artery occlusion. P2Y12

Fig. 3 Neuroprotection by P2Y receptor (P2YR) antagonists in animal
models—hypothesized signaling pathways. P2Y receptor antagonists
inhibit release of glutamate, proinflammatory cytokines, and ATP, and
thereby block apoptosis. Astrocytes release glutamate ➀,

proinflammatory cytokines ➁, and ATP ➂ after P2Y1/P2Y2 receptors
activation. Glutamate and ATP contribute via glutamate receptors and
P2Y1/P2Y2 receptors to further increase of cytosolic Ca2+ concentration
in neurons. Ca2+ overload leads to apoptosis in neurons ➃

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

Fig. 4 P2Y receptor (P2YR) receptors antagonists acting on microglia in
animal models—hypothetical mechanisms of action. ATP activates
P2Y12 and P2Y1 receptors on microglia cells and contributes to cellular
activation. Activated micoglia release TNFα, which might cause
apoptosis in neurons and astrocytes by the extrinsic pathway. After
binding of UDP, the P2Y6 receptors cause activated microglia to initiate
phagocytosis. There is a homeostatic balance between detrimental
phagocytosis of potentially salvageable astrocytes and neurons and
beneficial removal of apoptotic debris. Activation of microglia and
execution of phagocytosis could be inhibited by P2Y receptor antagonists

receptor expression knockdown mice or animals treated with
the P2Y12 receptor antagonist clopidogrel suffered less neuronal injury by bilateral carotid artery occlusion [78].
A P2Y1 receptor-specific study was performed with P2Y1
receptor knockout (KO) mice focusing on cognitive functions
and the neuroinflammatory response after MCAO [89]. Here,
transient MCAO was induced by insertion of a nylon filament
with an infarction time of 45 min. One week after MCAO, a
contextual fear conditioning test was performed with wildtype and P2Y1 receptor KO mice. The wild-type mice showed
significantly reduced cognitive ability after MCAO compared
to the sham-operated wild-type group, whereas the P2Y1 receptor KO mice showed no decline after MCAO compared to
the sham-operated P2Y1 receptor KO mice group. There was
no difference in the sensory motor deficits after MCAO between wild-type and P2Y1 receptor KO mice compared to
respective sham-operated control group. Improved cognitive
outcome in wild-type mice after MCAO could be achieved by
application of a P2Y 1 receptor-specific antagonist
MRS2500 (4-[2-iodo-6-(methylamino)-9H-purin-9-yl]2-(phosphonooxy)bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane-1-methanol
dihydrogen phosphate ester tetraammonium salt). Further neuroinflammatory cellular change of the hippocampus was analyzed by immunohistochemical staining.
Brain sections were stained with labeled antibodies to
mark activated astrocytes (anti-GFAP) and activated microglia (anti-Iba1). Only in the CA2/3 region, the glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) expression in P2Y1 receptor KO MCAO mice was suppressed significantly as
compared to the sham-operated control group. However,

449

in all hippocampal regions, the expression of Iba1 was
significantly reduced in the P2Y1 receptor KO MCAO
mice at 3 weeks and 2 months after MCAO [89].
Besides permanent MCAO models, the transient MCAO
model provides a tool to investigate transient ischemic events,
which resemble the clinical pathogenesis from stroke development to thrombolysis. The influence of P2Y1 receptor agonists and antagonists on the outcome of transient MCAO in
mice was investigated [90]. Here, the carotid artery of mice
was reversibly occluded by insertion of a nylon monofilament
for 30 or 60 min. The infarct size was determined by 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium (TTC) staining at 72 h after transient
MCAO. TTC is converted by the activity of mitochondrial
dehydrogenases and therefore changes color. The application
of the methanocarba ring-based P2Y 1 receptor agonist
MRS2365 ([[(1R,2R,3S,4R,5S)-4-[6-amino-2-(methylthio)9H-purin-9-yl]-2,3-dihydroxybicyclo[3.1.0]hex-1-yl]methyl]
diphosphoric acid mono ester trisodium salt) increased the
infarct volume in the mice exposed to 30 min transient
MCAO, but not in the mice exposed to 60 min transient
MCAO. The P2Y1 receptor antagonist MRS 2179 decreased
the infarct volume, when it was applied in 3 pulses with 12 h
intervals. MRS2179 was more effective in decreasing the infarct volume, when it was applied at 0, 12, and 24 h after
transient MCAO as compared to the later applications at 36,
48, and 60 h after transient MCAO. The motor function of the
mice was assessed by rotarod test which records the latency to
fall from a rotarod. The mice treated with MRS 2179 showed
improved motoric function compared to the untreated mice, as
demonstrated by increased latencies to fall in the rotarod test.
Immunostaining with Iba1 and OX42, a microglial marker,
showed lower intensity in the group treated with MRS 2179
implicating that microglial activation and/or macrophage accumulation was inhibited. The investigations of the involved
pathways showed that MRS2179 lowered the amount of pRelA, a subunit of NFκB, and that the inhibition of NFκB
with ammonium pyrolidine dithiocarbamate mimicked the effects of MRS2179 concerning the infarct size and motor functions after stroke. Taken together, this study suggests that
P2Y1 receptor activation by MRS2365 initiates the NFκB
pathway enhancing the inflammatory response and increasing
the infarct size after stroke. Blocking the P2Y1 receptor by
MRS2179 attenuates the inflammatory response and decreases the infarct size [90].
The mechanism of protection by P2Y1 receptor-specific
antagonists in MCAO models is unknown. Possible hypotheses are similar to those explaining the protective effects of
broad range P2Y receptor antagonist, which we discussed
above in Fig. 3. These effects on the inflammatory response
cannot be explained by inhibition of P2Y6 and P2Y12 receptors on microglia, but by induction of release of TNFα and
glutamate from astrocytes. TNFα is a proinflammatory cytokine which might contribute to enhanced inflammatory

450

responses and cell death. Glutamate release exacerbates
excitotoxicity and leads to degeneration of neurons.
A stroke model different from MCAO uses the injection of
Rose Bengal into the mice and the illumination of arteries on
the cortical surface with a green laser at 543 nm causing the
formation of clots in these vessels [91]. Here, the infarct size
was evaluated with three different methods. The fluorescently
labeled CD40 antibody was injected 2, 3, or 4 days after
photo-thrombotic clotting and in vivo images were recorded.
CD40 is a protein from the TNF receptor family and an important marker for necrosis during ischemia. TTC staining
was performed on brain sections of mice at days 1 and 5 after
photo-thrombotic clotting. Transgenic mice expressing GFPGFAP were used for experiments. The infarction border was
visualized by confocal imaging as absence of GFP fluorescence at day 1 or 2 after stroke. This also allows monitoring
the degree of swelling in astrocytes. All methods showed that
a tail vein injection of 2MeSADP (0.1 ml, 100 μM) significantly reduced the infarct size after stroke and decreased the
swelling of astrocytes in the border area of the ischemic core.
Application of Ruthenium 360, which is a specific blocker of
mitochondrial Ca2+ uptake, inhibited the 2MeSADP-mediated
protective effect. The protection by 2MeSADP is attributed to
the increase of intracellular Ca2+ and stimulation of the mitochondrial matrix dehydrogenases. The enhanced mitochondrial metabolism helps to maintain the ion homeostasis and
avoids swelling and cell death in astrocytes. An important
characteristic of the Rose Bengal photo-thrombosis model is
that it produces much smaller ischemic volumes in comparison to MCAO models. The former resemble silent strokes.
The results from the Rose Bengal photo-thrombosis model
are extraordinary as it represents the only in vivo stroke model
that demonstrates benefits of P2Y receptor activation [91].
The Rose Bengal photo-thrombosis model was also applied to transgenic mice expressing yellow fluorescent protein
in neurons and green fluorescent protein in astrocytes [92].
Confocal imaging at 24 h after photo-thrombosis revealed that
both infarct size and neuronal loss were reduced by injection
of 2MeSADP directly after onset of photo-thrombosis. Investigation of dendrites showed beading at 3 h after onset of
photo-thrombosis. Beading is a morphological hallmark of
early ischemic damage. Injection of 2MeSADP at 3 h after
photo-thrombosis could reverse beading of dendrites within
3 h. Mitochondrial polarization during ischemia was estimated
by tetra-methyl rhodamine methyl ester staining. This method
showed that depolarization that occurred after 3 h of ischemia
could be reversed by injection of 2MeSADP. Mitochondrial
repolarization after photo-thrombosis did not occur in inositol-(1,4,5) trisphosphate receptor-type2 knockout mice [92].
These results underline that P2Y receptors and the inositol
trisphosphate-Ca2+ signaling pathway might play an important role in neuroprotection in mild strokes. This study underlines the significance of the photo-thrombosis model in

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

demonstrating beneficial effects of P2Y receptor agonists.
The interpretation of these exceptional findings will be given
in the context of our conclusions below.
Similar to stroke, the TBI after accidents is a common
cause of death and disability. A study investigated the role
of P2 receptor antagonists in TBI [93]. A controlled cortical
impact was applied to the head of mice with a pneumatic
impactor. MRS2179, a P2Y1 receptor antagonist, was administered with an osmotic minipump, which was implanted
3 days prior to the controlled cortical impact. At days 3 or 7
after the controlled cortical impact, hippocampal slices of the
CA3 region were investigated with cresyl violet staining to
determine the neuronal loss. Groups treated with MRS2179
showed significantly reduced neuronal loss after controlled
cortical impact. In the same study, cognitive functions were
tested in the Morris water maze at 3 or 7 days after controlled
cortical impact. The Morris water maze uses a pool with turbid
water which has a safe platform close to the surface. Marks on
the wall of the pool allow orientation. Swim speed and latency
time are recorded for mice to find the safe platform, after
learning its position. Animals treated with MRS2179 showed
reduced latency but similar peak swim speed compared to the
control group. This reduced latency may be attributed to improved cognition in the MRS2179-treated group of animals.
The mechanism of protection is unclear, but reduced release of
glutamate may inhibit excitotoxicity. Blocking hippocampal
P2Y1 receptors might lead to an enhancement of synaptic
signaling which might trigger pro-survival pathways and antioxidant mechanism [93].
The hypothesized mechanisms of protection in TBI models
are quite similar to mechanism of protection discussed for the
MCAO models, as presented above in Fig. 3.

Conclusions and future perspectives
There seems to be a conflict concerning reports describing a
protective role of P2Y receptors either in in vitro or in vivo
brain damage models. This includes models for oxidative
stress, apoptosis, TBI, and MCAO. P2Y receptor activation
in vitro is protective by antioxidant and antiapoptotic actions.
Improved outcome in models of MCAO and TBI after P2Y
receptor blocking has been observed in in vivo studies. This
appears to be contradictory, but one has to keep in mind that
those cellular models and animal models differ strongly
from a methodological point of view. Cellular models
are well suitable for investigation of pathways connected to receptors, mRNA, and protein levels or the influence of toxic agents. However, their significance for
description of the complex interplay of events during
diseases in a whole organism is limited.
In contrast to cellular models, animal models imply
crosstalk of different cell types, including astrocytes, neurons,

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

and microglia. The role of microglia and blood-derived immune cells during neuroinflammation is completely absent in
cellular models, but contributes crucially to the pathogenesis
of neurodegenerative disease, stroke, and TBI.
Microglial P2Y6 and P2Y12 receptors were shown to be
targets for neuroprotection in vivo and in neural/microglial
mixed cultures. Medication with P2Y6 and P2Y12 receptor
antagonists to avoid phagocytosis of salvageable cells is a
promising pharmaceutical application for stroke and also for
neurodegenerative diseases displaying chronic inflammation.
Application of specific synthetic P2Y6 and P2Y12 receptor
agonists or antagonists might help to induce beneficial
immunomodulation.
Another important factor which distinguishes in vitro
models from the in vivo MCAO models concerning P2Y receptors is that the cells in vitro are often preincubated with
nucleotides and have sufficient amounts of oxygen and substrates during that period. This enables adaptation mechanisms like upregulation of antioxidant enzymes and
antiapoptotic proteins. The MCAO model provides no opportunity for such adaptation because treatment takes place after
MCAO and oxygen and substrates are instantaneously limited. Here, treatment with P2Y receptor agonists worsens the
outcome by increased cytosolic Ca2+ concentration, enhanced
glutamate release, and exacerbated neuroinflammation.
This design of the in vivo studies in which preincubation
protocols are not tested resembles the clinical practice. In this
context, the study using the photo-thrombosis-induced infarct
model seems to support the idea that adaptation requires oxygen and substrates. This is the only study which shows that
P2Y receptor agonists improve the outcome in a stroke model.
The study uses a model resembling a silent stroke with small
infarct volume and less pronounced limitation of oxygen and
substrates. Also early application of 2MeSADP was more
beneficial than application after a 24-h delay. Generally, the
photo-thrombosis-induced infarct model leaves a time window for adaptation mechanisms that are enhanced by P2Y
receptor activation. The inflammation process is less severe
and the amount of salvageable brain tissue is higher as compared to MCAO models. This suggests that the application of
P2Y1 receptor agonists in mild cases of stroke could improve
the outcome.
The studies using a MCAO model prove beneficial effects
of P2Y receptor antagonists and harmful effects of P2Y1 receptor agonists concerning the size of the infarct and the motor
abilities. These studies suggest that during MCAO the P2Y1
receptor enhances the inflammatory response and increases
the infarct size in the brain during the first days after the
incident. A pronounced and instant limitation of oxygen and
substrates in the MCAO model leads to massive cell death and
release of nucleotides, which makes further P2Y receptor agonist treatment ineffective. However, the longest period of
time between MCAO and determination of the infarct size

451

was 28 days after MCAO. At 28 days after MCAO, there
was no difference between the untreated and the P2Y receptor
antagonist-treated group. To draw further conclusions for clinical use, it is necessary to investigate the long-term outcome of
stroke models using P2Y receptor agonists or antagonists beyond 28 days after MCAO.
Yet, in the P2Y receptor family, only the P2Y1 receptor was
specifically targeted for investigations in the context of stroke.
Other P2Y receptor subtypes could also be considered as potential drug targets. A pretreatment regime shows protective
effects in cellular models. It would be interesting to investigate
a pretreatment regime with P2Y receptor agonists in a MCAO
model. The currently available data suggest that after severe
stroke or TBI, a treatment with P2Y1 receptor antagonist may
improve the outcome, whereas during mild stroke a treatment
with P2Y1 receptor agonists might be beneficial. Treatment of
risk groups with P2Y receptor agonists as preventive measure
against stroke should be investigated. For pharmacological
use, the design of P2Y receptor agonists and antagonists,
which specifically target the brain by passing the BBB, is
necessary. The potential pharmaceuticals have to be chemically stable to provide sufficient bioavailability. Negative interference with other P2Y receptor-dependent processes, like
blood coagulation, has to be ruled out. P2Y receptors need
to be specifically targeted.
Interaction of P2Y receptors with other types of P2Y
receptors or membrane proteins needs to be considered in
this process. It is also noteworthy to mention that both in
primary cell cultures and in vivo models, respectively,
different subtypes of P2Y receptors are expressed. Finally,
P2Y receptors may form homo- or heterooligomers with
each other or interact with other receptors in neurons and
glia cells [94]. We have previously reported heterooligomerization of P2Y 11 receptors specifically with
P2Y1 receptors that controls the internalization and ligand
selectivity of the P2Y11 receptor [95, 96]. In addition,
adenosine A1 receptors and P2Y 1 receptors form
multimeric complexes in astrocytes [97]. Additionally interactions with P2XRs were reported in primary rat cerebellar astrocytes [98]. From that point of view even if one
P2Y receptor subtype might be predominantly responsible
for the observed effects, the contribution of other P2Y
receptor subtypes or interaction partners has to be
clarified.
Our analysis and conclusions will certainly motivate substantial further research concerning the role of purinergic signaling during stroke and neurodegenerative conditions based
on the design of specific P2Y receptor ligands for pharmaceutical use.

Acknowledgments The work in the corresponding author’ laboratory
was supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (RE 563).

452

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.
23.

Lipmann F (1948) Biosynthetic mechanisms. Harvey Lect 44:99–
123
Burnstock G (1972) Purinergic nerves. Pharmacol Rev 24:509–81
von Kügelgen I, Wetter A (2000) Molecular pharmacology of P2Yreceptors. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 362:310–23
Khakh BS (2001) Molecular physiology of P2X receptors and ATP
signalling at synapses. Nat Rev Neurosci 2:165–74
Stone T W, Ceruti S, Abbracchio M P (2009). Adenosine receptors
and neurological disease: neuroprotection and neurodegeneration.
Handb Exp Pharmacol, 535–87
Burnstock G (2014) Purinergic signalling: from discovery to current developments. Exp Physiol 99:16–34
von Kügelgen I (2006) Pharmacological profiles of cloned mammalian P2Y-receptor subtypes. Pharmacol Ther 110:415–32
Illes P, Ribeiro JA (2004) Neuronal P2 receptors of the central
nervous system. Curr Top Med Chem 4:831–8
Burnstock G (2009) Purinergic signalling: past, present and future.
Braz J Med Biol Res 42:3–8
Felix RA, Martin S, Pinion S, Crawford DJ (2012) Development of
a comprehensive set of P2 receptor pharmacological research compounds. Purinergic Signal 8:101–12
Jacobson KA, Boeynaems JM (2010) P2Y nucleotide receptors:
promise of therapeutic applications. Drug Discov Today 15:570–8
Abbracchio MP, Boeynaems JM, Barnard EA, Boyer JL, Kennedy
C, Miras-Portugal MT, King BF, Gachet C, Jacobson KA, Weisman
GA, Burnstock G (2003) Characterization of the UDP-glucose receptor (re-named here the P2Y14 receptor) adds diversity to the P2Y
receptor family. Trends Pharmacol Sci 24:52–5
Langer D, Hammer K, Koszalka P, Schrader J, Robson S,
Zimmermann H (2008) Distribution of ectonucleotidases in the
rodent brain revisited. Cell Tissue Res 334:199–217
Dorsam RT, Kunapuli SP (2004) Central role of the P2Y12 receptor
in platelet activation. J Clin Invest 113:340–5
Guzman-Aranguez A, Santano C, Martin-Gil A, Fonseca B, Pintor
J (2013) Nucleotides in the eye: focus on functional aspects and
therapeutic perspectives. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 345:331–41
Burnstock G, Krügel U, Abbracchio MP, Illes P (2011) Purinergic
signalling: from normal behaviour to pathological brain function.
Prog Neurobiol 95:229–74
Moore DJ, Chambers JK, Wahlin JP, Tan KB, Moore GB, Jenkins
O, Emson PC, Murdock PR (2001) Expression pattern of human
P2Y receptor subtypes: a quantitative reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction study. Biochim Biophys Acta 1521:
107–19
Moore D, Chambers J, Waldvogel H, Faull R, Emson P (2000)
Regional and cellular distribution of the P2Y1 purinergic receptor
in the human brain: striking neuronal localisation. J Comp Neurol
421:374–84
Moran-Jimenez MJ, Matute C (2000) Immunohistochemical localization of the P2Y1 purinergic receptor in neurons and glial cells of
the central nervous system. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 78:50–8
Kong Q, Peterson TS, Baker O, Stanley E, Camden J, Seye CI, Erb
L, Simonyi A, Wood WG, Sun GY, Weisman GA (2009)
Interleukin-1β enhances nucleotide-induced and α-secretasedependent amyloid precursor protein processing in rat primary cortical neurons via up-regulation of the P2Y2 receptor. J Neurochem
109:1300–10
Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C (2010) The science of stroke:
mechanisms in search of treatments. Neuron 67:181–98
Fisher M (2006) The ischemic penumbra: a new opportunity for
neuroprotection. Cerebrovasc Dis 21(Suppl 2):64–70
Ginsberg MD (2008) Neuroprotection for ischemic stroke: past,
present and future. Neuropharmacol 55:363–89

24.
25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.
34.
35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

40.

41.

42.
43.
44.
45.

46.

Ferrer I (2006) Apoptosis: future targets for neuroprotective strategies. Cerebrovasc Dis 21(Suppl 2):9–20
Pradelli LA, Beneteau M, Ricci JE (2010) Mitochondrial control of
caspase-dependent and -independent cell death. Cell Mol Life Sci
67:1589–97
Rami A, Bechmann I, Stehle JH (2008) Exploiting endogenous
anti-apoptotic proteins for novel therapeutic strategies in cerebral
ischemia. Prog Neurobiol 85:273–96
Lemasters JJ, Theruvath TP, Zhong Z, Nieminen AL (2009)
Mitochondrial calcium and the permeability transition in cell death.
Biochim Biophys Acta 1787:1395–401
Rasola A, Bernardi P (2007) The mitochondrial permeability transition pore and its involvement in cell death and in disease pathogenesis. Apoptosis 12:815–33
Zorov DB, Juhaszova M, Yaniv Y, Nuss HB, Wang S, Sollott SJ
(2009) Regulation and pharmacology of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore. Cardiovasc Res 83:213–25
Azarashvili T, Baburina Y, Grachev D, Krestinina O, Evtodienko Y,
Stricker R, Reiser G (2011) Calcium-induced permeability transition in rat brain mitochondria is promoted by carbenoxolone
through targeting connexin43. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 300:
C707–20
Doyle KP, Simon RP, Stenzel-Poore MP (2008) Mechanisms of
ischemic brain damage. Neuropharmacol 55:310–8
Lai TW, Zhang S, Wang YT (2014) Excitotoxicity and stroke: identifying novel targets for neuroprotection. Prog Neurobiol 115:157–
88
Szydlowska K, Tymianski M (2010) Calcium, ischemia and
excitotoxicity. Cell Calcium 47:122–9
Murphy MP (2009) How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen
species. Biochem J 417:1–13
Kowaltowski AJ, de Souza-Pinto NC, Castilho RF, Vercesi AE
(2009) Mitochondria and reactive oxygen species. Free Radic
Biol Med 47:333–43
Rachmilovich-Calis S, Masarwa A, Meyerstein N, Meyerstein D
(2011) The effect of pyrophosphate, tripolyphosphate and ATP on
the rate of the Fenton reaction. J Inorg Biochem 105:669–74
Panov A, Dikalov S, Shalbuyeva N, Hemendinger R, Greenamyre
JT, Rosenfeld J (2007) Species- and tissue-specific relationships
between mitochondrial permeability transition and generation of
ROS in brain and liver mitochondria of rats and mice. Am J
Physiol Cell Physiol 292:C708–18
Federico A, Cardaioli E, Da Pozzo P, Formichi P, Gallus GN, Radi
E (2012) Mitochondria, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration. J
Neurol Sci 322:254–62
Conrad M, Schick J, Angeli JP (2013) Glutathione and thioredoxin
dependent systems in neurodegenerative disease: what can be
learned from reverse genetics in mice. Neurochem Int 62:738–49
Johnson WM, Wilson-Delfosse AL, Mieyal JJ (2012)
Dysregulation of glutathione homeostasis in neurodegenerative
diseases. Nutrients 4:1399–440
Ghosh N, Ghosh R, Mandal SC (2011) Antioxidant protection: a
promising therapeutic intervention in neurodegenerative disease.
Free Radic Res 45:888–905
Dringen R, Pawlowski PG, Hirrlinger J (2005) Peroxide detoxification by brain cells. J Neurosci Res 79:157–65
Amor S, Puentes F, Baker D, van der Valk P (2010) Inflammation in
neurodegenerative diseases. Immunology 129:154–69
Jin R, Yang G, Li G (2010) Inflammatory mechanisms in ischemic
stroke: role of inflammatory cells. J Leukoc Biol 87:779–89
Tian L, Rauvala H, Gahmberg CG (2009) Neuronal regulation of
immune responses in the central nervous system. Trends Immunol
30:91–9
Koizumi S, Ohsawa K, Inoue K, Kohsaka S (2013) Purinergic
receptors in microglia: functional modal shifts of microglia mediated by P2 and P1 receptors. Glia 61:47–54

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454
47.

48.

49.
50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

Quintas C, Fraga S, Goncalves J, Queiroz G (2011) P2Y receptors
on astrocytes and microglia mediate opposite effects in astroglial
proliferation. Purinergic Signal 7:251–63
De Simone R, Niturad CE, De Nuccio C, Ajmone-Cat MA,
Visentin S, Minghetti L (2010) TGF-β and LPS modulate ADPinduced migration of microglial cells through P2Y1 and P2Y12
receptor expression. J Neurochem 115:450–9
Sofroniew MV (2009) Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis
and glial scar formation. Trends Neurosci 32:638–47
Kimelberg HK, Nedergaard M (2010) Functions of astrocytes and
their potential as therapeutic targets. Neurother J Am Soc Exp
NeuroTher 7:338–53
Neary JT, Rathbone MP, Cattabeni F, Abbracchio MP, Burnstock G
(1996) Trophic actions of extracellular nucleotides and nucleosides
on glial and neuronal cells. Trends Neurosci 19:13–8
Fuller S, Münch G, Steele M (2009) Activated astrocytes: a therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease? Expert Rev Neurother 9:
1585–94
Zhou Y, Wang Y, Wang J, Anne Stetler R, Yang QW (2014)
Inflammation in intracerebral hemorrhage: from mechanisms to
clinical translation. Prog Neurobiol 115:25–44
Jarrott B, Williams S J (2015). Chronic brain inflammation: the
neurochemical basis for drugs to reduce inflammation.
Neurochem Res
Magrone T, Marzulli G, Jirillo E (2012) Immunopathogenesis of
neurodegenerative diseases: current therapeutic models of neuroprotection with special reference to natural products. Curr Pharm
Des 18:34–42
Shinozaki Y, Koizumi S, Ishida S, Sawada J, Ohno Y, Inoue K
(2005) Cytoprotection against oxidative stress-induced damage of
astrocytes by extracellular ATP via P2Y1 receptors. Glia 49:288–
300
Iwabuchi S, Kawahara K (2009) Possible involvement of extracellular ATP-P2Y purinoceptor signaling in ischemia-induced tolerance of astrocytes in culture. Neurochem Res 34:1542–54
Ellis EF, McKinney JS, Willoughby KA, Liang S, Povlishock JT
(1995) A new model for rapid stretch-induced injury of cells in
culture: characterization of the model using astrocytes. J
Neurotrauma 12:325–39
Burgos M, Neary JT, Gonzalez FA (2007) P2Y2 nucleotide receptors inhibit trauma-induced death of astrocytic cells. J Neurochem
103:1785–800
Chorna NE, Santiago-Perez LI, Erb L, Seye CI, Neary JT, Sun GY,
Weisman GA, Gonzalez FA (2004) P2Y receptors activate neuroprotective mechanisms in astrocytic cells. J Neurochem 91:119–32
Kim SG, Gao ZG, Soltysiak KA, Chang TS, Brodie C, Jacobson
KA (2003) P2Y6 nucleotide receptor activates PKC to protect
1321N1 astrocytoma cells against tumor necrosis factor-induced
apoptosis. Cell Mol Neurobiol 23:401–18
Kim B, Jeong HK, Kim JH, Lee SY, Jou I, Joe EH (2011) Uridine
5′-diphosphate induces chemokine expression in microglia and astrocytes through activation of the P2Y6 receptor. J Immunol 186:
3701–9
Bruno V, Copani A, Besong G, Scoto G, Nicoletti F (2000)
Neuroprotective activity of chemokines against N-methyl-D-aspartate or β-amyloid-induced toxicity in culture. Eur J Pharmacol 399:
117–21
Mamedova LK, Gao ZG, Jacobson KA (2006) Regulation of death
and survival in astrocytes by ADP activating P2Y1 and P2Y12 receptors. Biochem Pharmacol 72:1031–41
Sellers LA, Simon J, Lundahl TS, Cousens DJ, Humphrey PP,
Barnard EA (2001) Adenosine nucleotides acting at the human
P2Y1 receptor stimulate mitogen-activated protein kinases and induce apoptosis. J Biol Chem 276:16379–90
Azran S, Förster D, Danino O, Nadel Y, Reiser G, Fischer B (2013)
Highly efficient biocompatible neuroprotectants with dual activity

453

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

as antioxidants and P2Y receptor agonists. J Med Chem 56:4938–
52
Fujita T, Tozaki-Saitoh H, Inoue K (2009) P2Y1 receptor signaling
enhances neuroprotection by astrocytes against oxidative stress via
IL-6 release in hippocampal cultures. Glia 57:244–57
Peterson TS, Thebeau CN, Ajit D, Camden JM, Woods LT, Wood
WG, Petris MJ, Sun GY, Erb L, Weisman GA (2013) Up-regulation
and activation of the P2Y2 nucleotide receptor mediate neurite extension in IL-1β-treated mouse primary cortical neurons. J
Neurochem 125:885–96
Arthur DB, Georgi S, Akassoglou K, Insel PA (2006) Inhibition of
apoptosis by P2Y2 receptor activation: novel pathways for neuronal
survival. J Neurosci 26:3798–804
Chen HH, Schock SC, Xu J, Safarpour F, Thompson CS, Stewart
AF (2007) Extracellular ATP-dependent upregulation of the transcription cofactor LMO4 promotes neuron survival from hypoxia.
Exp Cell Res 313:3106–16
Camden JM, Schrader AM, Camden RE, Gonzalez FA, Erb L, Seye
CI, Weisman GA (2005) P2Y2 nucleotide receptors enhance αsecretase-dependent amyloid precursor protein processing. J Biol
Chem 280:18696–702
Leon-Otegui M, Gomez-Villafuertes R, Diaz-Hernandez JI, DiazHernandez M, Miras-Portugal MT, Gualix J (2011) Opposite effects
of P2X7 and P2Y2 nucleotide receptors on α-secretase-dependent
APP processing in Neuro-2a cells. FEBS Lett 585:2255–62
Ajit D, Woods LT, Camden JM, Thebeau CN, El-Sayed FG,
Greeson GW, Erb L, Petris MJ, Miller DC, Sun GY, Weisman
GA (2014) Loss of P2Y2 nucleotide receptors enhances early pathology in the TgCRND8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease.
Mol Neurobiol 49:1031–42
Kim HJ, Ajit D, Peterson TS, Wang Y, Camden JM, Gibson Wood
W, Sun GY, Erb L, Petris M, Weisman GA (2012) Nucleotides
released from Aβ1–42-treated microglial cells increase cell migration and Aβ1–42 uptake through P2Y2 receptor activation. J
Neurochem 121:228–38
Espada S, Ortega F, Molina-Jijon E, Rojo AI, Perez-Sen R,
Pedraza-Chaverri J, Miras-Portugal MT, Cuadrado A (2010) The
purinergic P2Y13 receptor activates the Nrf2/HO-1 axis and protects against oxidative stress-induced neuronal death. Free Radic
Biol Med 49:416–26
Ortega F, Perez-Sen R, Delicado EG, Teresa Miras-Portugal M
(2011) ERK1/2 activation is involved in the neuroprotective action
of P2Y13 and P2X7 receptors against glutamate excitotoxicity in
cerebellar granule neurons. Neuropharmacol 61:1210–21
Neher JJ, Neniskyte U, Hornik T, Brown GC (2014) Inhibition of
UDP/P2Y6 purinergic signaling prevents phagocytosis of viable
neurons by activated microglia in vitro and in vivo. Glia 62:
1463–75
Webster CM, Hokari M, McManus A, Tang XN, Ma H, Kacimi R,
Yenari MA (2013) Microglial P2Y12 deficiency/inhibition protects
against brain ischemia. PLoS ONE 8, e70927
Kharlamov A, Jones SC, Kim DK (2002) Suramin reduces infarct
volume in a model of focal brain ischemia in rats. Exp Brain Res
147:353–9
Lämmer AB, Beck A, Grummich B, Förschler A, Krügel T, Kahn
T, Schneider D, Illes P, Franke H, Krügel U (2011) The P2 receptor
antagonist PPADS supports recovery from experimental stroke
in vivo. PLoS ONE 6, e19983
Bowser DN, Khakh BS (2007) Vesicular ATP is the predominant
cause of intercellular calcium waves in astrocytes. J Gen Physiol
129:485–91
Franke H, Verkhratsky A, Burnstock G, Illes P (2012)
Pathophysiology of astroglial purinergic signalling. Purinergic
Signal 8:629–57
Lecca D, Ceruti S, Fumagalli M, Abbracchio MP (2012) Purinergic
trophic signalling in glial cells: functional effects and modulation of

454
cell proliferation, differentiation, and death. Purinergic Signal 8:
539–57
84. Majumder P, Trujillo CA, Lopes CG, Resende RR, Gomes KN,
Yuahasi KK, Britto LR, Ulrich H (2007) New insights into
purinergic receptor signaling in neuronal differentiation, neuroprotection, and brain disorders. Purinergic Signal 3:317–31
85. Orellana JA, Stehberg J (2014) Hemichannels: new roles in
astroglial function. Front Physiol 5:193
86. Singh S, Swarnkar S, Goswami P, Nath C (2011) Astrocytes and
microglia: responses to neuropathological conditions. Int J
Neurosci 121:589–97
87. Tozaki-Saitoh H, Tsuda M, Inoue K (2010) Purinergic regulation of
microglia. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi 136:93–7
88. Inoue K (2007) UDP facilitates microglial phagocytosis through
P2Y6 receptors. Cell Adhes Migr 1:131–2
89. Chin Y, Kishi M, Sekino M, Nakajo F, Abe Y, Terazono Y, Hiroyuki
O, Kato F, Koizumi S, Gachet C, Hisatsune T (2013) Involvement
of glial P2Y1 receptors in cognitive deficit after focal cerebral stroke
in a rodent model. J Neuroinflammation 10:95
90. Kuboyama K, Harada H, Tozaki-Saitoh H, Tsuda M, Ushijima K,
Inoue K (2011) Astrocytic P2Y1 receptor is involved in the regulation of cytokine/chemokine transcription and cerebral damage in a
rat model of cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31:
1930–41
91. Zheng W, Watts LT, Holstein DM, Prajapati SI, Keller C, Grass EH,
Walter CA, Lechleiter JD (2010) Purinergic receptor stimulation
reduces cytotoxic edema and brain infarcts in mouse induced by
photothrombosis by energizing glial mitochondria. PLoS ONE 5,
e14401

Purinergic Signalling (2015) 11:441–454
92.

Zheng W, Talley Watts L, Holstein DM, Wewer J, Lechleiter JD
(2013) P2Y1R-initiated, IP3R-dependent stimulation of astrocyte
mitochondrial metabolism reduces and partially reverses ischemic
neuronal damage in mouse. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33:600–11
93. Choo AM, Miller WJ, Chen YC, Nibley P, Patel TP, Goletiani C,
Morrison B 3rd, Kutzing MK, Firestein BL, Sul JY, Haydon PG,
Meaney DF (2013) Antagonism of purinergic signalling improves
recovery from traumatic brain injury. Brain 136:65–80
94. Fischer W, Krügel U (2007) P2Y receptors: focus on structural,
pharmacological and functional aspects in the brain. Curr Med
Chem 14:2429–55
95. Ecke D, Hanck T, Tulapurkar ME, Schafer R, Kassack M, Stricker
R, Reiser G (2008) Hetero-oligomerization of the P2Y11 receptor
with the P2Y1 receptor controls the internalization and ligand selectivity of the P2Y11 receptor. Biochem J 409:107–16
96. Haas M, Shaaban A, Reiser G (2014) Alanine-(87)-threonine polymorphism impairs signaling and internalization of the human P2Y11
receptor, when co-expressed with the P2Y1 receptor. J Neurochem
129:602–13
97. Tonazzini I, Trincavelli ML, Montali M, Martini C (2008)
Regulation of A1 adenosine receptor functioning induced by
P2Y1 purinergic receptor activation in human astroglial cells. J
Neurosci Res 86:2857–66
98. Carrasquero LM, Delicado EG, Sanchez-Ruiloba L, Iglesias T,
Miras-Portugal MT (2010) Mechanisms of protein kinase D activation in response to P2Y2 and P2X7 receptors in primary astrocytes.
Glia 58:984–95

