MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 6427-6434, 2015

Combination of early and delayed ischemic postconditioning
enhances brain-derived neurotrophic factor production by
upregulating the ERK-CREB pathway in rats with focal ischemia
HUI WU, SHAO‑FENG YANG, JIONG DAI, YONG‑MING QIU, YI‑FENG MIAO and XIAO‑HUA ZHANG
Department of Neurosurgery, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 201112, P.R. China
Received July 29, 2014; Accepted April 15, 2015
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4327
Abstract. Ischemic postconditioning, including early and
delayed ischemic postconditioning, has been recognized as
a simple and promising strategy in the treatment of stroke.
However, the effects of the combination of early and delayed
ischemic postconditioning, and the mechanisms underlying
these effects, remain unclear. The aim of the present study was
to determine whether the combination of early and delayed ischemic postconditioning offers greater protection against stroke,
and enhances the production of brain‑derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF). A combination of early and delayed ischemic
postconditioning was established by repeated, transient occlusion and reperfusion of the ipsilateral common carotid artery
in a rat model of middle cerebral artery occlusion. Infarct size,
motor function, cerebral blood flow and brain edema were
then evaluated, in order to confirm the effects of combinative ischemic postconditioning. TUNEL staining was used to
analyze the rate of apoptosis of cells in the penumbral area.
BDNF, extracellular signal‑regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2) and
cAMP response element‑binding protein (CREB) expression
was detected using immunofluorescence staining and western
blot analysis. The results of the present study indicated that the
combination of early and delayed ischemic postconditioning
further reduced the infarct volume, stabilized cerebral blood
disturbance and attenuated neuronal apoptosis, compared with
either alone. However, combinative postconditioning exerted
the same effect on neurological function and brain edema,
compared with early or delayed ischemic postconditioning
alone. Further investigation indicated that combinative ischemic postconditioning increased the expression of BDNF,
and a significantly higher number of BDNF‑positive cells was

Correspondence to: Professor Xiao‑Hua Zhang or Dr Yi‑Feng
Miao, Department of Neurosurgery, Renji Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 2000 Jiangyue Road,
Shanghai 201112, P.R. China
E‑mail: zxh1969@aliyun.com
E‑mail: yifengmwx@hotmail.com

Key

words: combination, neuroprotection, brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, ischemic postconditioning, focal brain ischemia

observed in neurons and astrocytes from the combined group
than in the early or delayed groups. Combinative ischemic postconditioning also induced the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and
CREB in the cortex, following focal ischemia. The results of the
present study suggest that the combination of early and delayed
ischemic postconditioning may further reduce brain ischemic
reperfusion injury following focal ischemia, compared with
either treatment alone. In addition, it induces the production of
BDNF in neurons and astrocytes. Furthermore, the effects of
combinative ischemic postconditioning may be mediated by the
activation of ERK1/2 and CREB.
Introduction
Since there are few effective treatments available for acute
stroke, further research is required to identify novel strategies
with which to treat this condition (1). One such strategy is
ischemic postconditioning, which may be induced by repeated
cycles of transient reperfusion and re‑occlusion of the artery,
which is applied immediately after reperfusion (2‑4). There are
two types of ischemic postconditioning: Early and delayed ischemic postconditioning (5). Rapid postconditioning is induced
immediately or a few minutes after reperfusion. Delayed postconditioning may be induced up to 2 days after stroke, however
at present 3‑6 h is recognized to induce robust neuroprotection
after ischemic injury. It has previously been reported that
both forms of ischemic postconditioning are able to improve
neurological function and reduce infarct volume following focal
ischemic injury (6). However, as ischemia is unpredictable, ischemic postconditioning, which may be implemented following a
stroke, requires further research and increased clinical attention.
Therefore, it may be important to identify additional models of
ischemic postconditioning. However, to date, there have been no
reports on the effects of the combination of early and delayed
ischemic postconditioning, and whether this may provide an
increased neuroprotective effect, compared with one type of
ischemic postconditioning alone.
Brain‑derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a member
of the neurotrophin family, which is hypothesized to be one
of the most important neurotrophic factors (NTFs) in the
central and peripheral nervous systems (7,8). Numerous
studies have indicated that NTFs, particularly BDNF, are
associated with neuronal development and differentiation, as
well as with improvement in neurological function following

6428

WU et al: COMBINATIVE ISCHEMIC POSTCONDITIONING INDUCES NEUROPROTECTION

brain injury (9,10). The cAMP response element‑binding
protein (CREB) is a transcription factor of BDNF (11). In
addition, extracellular signal‑regulated kinases 1/2 (ERK1/2)
is an upstream phosphorylating enzyme of BDNF (11,12).
Therefore, all of these proteins are important for the survival
and development of neuronal cells.
The present study aimed to investigate whether early
ischemic postconditioning, in combination with delayed
ischemic postconditioning, may protect against neuronal
injury and behavioral deficits following focal brain ischemia.
Furthermore, in order to explore the mechanisms underlying
these neuroprotective effects, the effects of ischemic postconditioning on the disturbance of cerebral blood flow (CBF) and
brain edema were evaluated. The current study also investigated the role of the ERK1/2‑CREB‑BDNF pathway in the
neuroprotective effects of combinative postconditioning.
Materials and methods
Animals, surgical procedures and ischemic postconditioning.
The experimental protocol of the present study was approved
by the ethical committee of the Animal Care and Experimental
Committee of the School of Medicine of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University (Shanghai, China). A total of 136 age‑matched adult
male Sprague‑Dawley rats (weight, 270‑300 g; age, 7‑8 weeks),
were housed in a temperature‑ and light‑controlled environment
with a 14/10‑h light/dark cycle. The rats were purchased from the
Animal Center of the School of Medicine of Shanghai Jiao Tong
University (Shanghai, China). The rats were randomly divided
into five groups: Sham‑operated (sham; n=24), middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO; n=30), early ischemic postconditioning
(IPe; n=28), delayed ischemic postconditioning (IPd; n=28) and
combinative ischemic postconditioning treatment (IPc; n=26)
groups. Transient cerebral ischemia was induced using MCAO,
as previously described (13). Briefly, the rats were anesthetized
by inhalation of 5% isoflurane (Ohio Medical Corporation,
Gurnee, IL, USA), and were treated with 2% isoflurane during
surgery and early reperfusion. A heating blanket was applied to
the rats, in order to maintain a rectal temperature of 37.0±0.5˚C
throughout the experiments. A middle neck incision was made
to expose the left common carotid artery (CCA). The external
carotid artery was ligated using a bipolar coagulator (Hkpromed,
Beijing, China). A nylon filament (diameter 0.24‑0.28 mm)
was gently inserted into the left internal carotid artery, until
resistance was felt. Subsequently, the CBF dropped sharply,
indicating that the ischemic model was successfully established.
Reperfusion was induced by removing the filament after 90 min
of ischemia. Sham‑operated animals were subjected to the
same anesthetic, incision and exposure of the vessels, without
arterial occlusion. Ischemic postconditioning was established
by repeatedly occluding and releasing the left CCA using aneurysm clips (cat. no. FE 681 K; Aesculap, Inc., Center Valley, PA,
USA). In order to explore the combinative effects of early and
delayed postconditioning, the two types of postconditioning
were combined. The protocol for early plus delayed ischemic
postconditioning is shown in Fig. 1A. Both types of postconditioning consisted of 10 cycles of 10‑sec reperfusion/10‑sec
occlusion; early postconditioning was conducted immediately
following reperfusion, and late postconditioning took place 3 h
after reperfusion.

CBF measurements. A laser Doppler flow meter (PeriFlux
System 5000; Perimed AG, Järfälla, Sweden) was used to
measure CBF throughout the experiments, and was connected
to a standard laser Doppler monitor (PeriFlux 5000 Laser
Doppler Perfusion Monitor and PeriFlux 5000 main unit;
Perimed AG). The holder for the Doppler probe was fixed to
the left side of the skull, in the region of the ischemic penumbra
(2 mm lateral and 2 mm posterior to the bregma). The baseline
value was regarded as the recorded CBF prior to occlusion.
All CBF values were expressed as a percentage relative to the
baseline.
Neurological behavioral assessment. A fully computerized
electronically controlled rotarod treadmill for rats (Accuscan
Instruments, Inc., Columbus, OH, USA) was used to investigate motor function. Each rat was placed in a neutral position
on a cylinder with a diameter of 3.75 inches. The speed of the
rod accelerated linearly between 0 and 24 rpm within 60 sec.
The time that rats maintained on the rotarod was recorded
automatically. The maximum score given to an animal was
fixed at 60 sec. All rats were given three trials and the average
score from these three trials was calculated.
Infarct volume measurement. The rats were euthanized 3 days
after surgery using CO2 and the brain tissue was harvested
after transcardial perfusion with cold phosphate‑buffered
saline (PBS). Following 3 min of freezing, the brains were cut
into six 2‑mm coronal sections. The tissue sections were then
immediately stained with 2% 2,3,5‑triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) in PBS at 37˚C for 20 min. Images of the stained
sections were captured using a digital camera (Nikon E5100;
Nikon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan), and were then quantified
using ImageJ version 1.37c software (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MA, USA). The infarct volume was the sum
of the measured infarct areas of evenly sliced (2‑mm) brain
sections, according to Simpson's rule (14).
Brain edema measurement. The cerebral hemispheres,
cerebellum and brain stem were separated. The wet weight
was regarded as the immediate weight, and the dry weight
was regarded as the weight after drying at 104˚C for 48 h. The
water content percentage was determined using the following
formula: [(wet weight‑dry weight)/wet weight] x 100.
In situ labeling of DNA fragmentation using TUNEL staining.
In order to determine the level of apoptosis in the penumbral area, TUNEL staining was performed on each tissue
section, according to the manufacturer's instructions (Roche
Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany). Briefly, the slides
were washed with PBS at room temperature for 30 min and
incubated with 0.1% Triton X‑100 in 0.1% sodium citrate solution at 4˚C for 2 min. Approximately 50 µl TUNEL mixture
solution was applied to each slide at 37˚C for 1 h. All of the
sections were overlaid with prolonged mounting reagent and
DAPI (Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA),
and were covered with coverslips. The Nikon ECLIPSE Ti
fluorescence microscope (Nikon Corporation) and CoolSNAP
photometrics camera (Nikon Corporation) were used to
visualize and capture the images. TUNEL‑positive cells,
indicated by bright green fluorescence, were quantified using

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 6427-6434, 2015

the NIS‑Elements BR diagnostic software version 3.2 (Nikon
Corporation). The number of TUNEL‑positive cells was
counted from three random 1x1 mm2 areas.
Immunofluorescence staining. Brain sections (10 µm) were
incubated with 10% normal goat serum/0.1% Triton‑X 100
in PBS blocking solution at room temperature for 1 h. Slides
were then incubated with the following corresponding
primary antibodies: Polyclonal rabbit anti‑rat BDNF (1:200;
cat. no. ab6201; Epitomics, Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA),
monoclonal anti‑neuron‑specific nuclear protein (NeuN; 1:500;
cat. no. MAB377B; EMD Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA) and
monoclonal anti‑glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; 1:200;
cat. no. G3893; Sigma‑Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), overnight at 4˚C. Following incubation, slides were then washed
and incubated for 1 h with the following secondary antibodies:
Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti‑rabbit Immunoglobulin G (1:300;
cat. no. A31267; Invitrogen Life Technologies, Camarillo, CA,
USA) and Alexa Fluor 568 goat anti‑rat (1:500; cat. no. A10042;
Invitrogen Life Technologies). DAPI was used to stain the
nuclei (Sigma‑Aldrich). All of the slides were visualized under
a Nikon ECLIPSE Ti fluorescence microscope, loaded with a
CoolSNAP photometrics camera at 400x magnification.
Western blot analysis. The expression levels of CREB‑ERK
pathway‑associated proteins were detected by western blot
analysis. Protein extraction reagents (Sigma‑Aldrich) were
applied for total protein isolation and purification. Protein
samples (~50  µg) were separated by 11.5% SDS‑PAGE
(Sigma‑Aldrich). Polypeptides were electrophoretically transferred onto an Immobilon polyvinylidene fluoride membrane
(EMD Millipore) at 300 mA for 1 h on ice. The membranes
were then blocked with 5% non‑fat milk in Tris‑buffered
saline with Tween (TBST). After blocking, the membranes
were rinsed with PBS and incubated with the following
antibodies: Anti‑BDNF (1:500; Epitomics, Inc.), anti‑phosphorylated (p) ERK1/2 (1:200; cat. no. 14227s; Cell Signaling
Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA), anti‑p‑CREB
(1:600; cat. no. 8212s; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.) and
anti‑β ‑actin (1:1,000; cat. no. A2022; Sigma‑Aldrich) overnight at 4˚C. The membranes were then washed with TBS
and were treated with horseradish peroxidase‑conjugated
secondary antibodies (1:800; cat. no. sc‑2448; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, TX, USA) using 1% non‑fat milk
in TBST for 2 h at room temperature. The blots were visualized using the ChemiDoc™ XRS Imaging system (Bio‑Rad
Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA, USA), and the band densities were quantified using the Multi Gauge Software of
Science Lab 2006 (Fujifilm Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Six
animals were analyzed from each group for the western blot
analyses.
Statistical analysis. Data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of the mean. The neurological scores were analyzed
using the Mann‑Whitney non‑parametric test. Statistical
analysis was performed using analysis of variance, followed
by Dunnett's post hoc test. P<0.05 (95% confidence interval)
was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
SPSS version 15.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA)
was used to conduct statistical analyses.

6429

Results
Combinative ischemic postconditioning further reduces infarct
volume, compared with early or late postconditioning alone,
and attenuates behavioral deficits in MCAO rats. In order to
determine the effects of the combination of early and delayed
ischemic postconditioning on brain ischemic injury, the infarct
size due to ischemic insult was measured. Representative images
of TTC‑stained brain sections from rats subjected to MCAO
are shown in Fig. 1B. The rats in the sham group exhibited no
cerebral infarcts. In the MCAO group, large infarcts developed,
which were predominantly located in the cerebral cortex and
striatum. The normalized infarct volume in the MCAO group
was 28.16±1.79%. Early and delayed ischemic postconditioning
reduced the infarct volume, and the normalized infarct volumes
in these groups were 9.38±0.96 and 10.33±1.31%, respectively.
The combination of early and delayed ischemic postconditioning further reduced the infarct volume to 2.22±0.65%,
which was approximately 22% lower than that of the MCAO
group (P<0.01), 7% lower than that of the IPe group (P<0.05)
and 8% lower than that of the IPd group (P<0.05, Fig. 1C).
The rotarod test was performed in order to test the neurological function of rats following ischemic injury. The results
indicated that early, delayed and combinative ischemic postconditioning significantly attenuated the neurological deficits,
compared with the MCAO group (P<0.05, Fig. 1D). However,
no significant differences were detected among the three ischemic postconditioning groups.
Combinative ischemic postconditioning stabilizes changes
in CBF and attenuates brain edema. During ischemia, CBF
was decreased to equivalent extents (51.64±3.08% of baseline)
in all groups, apart from the sham group. Following reperfusion, a short period of hyperperfusion (168.67±6.11%), which
lasted ~50 min, followed by a long period of hypoperfusion,
was observed in the MCAO group (Fig. 2A). Although early
postconditioning did not shorten the time of hyperperfusion,
the level of hyperperfusion was reduce to 138.67±3.28% in the
IPe group (P<0.05 compared with the MCAO and IPd groups)
and 132.87±3.31% in the IPc group (P<0.05 compared with
the MCAO and IPd groups). Following ~3 h of hypoperfusion, delayed postconditioning increased the CBF value to
119.67±1.17% in the IPd group (P<0.05 compared with the
MCAO and IPe groups), and 122.17±2.74% in the IPc group
(P<0.05 compared with the MCAO and IPe groups). These
results suggest that combinative ischemic postconditioning
significantly attenuated early hyperperfusion following ischemic reperfusion, as well as the subsequent hypoperfusion.
The wet‑dry method was used to assess the level of
brain edema 3 days after MCAO. The left brain hemisphere
(84.36±0.72%) contained more water than the right brain
hemisphere (80.81±0.88%) in the MCAO group. Early, delayed
and combinative ischemic postconditioning all significantly
reduced the water content of the left brain hemisphere (P<0.05),
compared with the MCAO group. However, no significant
differences were detected among the three ischemic postconditioning groups (Fig. 2B).
Combinative ischemic postconditioning further inhibits
apoptosis in the penumbral area compared with early or late

6430

WU et al: COMBINATIVE ISCHEMIC POSTCONDITIONING INDUCES NEUROPROTECTION

A

B

C

D

Figure 1. Combination of IPe and IPd reduced infarct volumes and neurological deficit in MCAO rats. (A) Protocol for IPc (n=26), in which postconditioning
was conducted by occluding and releasing the ipsilateral common carotid artery. IPe (=28) was performed by conducting 10 cycles of 10/10‑sec reperfusion/re‑occlusion immediately after MCAO. IPd (n=28) was performed 3 h after MCAO. Ischemic injury was induced by MCAO (MCAO, n=30). The sham
group (n=24) was used as a control. (B) Representative infarct volume from each group, demonstrated by staining with 2,3,5‑triphenyl tetrazolium chloride.
(C) Average infarct volume in rats treated with postconditioning. (D) Ischemic postconditioning improved motor function, as evaluated by the rotarod test.
Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean. *P<0.05, compared with the sham group; #P<0.05 and ##P<0.01, compared with the MCAO group;
$
P<0.05, compared with the IPe group; and &P<0.05, compared with the IPd group. MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; IPe, early ischemic postconditioning; IPd, delayed ischemic postconditioning; IPC, combined IPe and IPd.

A

B

Figure 2. Combination of early and delayed postconditioning stabilized CBF and attenuated brain edema. (A) Changes in CBF in the MCA area following
ischemia and ischemic postconditioning. Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean; n=24. *P<0.05, compared with the sham group; #P<0.05,
compared with the MCAO group; $P<0.05, compared with the IPe group; and &P<0.05, compared with the IPd group. (B) Brain water content of the LH, RH,
CL and BS following ischemia and ischemic postconditioning. Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean; n=6. *P<0.05, compared with the
sham group; and #P<0.05 compared with the MCAO group. CBF, cerebral blood flow; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; IPe, early ischemic postconditioning; IPd, delayed ischemic postconditioning; IPc, combinative ischemic postconditioning; LH, left hemisphere; RH, right hemisphere; CL, cerebellum;
BS, brain stem.

postconditioning alone. In pathological and anatomical terms,
the penumbra is an area surrounding a severely ischemic
core. This area is where pharmacological interventions are
most likely to attenuate the neurological injury and improve
clinical outcome (Fig. 3A). TUNEL‑positive staining was
absent in the sham‑treated group (Fig. 3B). Numerous bright
green dots, which indicate the presence of TUNEL‑positive

cells, were observed in the MCAO group (Fig. 3C). There
were few TUNEL‑positive cells observed among rats that
were administered with early, delayed and combinative ischemic postconditioning treatment (Fig. 3D‑F). Quantitative
analysis indicated that the number of TUNEL‑positive cells
in the MCAO group was 409.78±45.23. Early and delayed
ischemic postconditioning significantly reduced the level of

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 6427-6434, 2015

6431

Figure 3. Combination of IPe and IPd inhibited the levels of apoptosis in the penumbral area. (A) The black square indicates the penumbral area.
Immunofluorescence results of the TUNEL assay in the (B) sham, (C) MCAO, (D) IPe, (E) IPd and (F) IPc groups. Bright green dots indicate TUNEL‑positive
apoptotic cells. Scale bar represents 50 µm. (G) Analysis of apoptotic cells 3 days after MCAO. TUNEL‑positive cells were counted from three random
1x1 mm2 areas. Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean; n=9 per group. *P<0.05, compared with the sham group; #P<0.05 or ##P<0.01,
compared with the MCAO group; $P<0.05, compared with the IPe group; and &P<0.05, compared with the IPd group. MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion;
IPe, early ischemic postconditioning; IPd, delayed ischemic postconditioning; IPc, combinative ischemic postconditioning.

Figure 4. Combination of IPe and IPd increased the expression of BDNF in the penumbral area. Coronal sections were stained with the following specific antibodies 3 days after the operation: BDNF (green), with either NeuN (red) or GFAP (red). Mounting medium contained DAPI, which counterstained the nuclei blue.
Merged pictures, which co‑expressed (A)‑(E) NeuN and BDNF or (F)‑(J) GFAP and BDNF, were shown with yellow. Scale bar indicates 100 µm. (K) Quantitative
analysis of BDNF‑positive cells were analyzed by ImageJ software. Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean; n=9 per group. *P<0.05, compared
with the sham group; ##P<0.01, compared with the MCAO group; $P<0.05, compared with the IPe group; and &P<0.05, compared with the IPd group. BDNF,
brain‑derived neurotrophic factor; GFAP, glial acidic fibrillary protein; NeuN, neuron‑specific nuclear protein; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; IPe, early
ischemic postconditioning; IPd, delayed ischemic postconditioning; IPc, combinative ischemic postconditioning.

apoptosis, compared with the MCAO group (P<0.05, Fig. 3G).
Combinative ischemic postconditioning further decreased the
rate of apoptosis following ischemia in the penumbral area
(P<0.01, compared with the MCAO group; P<0.05, compared
with the IPe and IPd groups; Fig. 3G).

was higher in the combinative ischemic postconditioning group,
compared with that in the MCAO, IPe and IPd groups (Fig. 4E
and G). Quantitative analysis also indicated that BDNF‑positive
signals were higher in the IPc group, compared with those in the
MCAO (P<0.01), IPe (P<0.05) and IPd groups (P<0.05; Fig. 4K).

Combinative ischemic postconditioning increases the expression levels of BDNF in the penumbral area. The present
study sought to determine whether ischemic postconditioning
induces BDNF in the penumbral area, using immunofluorescence staining. Neurons in the sham control group exhibited
BDNF‑positive immunoreactivity, as assessed by BDNF+NeuN
double staining (Fig. 4A). Astrocytes in this groups were
also positive for BDNF, as assessed by BDNF+GFAP double
staining (Fig. 4F). BDNF immunoreactivity was significantly lower in the MCAO group, compared with the sham
group (Fig. 4B and G). Neither early nor delayed ischemic
postconditioning alone had a significant effect on expression of
BDNF (Fig. 4C, D, H and I). However, BDNF immunoreactivity

Combinative ischemic postconditioning upregulates BDNF
protein expression levels by phosphorylating CREB and
ERK1/2. Western blot analyses indicated that combinative ischemic postconditioning increased the protein expression levels of
BDNF in the penumbral area (Fig. 5A). Western blot analysis
was also performed to investigate whether combinative ischemic postconditioning results in the phosphorylation of CREB
and ERK1/2 within the cortex. No significant differences in the
protein expression of total CREB and ERK1/2 were detected
among the groups. However, administration of combinative
ischemic postconditioning significantly increased the expression of p‑CREB, compared with that of the MCAO (P<0.01), IPe
(P<0.05) and IPd groups (P<0.05; Fig. 5A and B). Similar results

6432

WU et al: COMBINATIVE ISCHEMIC POSTCONDITIONING INDUCES NEUROPROTECTION

A

B

Figure 5. Combination of IPe and IPd upregulated the protein expression levels
of BDNF, p‑CREB and p‑ERK1/2. (A) Protein expression levels of BDNF,
p‑CREB, t‑CREB, p‑ERK1/2 and t‑ERK1/2 in the sham, MCAO, IPe, IPd and
IPc rats. (B) Optical density analysis of BDNF, p‑CREB, t‑CREB, p‑ERK1/2
and t‑ERK1/2 expression. Data are presented as the mean ± standard error of
the mean; n=9 per group. *P<0.05, compared with the sham group; #P<0.05
or ##P<0.01, compared with the MCAO group; $P<0.05 compared with the
IPe group; and &P<0.05, compared with the IPd group. BDNF, brain‑derived
neurotrophic factor; p, phosphorylated; t, total; CREB, cAMP response
element‑binding protein; ERK 1/2, extracellular signal‑regulated kinases
1/2; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; IPe, early ischemic postconditioning; IPd, delayed ischemic postconditioning; IPc, combinative ischemic
postconditioning.

were obtained for the expression of p‑ERK1/2 (Fig. 5A and B),
which is the upstream phosphorylating enzyme of CREB.
Discussion
The results of the present study demonstrated that the
combination of early and delayed ischemic postconditioning
reduced infarct volume and stabilized CBF disturbance in rats,
following focal brain ischemia, compared with no treatment,
as well as with early or late postconditioning treatment alone.
The potential neuroprotective mechanisms underlying the
protective effect of combinative ischemic postconditioning
against focal ischemic injury may involve the reduction of
neuronal apoptosis in the penumbral area. Furthermore, it was
demonstrated that combinative ischemic postconditioning
upregulated the expression of BDNF, which aids the repair
of neuronal injury in the central nervous system. In addition,
the majority of BDNF‑positive cells were detected by staining
with either anti‑NeuN or anti‑GFAP. Combinative ischemic
postconditioning also activated ERK1/2 and CREB in the
cortex, following focal ischemia. These results suggested
that combinative ischemic postconditioning induces BDNF
expression in neurons and astrocytes, and protects against
neurological injury following brain ischemia, which may be
mediated by the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and CREB.
It has been established that numerous neuroprotectants,
which are highly effective in animal models of stroke,

fail in clinical trials due to side effects, which frequently
result in premature termination of a trial (e.g., MK‑801,
ZK200755) (15‑17). Previous studies have aimed to overcome
this limitation by developing methods that induce, mimic or
enhance endogenous protective responses, and do not interfere with physiological neurotransmission (18‑20). Therefore,
endogenous neuroprotection is a novel strategy that has been
increasingly focused on within stroke research (21).
Ischemic conditioning has been suggested as a useful
method with which to generate ischemic tolerance or endogenous neuroprotection (20). There are two types of ischemic
conditioning: Ischemic preconditioning and ischemic postconditioning. Ischemic preconditioning may be induced by
the application of transient episodes of nonlethal ischemia
prior to stroke (22). Ischemic postconditioning is defined as
numerous repeated cycles of brief reperfusion and re‑occlusion, which may protect against lethal ischemic injury and
subsequent reperfusion damage (23). Currently, both of
these types of ischemic conditioning are hypothesized to be
possible therapeutic strategies. However, the translational
application of ischemic preconditioning is hindered by the
fact that it can only be applied for strokes or ischemic injuries
that may be predicted (24,25). Therefore, ischemic postconditioning, which can be applied after ischemia, may be a better
approach.
Recently, it has been demonstrated that two types of
postconditioning, early ischemic postconditioning (26) and
delayed ischemic postconditioning (23), exhibit neuroprotective effects, and may reduce neuronal injury following
brain ischemia. However, there are few reports regarding the
neuroprotective effects of a combination of these two types
of postconditioning. Therefore, the aim of the present study
was to evaluate the effects of combined early and delayed
ischemic postconditioning. In the present study, early ischemic postconditioning or delayed ischemic postconditioning
each reduced the infarct volume following brain ischemia.
However, combinative ischemic postconditioning further
reduced infarct volume (P<0.05), compared with either
approach alone. Disturbances to CBF occur throughout
the period of reperfusion. Following reperfusion, there is a
short period of hyperperfusion, followed by a longer period
of hypoperfusion. The results of the present study indicated
that combinative ischemic postconditioning may stabilize
CBF disturbances during the early hyperperfusion and later
hypoperfusion periods.
BDNF is considered an important member of the neurotrophin family, which contributes to the maintenance and
survival of neurons (27), and stimulates the differentiation
and growth of new neurons and synapses (28). The primary
role of BDNF is associated with increased long‑term potentiation and neurogenesis (29). Numerous studies have shown that
BDNF decreases infarct volume and improves neurological
outcomes, when exogenously administered (30) or when overexpressed using genetic methods in vivo (31) in experimental
models of stroke. However, the mechanisms underlying the
effects of ischemic postconditioning on the production of
BDNF remain unclear. The present study used immunofluorescence staining and western blot analysis to detect BDNF
expression in the brain penumbral area following focal
brain ischemia. The results indicated that neither early nor

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 6427-6434, 2015

delayed ischemic postconditioning significantly increased the
expression levels of BDNF. However, combinative ischemic
postconditioning upregulated the expression levels of BDNF
in neuronal cells and astrocytes.
Additional mechanisms of combinative ischemic postconditioning were hypothesized to involve CREB, a transcription
factor of BDNF. Furthermore, ERK1/2, which is the upstream
phosphorylating enzyme of CREB, activates and phosphorylates CREB at Ser133 (32), resulting in the upregulation of
pro‑survival CREB target genes, including BDNF (33,34).
Therefore, in the present study western blotting was used to
detect the protein expression levels of CREB and ERK1/2.
The results demonstrated that no difference in the expression of total CREB and ERK1/2 protein among the groups.
However, combinative ischemic postconditioning significantly increased the protein expression levels of p‑CREB
and p‑ERK1/2 in the penumbral area following focal brain
ischemia.
The results of the present study demonstrated that a
combination of early and delayed ischemic postconditioning
had stronger neuroprotective effects on focal brain ischemia,
compared with early or delayed ischemic postconditioning
alone. This effect may be associated with the stabilization
of CBF disturbances and a reduction in apoptosis in the
penumbral area following focal brain ischemia. Furthermore,
it was indicated that combinative ischemic postconditioning
upregulated the expression of BDNF, in neurons and astrocytes, and protected against neurological damage following
brain ischemic injury. These effects may be associated with
activation of ERK1/2 and CREB. Although there were some
limitations to the present study, such as the use of only one
model of combinative postconditioning and the fact that the
neuroprotective effects were examined using only a rat model,
combinative ischemic postconditioning appeared to alleviate
or even prevent ischemic brain injury. Therefore, combinative
ischemic postconditioning has the potential for future clinical
application and requires further investigation.
Acknowledgements
The present study was supported by the National Nature
Science Foundation (grant no. 81000498).
References
 1.	Blanco M and Castillo J: Stroke in 2012: Major advances in the
treatment of stroke. Nat Rev Neurol 9: 68‑70, 2013.
 2.	Liu J, Xu Q, Wang H, et al: Neuroprotection of ischemic postconditioning by downregulating the postsynaptic signaling
mediated by kainate receptors. Stroke 44: 2031‑2035, 2013.
 3.	Sandu N and Schaller B: Postconditioning: A new or old option
after ischemic stroke? Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther 8: 479‑482,
2010.
 4.	Zhao H: Ischemic postconditioning as a novel avenue to protect
against brain injury after stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29:
873‑885, 2009.
 5.	Danielisova V, Burda J, Nemethova M, et al: An effective combination of two different methods of postconditioning. Neurochem
Res 37: 2085‑2091, 2012.
 6.	Zhao H, Ren C, Chen X and Shen J: From rapid to delayed and
remote postconditioning: The evolving concept of ischemic
postconditioning in brain ischemia. Curr Drug Targets 13:
173‑187, 2012.
 7.	Dauncey MJ: Recent advances in nutrition, genes and brain
health. Proc Nutr Soc 71: 581‑591, 2012.

6433

 8.	Lu B, Nagappan G, Guan X, et al: BDNF‑based synaptic repair
as a disease‑modifying strategy for neurodegenerative diseases.
Nat Rev Neurosci 14: 401‑416, 2013.
 9.	Melo CV, Okumoto S, Gomes JR, et al: Spatiotemporal
resolution of BDNF neuroprotection against glutamate excitotoxicity in cultured hippocampal neurons. Neuroscience 237:
66‑86, 2013.
10.	Singh M and Su C: Progesterone, brain‑derived neurotrophic
factor and neuroprotection. Neuroscience 239: 84‑91, 2013.
11.	Alboni S, Tascedda F, Corsini D, et al: Stress induces altered
CRE/CREB pathway activity and BDNF expression in the
hippocampus of glucocorticoid receptor‑impaired mice.
Neuropharmacology 60: 1337‑1346, 2011.
12.	Pardon MC, Roberts RE, Marsden CA, et al: Social threat and
novel cage stress‑induced sustained extracellular‑regulated
kinase1/2 (ERK1/2) phosphorylation but differential modulation of brain‑derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression
in the hippocampus of NMRI mice. Neuroscience 132: 561‑574,
2005.
13.	Yifeng M, Bin W, Weiqiao Z, et al: Neuroprotective effect
of sophocarpine against transient focal cerebral ischemia via
down‑regulation of the acid‑sensing ion channel 1 in rats. Brain
Res 1382: 245‑251, 2011.
14.	Thiele H, Paetsch I, Schnackenburg B, et al: Improved accuracy
of quantitative assessment of left ventricular volume and
ejection fraction by geometric models with steady‑state free
precession. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson 4: 327‑339, 2002.
15.	Diener HC, Lees KR, Lyden P, et al; SAINT I and II Investigators:
NXY‑059 for the treatment of acute stroke: Pooled analysis of
the SAINT I and II Trials. Stroke 39: 1751‑1758, 2008.
16.	Furlan AJ: Challenges in acute ischemic stroke clinical trials.
Curr Cardiol Rep 14: 761‑766, 2012.
17.	Shuaib A, Lees KR, Lyden P, et al; SAINT II Trial Investigators:
NXY‑059 for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke. N Engl
J Med 357: 562‑571, 2007.
18.	Ducruet AF, Zacharia BE, Sosunov SA, et al: Complement
inhibition promotes endogenous neurogenesis and sustained
anti‑inflammatory neuroprotection following reperfused stroke.
PloS One 7: e38664, 2012.
19.	Iadecola C and Anrather J: Stroke research at a crossroad:
Asking the brain for directions. Nat Neurosci 14: 1363‑1368,
2011.
20.	Ding ZM, Wu B, Zhang WQ, et al: Neuroprotective effects
of ischemic preconditioning and postconditioning on global
brain ischemia in rats through the same effect on inhibition of
apoptosis. Int J Mol Sci 13: 6089‑6101, 2012.
21.	Wang Y, Reis C, Applegate R, et al: Ischemic conditioning‑induced endogenous brain protection: Applications pre‑,
per‑ or post‑stroke. Exp Neurol 15: 123‑125, 2015.
22.	Liu XQ, Sheng R and Qin Z: The neuroprotective mechanism
of brain ischemic preconditioning. Acta Pharmacol Sin 30:
1071‑1080, 2009.
23.	Ren C, Gao X, Niu G, et al: Delayed postconditioning protects
against focal ischemic brain injury in rats. PloS One 3: e3851,
2008.
24.	Wang JY, Shen J, Gao Q, et al: Ischemic postconditioning
protects against global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion‑induced
injury in rats. Stroke 39: 983‑990, 2008.
25.	Xing B, Chen H, Zhang M, et al: Ischemic postconditioning
inhibits apoptosis after focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
injury in the rat. Stroke 39: 2362‑2369, 2008.
26.	Liu C, Weaver J and Liu KJ: Early conditioning with oxygen
oscillation: Neuroprotection by intermittent normobaric
hyperoxia after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats.
Stroke 43: 220‑226, 2012.
27.	Stahl K, Mylonakou MN, Skare Ø, et al: Cytoprotective effects of
growth factors: BDNF more potent than GDNF in an organotypic
culture model of Parkinson's disease. Brain Res 1378: 105‑118,
2011.
28.	Baldelli P, Novara M, Carabelli V, et al: BDNF up‑regulates
evoked GABAergic transmission in developing hippocampus by
potentiating presynaptic N‑ and P/Q‑type Ca2+ channels signalling.
Eur J Neurosci 16: 2297‑2310, 2002.
29.	Babu H, Ramirez‑Rodriguez G, Fabel K, et al: Synaptic network
activity induces neuronal differentiation of adult hippocampal
precursor cells through BDNF signaling. Front Neurosci 3: 49,
2009.
30.	Hyacinth HI, Gee BE, Adamkiewicz TV, et al: Plasma BDNF and
PDGF‑AA levels are associated with high TCD velocity and stroke
in children with sickle cell anemia. Cytokine 60: 302‑308, 2012.

6434

WU et al: COMBINATIVE ISCHEMIC POSTCONDITIONING INDUCES NEUROPROTECTION

31.	Chang DJ, Lee N, Choi C, et al: Therapeutic effect of
BDNF‑overexpressing human neural stem cells (HB1.F3.BDNF)
in a rodent model of middle cerebral artery occlusion. Cell
Transplant 22: 1441‑1452, 2013.
32.	Cao G, Zhu J, Zhong Q, et al: Distinct roles of methamphetamine
in modulating spatial memory consolidation, retrieval,
reconsolidation and the accompanying changes of ERK and
CREB activation in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex.
Neuropharmacology 67: 144‑154, 2013.

33.	Chen DY, Bambah‑Mukku D, Pollonini G and Alberini CM:
Glucocorticoid receptors recruit the CaMKIIα‑BDNF‑CREB
pathways to mediate memory consolidation. Nat Neurosci 15:
1707‑1714, 2012.
34.	Lesiak A, Pelz C, Ando H, et al: A genome‑wide screen of CREB
occupancy identifies the RhoA inhibitors Par6C and Rnd3
as regulators of BDNF‑induced synaptogenesis. PloS One 8:
e64658, 2013.

