Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Behavioural Brain Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bbr

Research report

Cilostazol but not sildenaﬁl prevents memory impairment after
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in middle-aged rats
Jacqueline Godinho, Janaina Nicolau de Oliveira, Emilene Dias Fiuza Ferreira,
Gislene Gonçalves D. Zaghi, Cristiano Correia Bacarin, Rúbia Maria Weffort de Oliveira,
Humberto Milani ∗
Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Health Science Center, State University of Maringá, Maringá, Paraná 87020-900, Brazil

h i g h l i g h t s
•
•
•
•
•

Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH) causes retrograde amnesia in middle-aged rats.
Cilostazol reversed that retrograde amnesia in the absence of neuronal rescue.
The antiamnesic effect of cilostazol persisted for 4 weeks after the end of treatment.
Sildenaﬁl failed to prevent CCH-induced retrograde amnesia, despite neuronal rescue.
Cilostazol but not sildenaﬁl may be useful to treat memory deﬁcit after CCH.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 11 December 2014
Received in revised form 15 January 2015
Accepted 16 January 2015
Available online 24 January 2015
Keywords:
Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
Middle-aged rat
Memory loss
Cilostazol
Sildenaﬁl
Memory recovery

a b s t r a c t
We previously reported that the phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5) inhibitor sildenaﬁl prevented neurodegeneration but not learning deﬁcits in middle-aged rats that were subjected to the permanent, three-stage,
four-vessel occlusion/internal carotid artery (4-VO/ICA) model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH).
In the present study, we examined whether the PDE3 inhibitor cilostazol alleviates the loss of long-term
memory (i.e., retrograde amnesia) caused by CCH. The effect of sildenaﬁl was then compared to cilostazol. Naive rats (12–15 months old) were trained in a non-food-rewarded eight-arm radial maze and
subjected to CCH. One week later, retrograde memory was assessed for 5 weeks. Cilostazol (50 mg/kg,
p.o.) was administered for 42 days or 15 days, beginning approximately 45 min after the ﬁrst occlusion
stage. Sildenaﬁl (3 mg/kg, p.o.) was similarly administered for 15 days only. Histological examination was
performed after behavioral testing. Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion caused persistent retrograde amnesia, which was reversed by cilostazol after both short-term and long-term treatment. This antiamnesic
effect of cilostazol was sustained throughout the experiment, even after discontinuing treatment (15day treatment group). This effect occurred in the absence of neuronal rescue. Sildenaﬁl failed to prevent
CCH-induced retrograde amnesia, but it reduced hippocampal cell death. Extending previous ﬁndings
from this laboratory, we conclude that sildenaﬁl does not afford memory recovery after CCH, despite
its neuroprotective effect. In contrast, cilostazol abolished CCH-induced retrograde amnesia, an effect
that may not depend on histological neuroprotection. The present data suggest that cilostazol but not
sildenaﬁl represents a potential strategy for the treatment of cognitive sequelae associated with CCH.
© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH) has been implicated in
the genesis of aging-related dementia of vascular origin and/or

∗ Corresponding author at: Departamento de Farmácia e Farmacologia, Centro de
Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Estadual de Maringá, Av. Colombo, 5790, Maringá,
Paraná CEP 87020-900, Brazil. Tel.: +55 44 30114814; fax: +55 44 30114999.
E-mail address: hmilani@uem.br (H. Milani).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2015.01.026
0166-4328/© 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

the Alzheimer’s dementia type. As age advances, CCH might
emerge as a prodromal feature of dementia, and it is a common denominator in several aging-related comorbidities, including
hypertension, coronary artery disease, atherosclerosis of the internal carotid arteries, hypercholesterolemia, and diabetes mellitus,
among others [1–3]. Preventing or treating these comorbidities may reduce the prevalence of neurodegenerative diseases
and cognitive decline associated with CCH [3,4]. However, the
pharmacological control of vascular risk factors by antihypertensive, anticholesterolemic, and antidiabetic drugs has not been

62

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

convincingly shown to be associated with a reduction of cognitive decline or dementia in the elderly [5]. Despite the importance
of reducing the impact of vascular risk factors in the genesis and evolution of aging-related dementia, one unresolved
issue is whether the progression of brain damage and cognitive
impairment triggered by CCH can be mitigated pharmacologically.
We previously reported that the phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE5)
inhibitor sildenaﬁl reduced both mortality rate and hippocampal neurodegeneration in young rats that were subjected to
the permanent, two-stage, four-vessel occlusion/internal carotid
artery (4-VO/ICA) model of CCH [6]. In that study, however,
we found that young rats (3–4 months old) were not cognitively impaired after permanent 4-VO/ICA, thus hindering the
determination of possible beneﬁcial effects of sildenaﬁl on functional recovery. To reduce the mortality rate that is typically
observed with the two-stage 4-VO/ICA model, we are currently
using the three-stage 4-VO/ICA model, which consists of occluding
the vertebral arteries (VAs) simultaneously, followed by stepwise ligation of each internal carotid artery (ICA) according to
the sequence VA → ICA → ICA (i.e., three-stage 4-VO/ICA), with
an interstage interval (ISI) of 4 days. Under these conditions,
the mortality rate was zero in young rats, but their resilience
to learning/memory deﬁcits still persisted, despite the occurrence of hippocampal damage [7]. In contrast, middle-aged rats
(12–15 months old) that were subjected to permanent, threestage 4-VO/ICA developed not only brain damage but also learning
impairment in the radial maze task, and the mortality rate reached
25%, suggesting that aging is an important factor for the development of cognitive impairment after permanent, stepwise 4-VO/ICA
[7].
We then used middle-aged rats to further examine whether
sildenaﬁl can attenuate learning deﬁcits after permanent 4VO/ICA [8]. In that study, sildenaﬁl treatment covered the
period of three-stage 4-VO/ICA implantation, and learning performance was assessed more than 3 months after 4-VO/ICA.
Extending our previous data [7], sildenaﬁl afforded neurohistological protection not only in the hippocampus but also in
the cerebral cortex. It failed to attenuate, however, the learning
deﬁcit caused by CCH [8]. To explain the failure of sildenaﬁl to prevent learning deﬁcits after 4-VO/ICA, we speculated
that distinct PDE types may play differential roles in the mediation of functional recovery by PDE inhibitors following CCH,
and the effects of inhibitors of different PDE types should be
investigated [8]. For example, the PDE3 inhibitor cilostazol was
found to alleviate learning/memory deﬁcits caused by permanent, bilateral ligation of the common carotid arteries (2-VO
model of CCH) [9]. We also suggested that other treatment regimens or behavioral protocols should be used to further evaluate
any eventual beneﬁt of sildenaﬁl against CCH-induced cognitive
impairments in middle-aged rats [8]. We found that permanent,
three-stage 4-VO/ICA caused robust and persistent retrograde
amnesia in middle-aged rats in the aversive radial maze (AvRM)
task [10,11].
In the present study, we used a retrograde memory protocol to
evaluate whether the PDE3 inhibitor cilostazol and PDE5 inhibitor
sildenaﬁl can mitigate persistent retrograde amnesia caused by
4-VO/ICA in middle-aged rats. A sequence of experiments was
designed to answer the following questions: (i) Does long-term
treatment with cilostazol given throughout the experiment prevent retrograde amnesia caused by CCH? (ii) Is the antiamnesic
effect of cilostazol also evident after reducing the treatment duration? (iii) Can the antiamnesic effect of cilostazol be sustained after
the discontinuation of treatment? (iv) How do the effects of sildenaﬁl compare with the effects of cilostazol following the same
short-term treatment duration?

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Subjects
One hundred forty-four male, middle-aged Wistar rats (inbred
strain, 12–15 months old) were acquired from the local vivarium.
Ninety-four rats completed the experiments. Of these, 31 were
assigned to sham operation (sham group), and 63 were subjected
to CCH and assigned to the following treatments: vehicle (veh;
n = 27), cilostazol for 42 days (Cilos43; n = 14), cilostazol for 15
days (cilos15; n = 13), and sildenaﬁl for 15 days (sild; n = 9). The
rats were housed under a controlled temperature (22 ± 1 ◦ C) on a
12 h alternating light/dark cycle (lights on at 7:00 AM). The animals
had free access to tap water and a standard commercial chow diet
(Nutrilab-CR1; Nuvital Nutrients, Curitiba, PR, Brazil). The experimental procedures were approved by our Ethics Committee on
Animal Experimentation (protocol no. 137/2012).
2.2. Surgery
The animals were anesthetized by isoﬂurane inhalation
(Isoﬂorine, Cristália, SP, Brazil) that was delivered through a mask
adapted to the nose. The vaporizer was regulated to a minimal
burble ﬂow of 0.5 L/min. Under these conditions, the volume of
isoﬂurane delivered to the animal was further regulated and monitored to maintain the minimal isoﬂurane concentration required
for efﬁcient anesthesia (evaluated by pinching the animal’s tail).
Permanent 4-VO/ICA or sham surgery was performed gradually in
three stages according to the sequence VA → ICA → ICA, with an
interstage interval (ISI) of 4 days. For bilateral occlusion of the VAs,
the tip of a unipolar electrode was inserted into the alar foramen
of the ﬁrst cervical vertebra and gently rotated until the presence
of hemorrhage ensured vessel rupture. The hemorrhage was then
immediately staunched by a 3–4 mA electrical current. This procedure ensures complete and irreversible VA occlusion. An incision
into the ventral neck exposed the internal carotid arteries, which
were carefully dissected from adjacent tissues and permanently
ligated using cotton thread. After each occlusion stage, the incision
was sutured, and the animal was returned to its home cage until
the next surgery. Rectal temperature was monitored with a digital thermometer (Minipa, APPA MT-520, São Paulo, Brazil) using a
rectal probe inserted to a depth of approximately 6 cm. Core temperature was controlled only during surgery and maintained at
approximately 37.5 ◦ C by a heating blanket. The animals that were
assigned to the sham surgery group were subjected to the same
surgical procedures as their counterparts but did not receive vessel
occlusions.
2.3. Timeline of drug administration relative to three-stage
4-VO/ICA surgery and behavioral testing
Fig. 1 schematically shows the entire experimental protocol.
Naive rats were trained for 15 days to learn the radial maze task (see
procedural details below) and then assigned to different groups.
On the following day, the three-stage 4-VO/ICA surgeries were
performed (Days 0, 4, and 8). All of the drug treatments began
approximately 45 min after the ﬁrst occlusion stage (VA occlusion;
i.e., when the animals fully recovered from anesthesia). Subsequent
doses were administered daily between 2:00 PM and 3:00 PM. In
the ﬁrst experiment, cilostazol (50 mg/kg) or vehicle was administered for 42 days consecutively, covering the entire periods of
4-VO/ICA and the retention memory trials (RMTs). In the second
experiment, the duration of cilostazol treatment was reduced to
15 days. According to this protocol, cilostazol administration did
not coincide with behavioral testing. Based on the results obtained
with cilostazol, a third experiment evaluated the effect of sildenaﬁl

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the experimental protocol, delineating the
phases of preoperative training, three-stage 4-VO/ICA surgery with an interstage
interval of 4 days, retention memory trials (RMT) at a rate of 1 RMT/week, histological examination, and the beginning and duration of drug treatment. VA, vertebral
artery; ICA, internal carotid artery.

also given for 15 days. On the day after the last RMT, the brains
were removed for histological examination.
2.4. Drug preparation and treatment
Cilostazol
(6-[4-(1-cyclohexyl-1H-tetrazol-5-yl)butoxy]3,4-dihydro-2-[1H]-quinolinone; Cebralat, Libbs Farmaceutica,
São Paulo, Brazil) and sildenaﬁl (1-[4-etoxido-3-(6,7-dihydro1-methyl-7-oxo-3-propyl-1H-pirazolo[4,3-d]-pyrimidine-5yl)phenylsulfonyl]-4-methylpiperazine citrate; Viagra, Pﬁzer, São
Paulo, Brazil) were used. One Cebralat tablet (cilostazol, 100 mg)
was readily dissolved in 2 ml of sterile 0.9% saline to a ﬁnal concentration of 50 mg/ml. Each Viagra tablet (sildenaﬁl, 50 mg) was ﬁrst
triturated into a ﬁne powder using a mortar and pestle [12] and
then dissolved in 12.5 ml of 0.9% saline to a ﬁnal concentration of
4 mg/ml sildenaﬁl. Cilostazol (50 mg/kg body weight) or sildenaﬁl
(3.0 mg/kg body weight) was administered by gavage in a volume
of 1.0 ml/kg. The doses used in the present study were based on
previous reports for sildenaﬁl [6,8] and cilostazol [9].
2.5. Behavioral testing
Preoperative training and postoperative retrograde memory
assessment were conducted in a non-food-rewarded, eight-arm
AvRM. Based on the circular platform test [1], the AvRM works on
the basis of the rat’s natural behavior of avoiding open and illuminated areas and preference for darkened and enclosed shelters. A
detailed view and description of the AvRM apparatus used herein
are shown elsewhere [6,7].
2.5.1. Preoperative training
Once habituated to the AvRM apparatus and testing room
(4–5 min/day for 3 days), the naive rats were trained to learn the
task according to the following schedule: 3 trials/session, 1 session/day, for 15 days. In each trial, the rat was placed into the center
of the arena for 30 s, with all arms closed and the video camera
turned on. The arms were then opened simultaneously, and the animal was allowed to explore the entire maze. When the rat entered
halfway down a non-rewarded arm (i.e., an arm that contained a
false goal box), the guillotine doors of the remaining arms were
closed simultaneously. Upon the rat’s return to the central area,
the newly visited arm was closed immediately, and the animal was
again conﬁned in the arena for a further 10 s. When the rat found
and entered halfway down the rewarded arm (i.e., the arm that contained the true goal box), the guillotine door of that arm was closed,
forcing the animal to enter the correct goal box, where it was left

63

for 1 min. If the rat did not ﬁnd the correct arm within 4 min, then it
was placed into it and gently introduced into the shelter. When the
rat inserted only its head into an incorrect opening and remained
there for more than 1 min, it was repositioned to the center of the
maze, and the trial was restarted. However, if the rat adopted such
atypical behavior for 4 consecutive days, then it was excluded from
further experimentation. Between trials, the rat was moved from
the maze (or goal box) to an individual home cage where it was left
in a separate room until the maze was cleaned of excrement and
randomly rotated on its central axis. The goal box was randomly
moved to any of the other seven arms, although its spatial position
relative to the extra-maze cues remained unchanged across trials
and sessions and was the same for all of the rats. This procedure
took approximately 90 s, after which the subsequent trial began.
From habituation until the last training session, the AvRM apparatus was cleaned of excrement (i.e., feces and urine) and any eventual
ﬂeck but remained saturated with the animals’ odor. The sawdust
in the shelter was changed daily. Memory performance was measured by three parameters: (i) the latency to ﬁnd the goal box, (ii)
the number of reference memory errors, and (iii) the number of
working memory errors. Within a given trial, a reference error was
counted when the rat visited an arm that contained a false goal box
for the ﬁrst time. However, if the rat returned to an arm that had
been visited previously during that trial, then a working memory
error was recorded. The animal was considered to have left an arm
when it placed all four paws on the central platform. On the last
day of preoperative training, the rats were assigned to the various
groups or treatments.
2.5.2. Postoperative memory performance
The procedure for postoperative RMTs after 4-VO/ICA was the
same as the description above for preoperative training, with the
exception of the habituation phase.
2.6. Histology
Under anesthesia (Thiopental, 50 mg/kg, i.v.), the animals were
transcardially perfused with 0.9% saline followed by Bouin’s ﬁxative (20 ml/min for 5 min). Following decapitation, the head was
immersed in crushed ice (1–2 ◦ C) for at least 2 h to avoid the appearance of so-called “dark” neurons. The brain was then removed and
immersed in the same ﬁxative for 2–3 h. The forebrain was sectioned into two parts and conserved in the same ﬁxative for an
additional 3–5 days, after which the two parts were embedded in
parafﬁn. For each brain, 12 coronal sections (7 ␮m thick, 70 ␮m
apart) were cut at the medial level of the hippocampus (−3.60
to −4.30 mm) and processed for Nissl staining. Using an Olympus BX 41 microscope (40× objective; Tokyo, Japan) coupled to a
color, high-performance device camera (QColor3, Ontario, Canada),
the number of remaining, normal-looking pyramidal neurons was
counted bilaterally across the CA1–CA4 subﬁelds of the hippocampus, in the retrosplenial (RS) cortex, and in the parietal association
(PtA) cortex (see Fig. 3 for an outline of these brain regions). In
the cerebral cortex, digital microscopic areas of 361␮m × 270 ␮m
(40× objective) were captured from the RS and PtA under an identical microscopic light intensity. In the RS, the area of cell counting
was located at the ‘center’ of this region. In the PtA, the cells were
counted in two distinct areas that were distant from each other
by the length of one microscopic ﬁeld. Normal-looking pyramidal
neurons showed a well-delimited, spherical form, with a distinct
nucleus and nucleolus, and were counted in both the hippocampus
and cerebral cortex. Neurons that had shrunken, dark-stained cell
bodies, sometimes with surrounding empty spaces (“ghost” cells),
were considered neurons that were destined to die and therefore
excluded. The number of pyramidal cells averaged from the various measurements in each individual were transformed into a

64

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

Fig. 2. Effects of cilostazol (cilos) and sildenaﬁl (sild) on CCH-induced memory loss. Naive rats were trained (T) for 15 days to learn the task and then subjected to CCH by
permanent, three-stage 4-VO/ICA (day 1 to day 9). Retention memory trials (RMT) were conducted on days 15, 22, 29, 37, and 42. Cilostazol was administered daily for 42 days
(cilos 42d) or 15 days (cilos 15d), and sildenaﬁl was administered for 15 days only. (Left panels) Temporal distribution of memory performance, expressed as latency, number
of reference memory errors, and number of working memory errors. (Right panels) Total latency and total number of errors summed over the various RMTs. Asymptotic
performance during training (T) is expressed as the mean (left) or sum (right) of the last 5 days of training. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05, vs. sham; ### p < 0.001, ## p < 0.01,
#
p < 0.05, vs. vehicle for between-group comparisons in the RMT phase; $$$ p < 0.001, $$ p < 0.01, $ p < 0.05, within-group comparisons between pre- and post-CCH performance.
The data are expressed as group mean ± SEM. Sample size (n): cilostazol experiment (sham = 21, veh = 19, cilos 15d = 13, cilos 43d = 14), sildenaﬁl experiment (sham = 10,
veh = 8, sild = 9).

percentage. The mean of the sham-operated group was considered
100%. Each individual value was then normalized to the mean of
the sham. On this basis, the degree of HCC-induced neuronal loss
(expressed as a percentage) was deduced from the reduction of
the number of normal-looking pyramidal cells compared with the
sham-operated groups. The identity of the groups was not revealed
during histological assessment.

2.7. Statistical analysis
SAS 9.3 software was used. Because the behavioral data did not
satisfy the assumptions of a normal distribution (D’Agostino and
Pearson omnibus normality test), homoscedasticity, or sphericity
(Mauchly’s test), the covariance model to which the data ﬁt better
was examined based on the following informational criteria: (i) the
−2 log Likelihood ratio test, (ii) the Akaike information criterion
(AIC and AICc), and (iii) the Bayesian information criterion (BIC).
Accordingly, the non-structured covariance model was chosen.
Two-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was
then performed to quantify memory performance across the
various RMTs (see Fig. 1), with Group as the between-subjects
factor and Trial as the within-subjects factor. If a main effect of
Group was found after the two-way ANOVA, then Tukey–Kramer’s

multiple-range test was used to distinguish between them. When
memory performance was expressed as the total latency and
total number of errors (summed across the various RMTs), these
data followed a Gaussian distribution, but the assumption of
homoscedasticity was not consistently satisﬁed (Bartlett test).
Therefore, the generalized linear model with a gamma distribution
was used for between-group comparisons in the RMT phase. For
within-group comparisons of total latency and total number of
errors measured prior to and after CCH, the Wilcoxon signed rank
test was used. The Generalized Linear Model with a gamma distribution was also used to quantify the histological data. Differences
were considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05.

3. Results
3.1. Mortality rate or exclusion
Ten of 144 animals (6.9%) were excluded because they did not
learn the task during presurgery training. Of the remaining rats,
four (3%, 4/134) died during surgery either because of anesthesia
or carotid artery rupture, and 36 (27.7%, 36/130) died at some time
point after the completion of 4-VO/ICA when the animals were
already conscious, likely reﬂecting the fatal effect of severe CCH

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

(p < 0.001, 4-VO/ICA vs. sham). The mortality rate did not differ signiﬁcantly between the groups treated with vehicle, cilostazol, and
sildenaﬁl. No death occurred after the sham operation.
3.2. Retrograde memory performance
The effects of cilostazol and sildenaﬁl on CCH-induced retrograde amnesia are shown in Fig. 2. The parameters latency,
reference memory errors, and working memory errors measured
on each individual testing day (or RMT) are shown in the left
panels. The parameters total latency and total number of errors
(summed across the various RMT) are shown in the right panels.
Memory performance during the RMT phase indicates the ability of rats to remember (or not) the task learned in the training
(T) phase (i.e., prior to CCH or sham surgery). A signiﬁcant main
effect of Group was found for all three parameters in both the
cilostazol experiment (left panels: F3,271 = 34.45–26.77, p < 0.0001;
right panels: 2 = 15.04–37.73, p < 0.001–0.01) and sildenaﬁl experiment (left panels: F2,92 = 11.93–87.07, p < 0.001; right panels:
2 = 20.41–33.63, p < 0.001). A main effect of Trial appeared in the
sildenaﬁl experiment for the parameter latency only (F4,92 = 2.68,
p < 0.05). The post hoc analysis revealed that the CCH/vehicle group
spent more time ﬁnding the goal box (latency) and committed more
reference and working memory errors than the sham-operated
group (veh vs. sham, p < 0.0001 in both the cilostazol and sildenaﬁl experiments). The deleterious effect of ischemia on memory
performance was further revealed when the total latency and total

65

number of errors recorded prior to and after CCH were compared within each group (right panels). This analysis revealed
that all three parameters consistently increased from the training phase to the RMT phase in the CCH/vehicle groups (cilostazol
experiment: W = −163.00 to −188.00, p < 0.001–0.01; sildenaﬁl
experiment: W = −28.00 to −36.00, p < 0.01–0.05) but remained
unchanged in the respective sham-operated groups (W = −7.00
to −67.00, p > 0.05). Collectively, these results indicate that the
vehicle-treated rats “forgot” the task that they learned prior to
CCH (i.e., retrograde amnesia), an effect from which they did
not spontaneously recover during the experiment. This memory deﬁcit, reﬂected by all three parameters, was signiﬁcantly
reduced by cilostazol administration for both 43 and 15 days (left
panels, Tukey–Kramer test, p < 0.001–0.01, cilos vs. veh; right panels, 2 test, p < 0.001–0.05). This indicates that the antiamnesic
effect of cilostazol was sustained throughout the experiment, even
after discontinuing treatment in the ﬁrst RMT (15-day treatment
group). In contrast, sildenaﬁl treatment did not change the loss
of memory caused by CCH (left/right panels: p > 0.05, sild vs. veh;
p < 0.001–0.01, sild vs. sham).
3.3. Histological analysis
The extent of CCH-induced neurodegeneration in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex (Fig. 3) was deduced from the reduction of
the number of normal-looking pyramidal neurons relative to the
sham-operated groups at the end of behavioral testing, and the

Fig. 3. (Upper panel) Low-magniﬁcation (50×), Nissl-stained coronal brain section at the intermediate level of the hippocampus obtained from a sham-operated rat that
shows where normal-looking pyramidal neurons were counted over the CA1-CA4 subﬁelds and in the retrosplenial (RS) and parietal association (PtA) cortices. (Bottom, left
panels) individual number (%) of normal-looking pyramidal neurons counted in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex in rats subjected to sham-surgery or CCH plus treatment
with vehicle, cilostazol for 15 days (cilos15), cilostazol for 42 days (cilos43), or sildenaﬁl for 15 days (Sild15). The data from the RS and PtA cortices were pooled because cell
counting did not differ between them. (Bottom, right panels) High-magniﬁcation (400×) representative photomicrographs of the CA1 pyramidal stratum and RS/PtA cortex in
rats assigned to each of the treatments. The notation “cilos” refers to either the cilos15 or cilos43 group, in which the cell counts were very similar between them. The notation
“vehicle” refers to the vehicle for either cilostazol or sildenaﬁl (both drugs were dissolved/diluted in sterile 0.9% saline). The arrow and arrowhead indicate normal-looking
and degenerating neurons, respectively. The data are expressed as mean and SEM. ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.001–0.05, vs. sham; ## p < 0.01, # p < 0.5, vs. vehicle. Sample
sizes (n): cilostazol experiment (sham = 17, veh = 17, cilos 15d = 10, cilos 43d = 14), sildenaﬁl experiment (sham = 10, veh = 8, sild = 9). Several brains (four sham, two vehicle,
and three cilos 15d) were unavailable for histological analysis because they fragmented during sectioning, perhaps because of inadequate ﬁxation/embedding process.

66

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

effects of cilostazol and sildenaﬁl thereon were assessed to indicate
the presence or absence of neuroprotection (i.e., neuronal rescue).
In the vehicle group, CCH caused a signiﬁcant loss of pyramidal
neurons in both the hippocampus (2 = 5.42–15.83, p < 0.001–0.05,
vs. sham) and cerebral cortex (2 = 52.88–100.63, p < 0.001, vs.
sham). Individually, the magnitude of neurodegeneration ranged
from 20% to 60% in the hippocampus and 20–70% in the cerebral
cortex. Regardless of the treatment duration, cilostazol did not
reduce neurodegeneration in the hippocampus or cerebral cortex,
except in the 15-day treatment group, in which neuroprotection
was slightly but signiﬁcantly reduced (p < 0.05). In the group
treated with sildenaﬁl, CCH-induced cell loss was clearly reduced
in the hippocampus (2 = 10.84, p < 0.01) but not cerebral cortex
(2 = 0.18, p > 0.05).

4. Discussion
As expected, middle-aged rats that were subjected to permanent
4-VO/ICA lost well-trained, long-term memory that was acquired
preoperatively, a sequela from which they did not spontaneously
recover until the end of behavioral testing, indicating a condition
of persistent retrograde amnesia. This ﬁnding extends our previous
report, in which hypoperfused rats exhibited learning impairment
in the AvRM task, perhaps reﬂecting a state of anterograde amnesia
[7,8]. The 27.7% mortality rate observed herein in middle-aged rats
after 4-VO/ICA is consistent with previous studies, which ranged
from 18% to 25% [7,8,11]. The histological integrity of the retina has
been shown to be preserved after 4-VO/ICA in both young and old
rats [13], and the cognitive impairment observed under conditions
of permanent 4-VO/ICA may not be attributable to visual dysfunction, which has commonly been observed in the classic 2-VO model
of CCH [14–16]. Therefore, normal visual function is an important variable when spatial, visually guided tasks are used to assess
the cognitive outcome of hypoxic/ischemic brain damage and the
effects of drugs thereon. Additionally, the use of middle-aged or
older rats makes the present experimental conditions more clinically relevant within the setting of cognitive impairment associated
with CCH. Therefore, the persistent learning and memory deﬁcits
that were caused by permanent, stepwise 4-VO/ICA in middle-aged
rats may be reminiscent of the cognitive impairment observed in
humans with cerebrovascular deﬁciency [17–19].
In the present study, cilostazol prevented the robust and persistent retrograde amnesia that was caused by 4-VO/ICA, regardless
of the treatment duration (42 or 15 days) after the imposition of
permanent 4-VO/ICA (Fig. 2). This antiamnesic effect of cilostazol
occurred in the absence of neuronal rescue in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex assessed at the end of behavioral testing
(Fig. 3). To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study that evaluated
whether cilostazol can prevent CCH-induced neuronal death in the
hippocampus and/or cerebral cortex. In contrast to cilostazol, sildenaﬁl administration during 15 days of 4-VO/ICA failed to alleviate
retrograde amnesia caused by 4-VO/ICA. These data extend and
conﬁrm our previous report, in which sildenaﬁl also failed to prevent learning deﬁcits long after 4-VO/ICA [8]. The results of the
histological analysis obtained with sildenaﬁl are also consistent
with our previous studies with regard to its neuroprotective effect
in the hippocampus [6,10]. In contrast to the last study, however,
sildenaﬁl failed to prevent neuronal death in the cerebral cortex
in the present study. We have no explanation for this discrepancy
between these two studies because the same histological methods were used. The fact that the sildenaﬁl solution used herein
was prepared from 50 mg Viagra tablets, whereas the pure citrate
salt was used in our early studies [6,8], likely does not explain
the present lack of cortical neuroprotection afforded by sildenaﬁl
because it was effective in the hippocampus in the same animals.

Moreover, the results of the behavioral analysis are similar between
the present study and the early one [8]. One issue, however, is
whether sildenaﬁl treatment for 42 days can alleviate CCH-induced
memory deﬁcits, similar to the effect of cilostazol. Although this
may be a possibility, such an experimental group (42-day treatment) would not be strictly relevant to the evaluation of how the
effects of sildenaﬁl compare with the effects of cilostazol. Presuming that 42-day sildenaﬁl treatment could be effective, such
results would still indicate the superiority of cilostazol over sildenaﬁl because cilostazol is effective after short-term treatment (15
days). Moreover, the negative result observed previously with sildenaﬁl [8] and expense of middle-aged rats with a 27.7% mortality
rate after 4-VO/ICA also justiﬁed the absence of a 42-day sildenaﬁl
treatment group in the present study.
The antiamnesic effect of cilostazol observed herein after 4VO/ICA in middle-aged rats agrees with the results obtained in
young rats that were subjected to the 2-VO model of CCH [9,20].
In those previous studies, cilostazol treatment coincided with
the entire period of memory trials, raising the issue of whether
cilostazol facilitates memory recovery by directly stimulating some
memory-related processes on its own at the time of each behavioral
session. In another study, however, a suboptimal dose of cilostazol
(30 mg/kg) that was administered throughout the period of behavioral testing failed to improve memory deﬁcits in rats that were
subjected to 2-VO and tested in the water maze task [21]. In the
present study, cilostazol administration (50 mg/kg) during the ﬁrst
15 days of 4-VO/ICA was as effective as the 42-day treatment regimen, and such effectiveness persisted for at least 1 month after the
discontinuation of treatment. Cilostazol did not prevent pyramidal
cell loss in either the hippocampus or cerebral cortex (Fig. 3), and its
sustained antiamnesic effect after the discontinuation of treatment
is striking. In contrast, sildenaﬁl afforded hippocampal neuroprotection but failed to facilitate memory recovery, conﬁrming our
early ﬁndings [6,8]. The data obtained herein with cilostazol and
sildenaﬁl support the consensus that functional recovery does not
necessarily depend on neuronal rescue. As stated elsewhere, “while
it is obviously important to preserve as many neurons as possible
after an ischemic insult it is clear that protection must also mean
preservation of function” [22]. Therefore, the present results suggest that the potential therapeutic utility is greater for cilostazol
than for sildenaﬁl within the setting of CCH. This potential value of
cilostazol for treating the cognitive outcome of hypoxia/ischemia
is further supported by other studies that used models of CCH
[9,20,23] or stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive (SHR-SP)
rats [24]. However, although sildenaﬁl has been reported to clearly
cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) [25], the ability of cilostazol to
penetrate brain tissues was reported to be limited in intact animals [26]. One issue then is the way in which cilostazol reaches
the brain in sufﬁcient concentrations to exert its beneﬁcial effects
after hypoxia/ischemia [9,20,23,present study]. One possibility is
that conditions that affect the integrity of the BBB might facilitate the entry of cilostazol into the brain. Evidence of CCH-induced
BBB breakdown has been obtained in the classic 2-VO model,
reﬂected by Evans Blue leakage in white matter [27] and claudin-3
immunoreactivity and neutrophil inﬁltration in both the cerebral
cortex and thalamus [28]. Even mild CCH that is created by permanently occluding one common carotid artery (1-VO model) in mice
was able to sufﬁciently disrupt the integrity of the neurovascular
unit (NVU) to allow the transfer of amyloid ␤1–42 (A␤1–42 ) peptides
from the blood to the hypoperfused brain hemisphere [29]. Supposing that permanent 4-VO/ICA also leads to disruptions of the
BBB and/or NVU in middle-aged rats, one speculation is that the
transfer of cilostazol from blood to brain increases in these animals. If not, however, then the present ﬁnding of memory recovery
indicates that cilostazol is effective even at low levels, which has
been considered plausible under another experimental condition

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68

when considering the observation that a 0.1% plasma cilostazol
concentration may be sufﬁcient to inhibit PDE III and afford vascular
protection [26].
The way in which cilostazol but not sildenaﬁl promoted sustained memory recovery after CCH is unclear. The present study
did not address this issue speciﬁcally, but other well-established
ﬁndings in the literature allow us to speculate about some possible mechanisms. One of the most important data refer perhaps
to the prevention of white matter lesions (WMLs) by cilostazol,
an effect that has been well characterized in the 2-VO model
of CCH [9,20,23]. We attempted to conﬁrm these ﬁndings in the
present 4-VO/ICA model, but we had no success in obtaining adequate quality staining after the Kluver–Barrera method, despite
repeated attempts. In contrast to cilostazol, the ability of sildenaﬁl to prevent CCH-induced WMLs has not been studied. Therefore,
the ability of cilostazol but not sildenaﬁl to prevent both memory deterioration and WMLs in models of CCH may make clinical
sense because WMLs have been show to negatively impact a wide
spectrum of cognitive functions, such as memory, processing speed,
attention, and executive function, in older humans [30], in whom
cognitive impairments and cerebrovascular deﬁciency are common occurrences [17–19]. The protective effect of cilostazol against
WML in rats that were subjected to CCH may be related to its
antioxidant, antiinﬂammatory, and antiapoptotic actions [9]. For
example, the production of the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-␣
(TNF-␣) and apoptosis were reduced by cilostazol after focal cerebral ischemia in rats [31]. Additionally, the antiinﬂammatory action
of cilostazol has been observed in a mouse model of stroke, in
which it reduced the density of microglial cells positive for matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in the cerebral cortex, an effect associated with the alleviation of brain edema, the amelioration of
cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF), the maintenance of vascular integrity,
increased survival rate, and improved neurological function [32].
Furthermore, cilostazol promoted the differentiation and survival
of newly generated oligodendrocytes in white matter, resulting in
remyelination after CCH in rats [23]. Whether sildenaﬁl exerts similar actions after CCH is unknown, although it has been shown to
reduce apoptosis in the mouse cerebral cortex after hypoxia [12].
Together with white matter protection, several other actions
of cilostazol may contribute to its beneﬁcial effect on cognition
after CCH. By inhibiting PDE3, cilostazol increases the intracellular levels of both cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and
cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), which mediate an array
of downstream effects on cerebrovascular endothelia, including the
inhibition of platelet aggregation, the inhibition of thrombus formation, and vasodilation [33], which together may improve (or
preserve) cerebrovascular reserve and counterbalance the negative
effects of CCH on learning/memory. The protective effect of cilostazol on microcirculation in the brain has been clearly demonstrated
in transgenic mice that express cerebrovascular ␤-amyloidosis. The
treatment of Tg-SwDI mice with 0.3% cilostazol in the diet for 4
months restored cerebral vasoreactivity, promoted the perivascular drainage of A␤ fragments, reduced the accumulation of both
vascular and parenchymal A␤ deposits, protected the integrity of
the vascular wall, and improved working memory performance.
All of these actions indicate that cilostazol preserved endothelial integrity and cerebrovascular function in an animal model
of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and/or cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA). Importantly, PDE3 is uniquely expressed in vascular
smooth muscle cells, and its upregulation was closely correlated
with amyloid burden [26]. The role played by NVU dysfunction
in A␤ accumulation in brain capillaries was also demonstrated
in C57BL/6J mice that were subjected to mild chronic cerebral
hypoperfusion [29]. These ﬁndings in Tg-SwDI mice and mice subjected to mild CCH are important within the context of the present
CCH results in middle-aged rats because early cerebrovascular

67

pathology, brain hypoperfusion, and cognitive impairments may
precede A␤ accumulation and the progressive cascade of pathological events that culminate in AD [34,35]. Accordingly, the observed
antiamnesic effect of cilostazol after CCH may be at least partially
attributable to the preservation of microvasculature integrity, with
the improvement and/or maintenance of cerebrovascular reserve.
The ability of cilostazol to preserve NVU integrity and thus the
functionality of brain microcirculation has also been demonstrated
in SHR-SP rats, in which it prevented the detachment of both
astrocytic endfeet and pericytes from endothelial cells [36]. Furthermore, the favorable effect of cilostazol on brain perfusion after
CCH or focal cerebral ischemia has been reported [24].
Sildenaﬁl acts primarily by selectively inhibiting PDE5, leading
to an increase in the intracellular concentration of cGMP that, in
turn, promotes vascular smooth muscle relaxation and vasodilation, a well known effect in the peripheral vasculature. However,
several investigations failed to demonstrate any favorable effect of
sildenaﬁl on overall CBF [37]. Although sildenaﬁl was found to facilitate functional recovery after embolic stroke in aged rats (an effect
associated with increased vascular density, endothelial cell proliferation, and synaptogenesis [38], treatment with the long-acting
PDE5 inhibitor vardenaﬁl had no beneﬁcial effect in a mouse model
of stroke [39]. Sildenaﬁl was also reported to promote an important
preconditioning-like effect in the ischemic myocardium, an action
associated with improved myocardial function [40], but whether
such an effect would also occur in the brain is unknown. Also,
whether sildenaﬁl exerts some protective effect on the endothelium and/or NVU under conditions of reduced CBF has apparently
not been investigated.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that cilostazol
but not sildenaﬁl prevents memory loss (i.e., retrograde amnesia)
caused by CCH in middle-aged rats, an effect that was sustained
for a long time even after the discontinuation of treatment. Supported by other studies and considering its clinical approval in other
areas of vascular disease, including stroke prevention, our present
data suggest that cilostazol but not sildenaﬁl may have therapeutic utility for treating the cognitive outcome of chronic cerebral
hypoperfusion.

Acknowledgements
This study was supported by CNPq (grant no. 472958/2011-9).
Humberto Milani and Rúbia Maria Weffort de Oliveira are recipients
of a research fellowship from CNPq. The other authors received
postgraduate fellowships from CAPES and Araucária Foundation.
We gratefully acknowledge the technical assistance by Marcos A.
Trombelli.

References
[1] de la Torre JC. Carotid artery ultrasound and echocardiography testing
to lower the prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis
2009;18:319–28.
[2] Dickstein DL, Walsh J, Brautigam H, Stockton Jr SD, Gandy S, Hof PR. Role of
vascular risk factors and vascular dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Mt Sinai
J Med 2010;77(1):82–102.
[3] Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, Decarli C, Greenberg SM, Iadecola C, et al.
Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement
for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American
Stroke Association. Stroke 2011;42(9):2672–713.
[4] de la Torre JC. Vascular risk factor detection and control may prevent
Alzheimer’s disease. Ageing Res Rev 2010;9(3):218–25.
[5] Debette S. Vascular risk factors and cognitive disorders. Rev Neurol (Paris)
2013;169(10):757–64.
[6] Romanini CV, Schiavon AP, Ferreira EDF, Oliveira RMW, Milani H. Sildenaﬁl prevents mortality and reduces hippocampal damage after permanent, stepwise,
4-vessel occlusion in rats. Brain Res Bull 2010;81:631–40.
[7] Ferreira EDF, Romanini CV, Mori MA, Oliveira RMW, Milani H. Middle-aged, but
not young, rats develop cognitive impairment and cortical neurodegeneration

68

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

J. Godinho et al. / Behavioural Brain Research 283 (2015) 61–68
following the four-vessel occlusion/internal carotid artery model of chronic
cerebral hypoperfusion. Eur J Neurosci 2011;34:1131–40.
Ferreira EDF, Romanini CV, Cypriano PE, Oliveira RMW, Milani H. Sildenaﬁl
provides sustained neuroprotection in the absence of learning recovery following the 4-vessel occlusion/internal carotid artery model of chronic cerebral
hypoperfusion in middle-aged rats. Brain Res Bull 2013;90:58–65.
Watanabe T, Zhang N, Liu M, Tanaka R, Mizuno Y, Urabe T. Cilostazol protects
against brain white matter damage and cognitive impairment in a rat model of
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Stroke 2006;37:1539–45.
Ferreira ED, Romanini CV, Oliveira JN, Previdelli IT, Melo SR, Oliveira RM, et al.
Fish oil provides a sustained antiamnesic effect after acute, transient forebrain
ischemia but not after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in middle-aged rats.
Behav Brain Res 2014;265:101–10.
Pereira FM, Ferreira EDF, Oliveira RMW, Milani H. Time-course of neurodegeneration and memory impairment following the 4-vessel occlusion/internal
carotid artery model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in middle-aged rats.
Behav Brain Res 2012;229:340–8.
Caretti P, Bianciardi R, Ronchi R, Fantacci M, Guazzi M, Samaja M.
Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibition abolishes neuron apoptosis induced by chronic
hypoxia independently of hypoxia-inducible factor-1␣ signaling. Exp Biol Med
2008;233:1222–30.
Barros CA, Ekuni R, Mori MA, Pereira FM, Pereira MAS, Milani H. The cognitive and histopathological effects of chronic 4-vessel occlusion in rats depend
on the set of vessels occluded and the age of the animals. Behav Brain Res
2009;197:378–87.
Davidson CM, Pappas BA, Stevens WD, Fortin T, Bennett SAL. Chronic cerebral
hypoperfusion: loss of papillary reﬂex, visual impairment and retinal neurodegeneration. Brain Res 2000;859:96–103.
Ohta H, Nishikawa H, Kimura H, Anayama H, Miyamoto M. Chronic
cerebral hypoperfusion by permanent internal carotid ligation produces
learning impairment without brain damage in rats. Neuroscience 1997;79:
1039–50.
Tian XS, Guo XJ, Ruan Z, Lei Y, Chen YT, Shang HY. Long-term vision and
non-vision dominant behavioral deﬁcits in the 2-VO rats are accompanied by
time and regional glial activation in the white matter. PLOS ONE 2014;9(6):
e101120.
Huang C, Eidelberg D, Habeck C, Moeller J, Svensson L, Tarabula T, et al. Imaging markers of mild cognitive impairment: multivariate analysis of CBF SPECT.
Neurobiol Aging 2007;28:1062–9.
Luckhaus C, Flub MO, Wittsack HJ, Grass-Kapanke B, Janner M, Khalili-Amiri
R, et al. Detection of changed regional cerebral blood ﬂow in mild cognitive
impairment and early Alzheimer’s dementia by perfusion-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging. Neuroimage 2008;40:495–503.
Osawa A, Maeshima S, Shimamoto Y, Maeshima E, Sekiguchi E, Kakishita K,
et al. Relationship between cognitive function and regional cerebral blood ﬂow
in different types of dementia. Disabil Rehabil 2004;26:739–45.
Kwak PA, Lim SC, Han SR, Shon YM, Kim YI. Supra-additive neuroprotection
by renexin, a mixed compound of ginkgo biloba extract and cilostazol, against
apoptotic white matter changes in rat after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. J
Clin Neurol 2012;8(4):284–92.
Lee JH, Park SY, Shin YW, Kim CD, Lee WS, Hong KW. Concurrent administration
of cilostazol with donepezil effectively improves cognitive dysfunction with
increased neuroprotection after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in rats. Brain
Res 2007;1185:246–55.
Corbett D, Nurse S. The problem of assessing effective neuroprotection in experimental cerebral ischemia. Prog Neurobiol 1998;54:531–48.

[23] Miyamoto N, Tanaka R, Shimura H, Watanabe T, Mori H, Onodera M, et al.
Phosphodiesterase III inhibition promotes differentiation and survival of
oligodendrocyte progenitors and enhances regeneration of ischemic white
matter lesions in the adult mammalian brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2010;30(2):299–310.
[24] Omote Y, Deguchi K, Tian F, Kawai H, Kurata T, Yamashita T, et al. Clinical
and pathological improvement in stroke-prone spontaneous hypertensive rats
related to the pleiotropic effect of cilostazol. Stroke 2012;43(6):1639–46.
[25] Puzzo D, Sapienza S, Arancio O, Palmeri A. Role of phosphodiesterase 5
in synaptic plasticity and memory. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2008;4(2):
371–87.
[26] Maki T, Okamoto Y, Carare RO, Hase Y, Hattori Y, Hawkes CA, et al. Phosphodiesterase III inhibitor promotes drainage of cerebrovascular ␤-amyloid. Ann
Clin Transl Neurol 2014;1(8):519–33.
[27] Ueno Y, Zhang N, Miyamoto N, Tanaka R, Hattori N, Urabe T. Edaravone attenuates white matter lesions through endothelial protection in a rat chronic
hypoperfusion model. Neuroscience 2009;162(2):317–27.
[28] Shin JS, Hyun SY, Kim DH, Lee S, Jung JW, Choi JW, et al. Chronic hypoperfusion increases claudin-3 immunoreactivity in rat brain. Neurosci Lett
2008;445(2):144–8.
[29] ElAli A, Thériault P, Préfontaine P, Rivest S. Mild chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
induces neurovascular dysfunction, triggering peripheral beta-amyloid brain
entry and aggregation. Acta Neuropathol Commun 2013;1(1):75.
[30] Bolandzadeh N, Davis JC, Tam R, Handy TC, Liu-Ambrose T. The association
between cognitive function and white matter lesion location in older adults: a
systematic review. BMC Neurol 2012;12:126.
[31] Lee JH, Park SY, Shim HK, Kim CD, Lee WS, Hong KW. Poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase inhibition by cilostazol is implicated in the neuroprotective
effect against focal cerebral ischemic infarct in rat. Brain Res 2007;1152:
182–90.
[32] Hase Y, Okamoto Y, Fujita Y, Kitamura A, Nakabayashi H, Ito H, et al. Cilostazol, a
phosphodiesterase inhibitor, prevents no-reﬂow and hemorrhage in mice with
focal cerebral ischemia. Exp Neurol 2012;233(1):523–33.
[33] Kambayashi J, Liu Y, Sun B, Shakur Y, Yoshitake M, Czerwiec F. Cilostazol as a
unique antithrombotic agent. Curr Pharm Des 2003;9:2289–302.
[34] Farkas E, Luiten PG. Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and Alzheimer’s
disease. Prog Neurobiol 2001;64(6):575–611.
[35] Ruitenberg A, den Heijer T, Bakker SL, van Swieten JC, Koudstaal PJ, Hofman
A, et al. Cerebral hypoperfusion and clinical onset of dementia: the Rotterdam
study. Ann Neurol 2005;57:789–94.
[36] Omote Y, Deguchi K, Kono S, Liu N, Liu W, Kurata T, et al. Neurovascular protection of cilostazol in stroke-prone spontaneous hypertensive
rats associated with angiogenesis and pericyte proliferation. J Neurosci Res
2014;92(3):369–74.
[37] Ghofrani HA, Osterloh IH, Grimminger F. Sildenaﬁl: from angina to erectile
dysfunction to pulmonary hypertension and beyond. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2006;5(8):689–702.
[38] Zhang L, Zhang RL, Wang Y, Zhang C, Zhang ZG, Meng H, et al. Functional
recovery in aged and young rats after embolic stroke: treatment with a phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor. Stroke 2005;36(4):847–52.
[39] Royl G, Balkaya M, Lehmann S, Lehnardt S, Stohlmann K, Lindauer U, et al.
Effects of the PDE5-inhibitor vardenaﬁl in a mouse stroke model. Brain Res
2009;1265:148–57.
[40] Kukreja RC, Salloum F, Das A, Ockaili R, Yin C, Bremer YA, et al. Pharmacological
preconditioning with sildenaﬁl: basic mechanisms and clinical implications.
Vasc Pharmacol 2005;42:219–32.

