Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 469–475
© 2015 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/15 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Systemically administered brain-targeted nanoparticles
transport peptides across the blood–brain barrier and
provide neuroprotection
Muge Yemisci1,5, Secil Caban2,5, Yasemin Gursoy-Ozdemir1, Sevda Lule1, Ramon Novoa-Carballal3, Ricardo Riguera3,
Eduardo Fernandez-Megia3, Karine Andrieux4, Partick Couvreur4, Yilmaz Capan2 and Turgay Dalkara1
Although growth factors and anti-apoptotic peptides have been shown to be neuroprotective in stroke models, translation of these
experimental ﬁndings to clinic is hampered by limited penetration of peptides to the brain. Here, we show that a large peptide like
the basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF) and a small peptide inhibitor of caspase-3 (z-DEVD-FMK) can effectively be transported to
the brain after systemic administration by incorporating these peptides to brain-targeted nanoparticles (NPs). Chitosan NPs were
loaded with peptides and then functionalized by conjugating with antibodies directed against the transferrin receptor-1 on brain
endothelia to induce receptor-mediated transcytosis across the blood–brain barrier (BBB). Pre-ischemic systemic administration of
bFGF- or z-DEVD-FMK-loaded NPs signiﬁcantly decreased the infarct volume after 2-hour middle cerebral artery occlusion and
22-hour reperfusion in mice. Co-administration of bFGF- or z-DEVD-FMK-loaded NPs reduced the infarct volume further and
provided a 3-hour therapeutic window. bFGF-loaded NPs were histologically detected in the brain parenchyma and also restored
ischemia-induced Akt dephosphorylation. The neuroprotection was not observed when receptor-mediated transcytosis was
inhibited with imatinib or when bFGF-loaded NPs were not conjugated with the targeting antibody, which enables them to cross
the BBB. Nanoparticles targeted to brain are promising drug carriers to transport large as well as small BBB-impermeable
therapeutics for neuroprotection against stroke.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 469–475; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.220; published online 10 December 2014
Keywords: cerebrovascular disease/stroke; caspases; growth factors/cytokines; nanoparticles; neuroprotection

INTRODUCTION
Recent research has disclosed that cell death in acute as well as
chronic neurodegenerative diseases involves common mechanisms such as caspase activation.1–5 Therefore, inhibitors of
caspases (e.g., benzyloxycarbonyl-Asp(OMe)-Glu(OMe)-Val-Asp
(OMe)-ﬂuoromethylketone (z-DEVD-FMK)) appear to be attractive
therapeutic targets for a wide range of neurologic diseases
including stroke.6–8 Unfortunately, most of the inhibitor agents are
small peptides that cannot cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB).
However, growth factors (e.g., basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
(bFGF)) suppress cell death by acting at several points on death
pathways and, additionally, promote regeneration.9–11 These
features make them promising agents for treatment of stroke
and other neurodegenerative diseases. Unfortunately, these large
peptides too cannot penetrate the brain tissue when systemically
administrated. Although it has been proposed that opening of the
BBB after ischemia could allow large molecules such as bFGF to
enter the brain, recent studies examining the BBB leakage
topographically have shown that early leakage is only seen in

the deeply ischemic core areas but not in the potentially
salvageable penumbra.12–14
Promoting cell survival while inhibiting death effectors is a
potentially promising neuroprotective approach that may provide
additive synergy between these two groups of drugs. Indeed, Ma
et al15 demonstrated that both z-DEVD-FMK and bFGF could
reduce infarct size when given intracerebroventricularly and that
their combined administration had a synergistic effect; not only
the infarct reduction was greater but also the therapeutic time
window was prolonged compared with their individual use.
Therefore, the development of an effective brain delivery system
for peptides is needed to translate these promising experimental
achievements to clinic.
Brain-targeted nanoparticles (NPs) can transport large amounts
of BBB-impermeable agents across the BBB on systemic administration.16,17 We previously demonstrated that chitosan NPs loaded
with z-DEVD-FMK and conjugated with antitransferrin receptor-1
monoclonal antibody (TfRMAb) rapidly crossed the BBB upon
systemic administration to mice by way of transferrin receptor-

1
Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neurological Sciences and Psychiatry, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey; 2Department of Pharmaceutical
Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey; 3Department of Organic Chemistry and Center for Research in Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Materials (CIQUS), University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain and 4Institut Galien Paris-Sud UMR CNRS 8612, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of ParisSud XI, Chátenay-Malabry, France. Correspondence: Professor Dr T Dalkara, Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neurological Sciences and Psychiatry,
Hacettepe University Hospitals, Ankara 06100 Turkey.
E-mail: tdalkara@hacettepe.edu.tr
5
These authors contributed equally to this work and therefore share the ﬁrst authorship.
Turgay Dalkara's work is supported by the Turkish Academy of Sciences. This study is supported by The Scientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK, Project
Number: 109S017).
Received 22 August 2014; revised 7 November 2014; accepted 11 November 2014; published online 10 December 2014

A brain-targeted nanomedicine for stroke treatment
M Yemisci et al

470
mediated transcytosis and provided neuroprotection against focal
cerebral ischemia.18 However, loading large peptides such as bFGF
to NPs and their transport to the brain in an active form and
sufﬁcient concentrations remained a challenge. In the present
study, we have ﬁrst developed the conditions to load bFGF to
chitosan NPs and then showed that they reduced ischemic injury
on systemic administration. Next, we investigated if we could
obtain an additive protective activity by combined administration
of z-DEVD-FMK and bFGF-loaded NPs and whether this approach
could provide a prolonged therapeutic window. We have also
demonstrated activation of the downstream pathways in bFGF
signaling to conﬁrm that bFGF was transported in sufﬁcient
concentrations similar to the inhibition of caspase-3 activity with
z-DEVD-FMK-loaded NPs as we previously showed.18 Finally, we
veriﬁed that neuroprotection was mediated by transcytosis of
peptide-loaded NPs across the endothelium by inhibiting
transcytosis with imatinib.19 Importantly, the targeted brain
delivery of bFGF-loaded NPs provided not only neuroprotection
but also ~ 300 times reduction in the amount of the peptide
administered to the mouse compared with the systemic administration of plain bFGF, offering a great advantage to reduce
systemic adverse effects.20
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation and characterization of the TfRMAb-conjugated or unconjugated chitosan NPs and evaluation of z-DEVD-FMK and bFGF release from
them are given elsewhere.11 Brieﬂy, NPs were prepared by loading either
peptide to chitosan–polyethyleneglycol–biotin graft polymers in a process
aided by reticulation with pentasodium tripolyphosphate. Polyethyleneglycol chains were added to the NP surface to reduce clearance by the
reticuloendothelial system, whereas biotin was used to conjugate
streptavidinylated TfRMAb by way of streptavidin–biotin binding. These
procedures yielded NPs in sizes of 715 ± 32 nm and 747 ± 42 nm when
z-DEVD-FMK or bFGF were loaded, respectively.
The experiments were performed on 75 Swiss albino, male mice (25–
30 g). The study protocol was approved by the Hacettepe University
Animal Experiments Local Ethics Committee (2008/78-1). Focal cerebral
ischemia was induced with the intraluminal ﬁlament middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAo) method as described previously.21 Brieﬂy, animals were
anesthetized with 2% isoﬂurane and maintained on 1.5% isoﬂurane and
30% oxygen. After ligating the right common carotid and external carotid
arteries, a nylon ﬁlament (8-0) inserted into the common carotid artery was
advanced to the origin of MCA. The distal 3 mm of ﬁlaments was coated
with silicone resin/hardener mixture. For reperfusion, the ﬁlament was
withdrawn. The regional cerebral blood ﬂow in ischemic area was
measured by laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry. Rectal temperature was maintained
at 37.0°C ± 0.5°C with a homeothermic blanket. Systolic blood pressure was
measured noninvasively. Tissue oxygen saturation was monitored from

Table 1.

the paw by a pulse oximeter (V3304 Tabletop Pulse Oximeter; Surgivet,
Waukesha, WI, USA).
Seven groups of mice were subjected to 2 hours proximal MCAo and
22 hours reperfusion. Animals were randomly allocated to study groups in
blocks. Fifteen years of experience of our lab shows that this stroke
model in Swiss albino mice results in an infarct volume of 50 ± 6 mm3
(mean ± s.d.). Based on a previous study15 demonstrating neuroprotection
by intracerebroventricular administration of caspase inhibitors and bFGF
against 2 hours MCA occlusion in mice, we anticipated a decrease in infarct
size by at least 20% in our model. Accordingly, sample size calculation
indicated that six animals were required per group for 80% power and an α
of 0.05. The control group received an equal mixture of nonfunctionalized
(TfRMAb-free) NPs loaded with z-DEVD-FMK (240 ng) or bFGF (17 ng).
Treatment groups received functionalized (TfRMAb-conjugated) NPs
loaded with z-DEVD-FMK (240 ng) or bFGF (17 ng) or an equal mixture of
both. Nanoparticles were administered just before inducing ischemia in
these groups. The combined treatment was given to another group
3 hours post-ischemia. Nanoparticles were administered intraperitoneally
in 0.1 mL ultrapure water in the above groups. To compare the efﬁcacy
of intravenous and intraperitoneal administrations, another group was
treated intravenously with bFGF-loaded NPs in 0.1 mL ultrapure water preischemia. Finally, mice treated with imatinib (150 mg/kg twice a day for
2 days) before the day of the MCAo were administered functionalized
bFGF-loaded NPs (intraperitoneally) pre-ischemia. Details of the groups
and treatments are given in Table 1.
Motor functions were scored as described previously.22 Twenty-two
hours after reperfusion, before sacriﬁce, clinical motor functions were
assessed and scored in each animal as: grade 0: no observable motor
deﬁcit (normal); grade I: failure to extend left forepaw on lifting the whole
body by the tail (mild); grade II: circling to the contralateral side
(moderate); and grade III: leaning to the contralateral side at rest or no
spontaneous motor activity (severe). One of the two evaluators was
masked about the study groups and only the values agreed on by both
investigators were analyzed.
Mice were then anesthetized with a lethal dose of chloral hydrate
(1 g/kg, intraperitoneally), transcardially perfused with 100 mL of heparinized saline (10 IU/mL) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde and then
decapitated. Brains were stored in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours, after
which 2-mm thick ﬁve brain slabs were serially cut in coronal plane and
embedded in parafﬁn. Five μm-thick sections were obtained from the
posterior surface of each slab and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. To
calculate the infarct volume, the boundary of infarct area, characterized by
reduced eosin staining on hematoxylin and eosin-stained coronal sections
under light microscopy, was outlined with image analysis software (ImageJ
1.44o, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). The size of
infarcted area in each section was calculated by subtracting the
noninfarcted region in the ischemic hemisphere from the total surface
area of the contralateral hemisphere. The infarct volume was then
calculated by multiplying each sequential infarct area by the distance
between sections (2 mm) and by 5 (the number of sections from each
brain).

Experimental groups

Groups

Administration time and route

Treatmenta

(1) TfRMAb-free, control

Pre-ischemia, intraperitoneally

(2) z-DEVD
(3) bFGF
(4) bFGF and z-DEVD pre

Pre-ischemia, intraperitoneally
Pre-ischemia, intraperitoneally
Pre-ischemia, intraperitoneally

(5) bFGF and z-DEVD post

3 hours post-ischemia, intraperitoneally

(6) bFGF, intravenously
(7) bFGF + imatinib

Pre-ischemia, intravenously
Imatinib; 150 mg/kg intraperitoneally twice per day for
2 days before the experiment
NPs; pre-ischemia, intraperitoneally

Equal mixture of TfRMAb-free NPs loaded with
z-DEVD-FMK or bFGF
TfRMAb-conjugated NPs loaded with z-DEVD-FMK
TfRMAb-conjugated NPs loaded with bFGF
Equal mixture of TfRMAb-conjugated NPs loaded with
z-DEVD-FMK or bFGF
Equal mixture of TfRMAb-conjugated NPs loaded with
z-DEVD-FMK or bFGF
TfRMAb-conjugated NPs loaded with bFGF
TfRMAb-conjugated NPs loaded with bFGF

bFGF, basic ﬁbroblast growth factor; NP, nanoparticle; TfRMAb, anti-transferrin receptor-1 monoclonal antibody; z-DEVD-FMK, benzyloxycarbonyl-Asp(OMe)Glu(OMe)-Val-Asp(OMe)-ﬂuoromethylketone. Groups consist of six mice except groups 4 and 7 (n = 5 in each). az-DEVD-FMK (240 ng) or basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor (17 ng) loaded nanoparticles were administered in 0.1 mL ultrapure water.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 469 – 475

© 2015 ISCBFM

A brain-targeted nanomedicine for stroke treatment
M Yemisci et al

471
In another set of animals, brains were examined to illustrate the NPs
penetrated into parenchyma. Ten naïve mice were given functionalized
bFGF-loaded NPs (intraperitoneally or intravenously) 30 minutes (n = 2),
1 hour (n = 2), and 3 hours (n = 6) before sacriﬁce. Mice administered
nonfunctionalized bFGF-loaded NPs served as controls (n = 3). NPs were
also searched in brain sections of four mice subjected to 2 hours ischemia
and 1 hour reperfusion, and received functionalized (n = 2) or nonfunctionalized (n = 2) bFGF-loaded NPs. Two mice given the vehicle of NP
suspensions (0.1 mL ultrapure water, intraperitoneally) served as sham
controls. Nanoparticles in sections were detected by either labeling free
biotin molecules on the NP surface with streptavidin–horseradish
peroxidase or immunolabeling against the human bFGF loaded to NPs.
For conjugating streptavidin to biotin molecules decorating the NP
surface, 4 to 5 μm-thick coronal sections were prepared from the parafﬁnembedded blocks. Sections were deparafﬁnized at 60°C overnight and
then in xylene for 1 hour. Sections were hydrated in graded alcohol
solutions, washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 10 min, and then
treated with streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase complex (Reagent C of
Acu-Stain Mouse+Rabbit HRP Kit, Genemed Biotechnologies, San Francisco, CA, USA) for 1 hour at room temperature. After three 10-minute
washes with PBS, sections were treated with ﬁltered diaminobenzidine
(Genemed Biotechnologies) for 1 hour at room temperature. Sections were
cover-slipped with Hoechst 33258 after three 10-minute washes with PBS.
For immunolabeling, parafﬁn-embedded 4 to 5 μm-thick sections were
deparafﬁnized and hydrated in xylol and graded alcohol solutions.
Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxidase solution. Antigen retrieval was performed with 10 mmol/L citrate
buffer (pH = 6) in a pressure cooker for 20 minutes. The sections were then
rinsed with PBS (pH 7.4) at room temperature and nonspeciﬁc binding was
blocked by using 3% bovine serum albumin (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) in
PBS for 20 minutes. Next, the sections were incubated with antihumanFGF-2/basic FGF polyclonal antibody (Millipore, Upstate, Billerica, MA, USA;
1:100 in PBS) at room temperature for 1 hour. Immunodetection of bFGF
was performed using the conventional streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase technique (Dako cytomation kit, Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA). Filtered
diaminobenzidine (Sigma) was used as a chromogen. Negative controls
were carried out by omitting the primary antibody.
In another set of animals, brain samples of the MCA area from mice
subjected to 2 hours of ischemia and 22 hours of reperfusion and received
(intravenously) either functionalized NPs (n = 6) or nonfunctionalized NPs
loaded with bFGF (n = 4) as well as from sham-operated naïve mice (n = 4)
were used for the blotting procedure. Samples obtained by wedge
resection of the MCA area were placed on ice and lysed in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.6), 150 mM NaCl,
1% Nonidet P-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, and 0.1% sodium dodecyl
sulfate) with protease (Sigma) and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma) by using
a ultrasonic homogenizer (Bandelin Sonopuls, Berlin, Germany). The lysates
were centrifuged at 14,000 r.p.m. for 15 minutes at 4°C. The supernatants
were collected and protein concentrations of the samples were
determined by Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR, USA).
Equal amounts of protein were loaded to sodium dodecyl sulfatepolyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (4% to 12%; Invitrogen) and subsequently transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes (Invitrogen)
by iBlot dry blotting system (Invitrogen). Nonspeciﬁc protein binding
was blocked by incubating the polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes in 3%
bovine serum albumin (Sigma) in Tris buffered saline with Tween 20 for
1 hour at 4 °C, and then the membranes were incubated with antirabbit
phospho-Akt (Ser473) antibody (1:1,000, Cell Signaling Technology,
Danvers, MA, USA) and antirabbit Akt antibody (1:1,000, Cell
Signaling Technology) overnight at 4 °C. Next day, after washing with Tris
buffered saline with Tween 20, the membranes were incubated with
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit immunoglobulin-G secondary antibody (1:3000, Cell Signaling Technology) for 1 hour at room
temperature. The protein bands were visualized by chemiluminescence
(Super Signal West-Femto; Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Images were captured
by Kodak 4000 MM image station (Kodak, Japan). ImageJ was used for data
analysis.

Statistical Analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. Blood pressure, regional cerebral
blood ﬂow, tissue oxygen saturation, motor function scores, infarct
volumes, and p-Akt/Akt ratios of groups were compared with Kruskal–
Wallis test. Statistically signiﬁcant data were further analyzed with Mann–
Whitney U-test. The infarct volumes (parametric values) were correlated
© 2015 ISCBFM

with the neurologic deﬁcit scores (nonparametric values) by using
Spearman's test. A P value of o0.05 was regarded as statistically
signiﬁcant. P values were corrected for multiple comparisons.

RESULTS
Systemically Administered Peptide-Loaded Nanoparticles Provide
Neuroprotection
For neuroprotection study, mice were randomly allocated to seven
groups of six animals to avoid any selection bias. The mean (± s.e.
m.) infarct volume of the control group receiving nonfunctionalized NPs loaded with an equal mixture of bFGF or z-DEVD-FMK,
which can release bFGF and z-DEVD-FMK to the plasma but are
unable to cross BBB, was 51 ±1 mm3 after 2 hours of MCAo and
22 hours of reperfusion (Figure 1A). In contrast, functionalized
bFGF-loaded NPs signiﬁcantly decreased the infarct volume when
administered either intravenously (37 ± 3 mm3) or intraperitoneally (33 ± 1 mm3) (Figures 1A and 1C). z-DEVD-FMK-loaded,
functionalized NPs (intraperitoneally) also reduced the infarct size
(37 ± 3 mm3) similarly to when they were administered intravenously, as previously reported.18 Administration of an equal
mixture of bFGF- or z-DEVD-FMK-loaded, functionalized NPs
further reduced the infarct volume to 24 ± 2 mm3 (n = 5, one
animal from this group was excluded because we detected
ischemic changes also in the contralateral hemisphere). To test if
the neuroprotection observed with the pre-ischemic treatments
above might have clinical signiﬁcance, an equal mixture of bFGFand z-DEVD-FMK-loaded NPs was administered 3 hours after
stroke (1 hour after reperfusion), which also signiﬁcantly reduced
the infarct volume to 34 ± 2 mm3. Treatments with NPs improved
motor function deﬁcit scores parallel to the reductions in infarct
size although the decreases in deﬁcit scores were less striking
possibly because some sensorimotor ﬁbers ascending to or
descending from the recovered cortex could not escape damage
in the ischemic subcortical area (Figure 1B). However, we found a
moderate but statistically signiﬁcant correlation (r = 0.59, P = 0.001,
n = 29) between the infarct volumes and the neurologic deﬁcit
scores.
To conﬁrm that the neuroprotection provided by NPs is
mediated by peptides transported into brain parenchyma, we
treated another group of mice with imatinib, which inhibits the
receptor-mediated endothelial transcytosis, 2 days before administering NPs.19 Imatinib treatment suppressed the neuroprotective
effect of bFGF-loaded functionalized NPs; the infarct volume of
this group (49 ± 2 mm3, n = 5, one mouse allocated to this group
died during surgery) was not signiﬁcantly different than the
control group receiving nonfunctionalized NPs (Figure 1D). These
mice slightly lost weight (3 ± 0 g in 2 days); however, we did not
detect any histological abnormalities in brain endothelia or other
vascular structures or in parenchyma in nonischemic hemispheres
by light microscopy as reported.23
Since no signiﬁcant differences in regional cerebral blood ﬂow
changes, arterial blood pressure, and tissue oxygen saturation
were observed between groups during ischemia (Table 2), we
attributed the reduction in infarct volume and motor function to
neuroprotective action of the brain-delivered peptides but not to
any potential hemodynamic or systemic changes induced by
circulating NPs. Moreover, to verify that effective concentrations
of bFGF in the parenchyma were achieved, we measured the
phosphorylation level of Akt (a downstream step in bFGF
signaling) in wedge-shaped ischemic MCA territory specimens in
14 mice. p-Akt/Akt ratio signiﬁcantly dropped to 39% ± 4% in mice
subjected to 2 hours of ischemia and 22 hours of reperfusion and
treated with nonfunctionalized NPs (n = 4) compared with
66% ± 3% in nonischemic, sham-operated mice brains (n = 4,
P o0.05). Treatment with functionalized NPs restored the p-Akt/
Akt ratio in ischemic brain specimens near to sham-operated brain
levels (60% ± 9%, n = 6, P = 0.61; Figure 2). Of note, effective
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 469 – 475

A brain-targeted nanomedicine for stroke treatment
M Yemisci et al

472

Figure 1. The infarct volumes and motor function deﬁcit scores of the control and treatment groups. Data are presented as mean ± s.e.m. 'o'
denotes individual values. (A) After 2 hours of ischemia and 22 hours of reperfusion, infarct volumes of the groups receiving functionalized
nanoparticles (NPs) loaded with benzyloxycarbonyl-Asp(OMe)-Glu(OMe)-Val-Asp(OMe)-ﬂuoromethylketone (z-DEVD-FMK), basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor (bFGF), or an equal mixture of bFGF and z-DEVD-FMK decreased signiﬁcantly compared with the group receiving
nonfunctionalized NPs loaded with an equal mixture of bFGF and z-DEVD-FMK (anti-transferrin receptor-1 monoclonal antibody (TfRMAb)
free, control). Combined treatment was more effective and had a 3-hour therapeutic window (last 2 columns, respectively). (B) Changes in
motor function scores paralleled the infarct volume changes. (C) Intraperitoneally or intravenously administration of functionalized NPs
loaded with bFGF was equally effective in decreasing the infarct volume. (D) When the endothelial transcytosis was inhibited with imatinib
treatment, no neuroprotection was obtained with bFGF-loaded functionalized NPs. *P o0.05 compared with the TfRMAb-free group. yP o0.05
compared with the bFGF or Z-DEVD-FMK-treated groups. The bFGF-NP (intraperitoneally) group in C and TfRMAb-free group in D were
reproduced from the data illustrated in A for comparison.

Table 2.

Physiologic parameters of groups

Groups
TfRMAb-free, control
z-DEVD
bFGF
bFGF and z-DEVD (pre-ischemia)
bFGF and z-DEVD (3 hours post-ischemia)
bFGF (intravenously)
bFGF+imatinib

Blood pressure (mm Hg)a

rCBF during ischemia (%)

Tissue oxygen saturation (%)

93 ± 7 (n = 4)
95 ± 4 (n = 3)
90 ± 5 (n = 5)
83 ± 10 (n = 4)
94 ± 5 (n = 3)
98 ± 8 (n = 5)
94 ± 3 (n = 3)

29 ± 3
27 ± 2
28 ± 3
30 ± 3
25 ± 4
26 ± 3
28 ± 4

96 ± 1
94 ± 2
97 ± 1
96 ± 2
95 ± 3
96 ± 2
96 ± 1

bFGF, basic ﬁbroblast growth factor; rCBF, regional cerebral blood ﬂow; TfRMAb, anti-transferrin receptor-1 monoclonal antibody; z-DEVD, benzyloxycarbonylAsp(OMe)-Glu(OMe)-Val-Asp(OMe)-ﬂuoromethylketone. Values are given as mean ± s.e.m. Group means were not signiﬁcantly different (P40.05). aBlood
pressure could not be measured in some mice for technical reasons. n = 5–6 for rCBF and tissue oxygen saturation values. Physiologic parameters were
recorded during the ﬁrst 30 minutes of ischemia before terminating anesthesia.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 469 – 475

© 2015 ISCBFM

A brain-targeted nanomedicine for stroke treatment
M Yemisci et al

473
visual screening. In contrast, we did not observe any NPs in brain
parenchyma (including the ischemic hemisphere) of the mice
given nonfunctionalized NPs, excluding the possibility that NPs
could penetrate the brain through the ischemia-damaged BBB in
accordance with the neuroprotection and biochemistry data.
NPs had a clearly distinguishable spherical shape ( o1 μm) when
visualized with the streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase technique
exploiting the presence of free biotin molecules on the NP surface
(Figure 3A). The speciﬁcity of this labeling was further conﬁrmed
by immunostaining of bFGF peptides loaded to the NPs with antibFGF antibodies (Figure 3C). There was no evidence of inﬂammation or astrocyte end-feet swelling in the nonischemic brain
parenchyma around the NPs, conforming with the idea that
chitosan is a biocompatible polymer and does not induce tissue
toxicity at microscopic level.24

Figure 2. p-Akt/Akt western blots of the middle cerebral artery
(MCA) area of mice subjected to 2 hours of ischemia and 22 hours of
reperfusion. Akt phosphorylation (p-Akt/Akt ratio) decreased in the
ischemic MCA area of the group treated with nonfunctionalized
nanoparticles (NPs) (anti-transferrin receptor-1 monoclonal antibody
(TfRMAb) free). Treatment with functionalized NPs (TfRMAb+)
restored the p-Akt/Akt ratio close to the sham-operated brain levels.
*, P = 0.029 and #, P = 0.61 compared to the sham-operated group.
The representative samples illustrated in A derived from the same
blot. The samples from three groups (B) were loaded to two gels
and processed in parallel.

inhibition of caspase-3 activity in ischemic mouse brain with
z-DEVD-FMK-loaded NPs given at the same dose used in the
present study had previously been shown.18
Detection of Nanoparticles in Brain Parenchyma
Investigators masked to the treatment evaluated the brain
sections to detect NPs in parenchyma in 19 mice (Figure 3). NPs
were scattered throughout the brain parenchyma and as the mice
were thoroughly perfused before sacriﬁce none was found inside
vessel lumens except a few adhered to the endothelium.
Numerous parenchymal NPs were detected 30 minutes and 1 hour
after administration, decreasing by 3 hours. This observation
conforms to the time proﬁle of NP penetrance to the brain
parenchyma by way of transferrin receptor-mediated transcytosis
as detected with in vivo brain imaging in intact mice under
anesthesia.18 Since NPs could unambiguously be detected only at
× 1,500 magniﬁcation, quantiﬁcation of their distribution across
5 μm-thick sections was not feasible and, hence, was limited
by sampling error; nevertheless, NPs appeared to be similarly
distributed in ischemic as well as nonischemic hemispheres with
© 2015 ISCBFM

DISCUSSION
In this study, we demonstrated that (1) a relatively large peptide
like bFGF (17.2 kDa) can be successfully encapsulated into
chitosan NPs and targeted to the brain as well as z-DEVD-FMK,
a small peptide consisting of four amino acids; (2) systemically
administered NPs can transport bFGF to the brain rapidly,
efﬁciently, and importantly in an active form, which provides
signiﬁcant neuroprotection against stroke induced by 2 hours of
MCAo; (3) this effect can totally be suppressed by inhibition of
transcytosis across the BBB; (4) combined treatment with z-DEVDFMK- and bFGF-loaded NPs provides additive neuroprotective
effect, and is effective even when administered 3 hours postischemia.
The active substances encapsulated to NPs were composed of
amino acids. Therefore, during preparation of NPs, we chose mild
chemical conditions to preserve their three-dimensional structures
and functional groups.25 Indeed, both peptides were found to be
biologically active in the brain after systemic administration (see
also ref. 18). Systemically administered bFGF-loaded NPs showed
neuroprotection only when they were conjugated with antibodies
against the TfR-1 located on the brain vascular endothelium.
This excludes the possibilities that bFGF released from the NPs
to circulation or direct access of bFGF-loaded NPs to the brain
through the ischemia-damaged BBB may have provided neuroprotection and, strongly suggests that transcytosis of NPs
mediated by the TfR-1 is the main mechanism transporting bFGF
into the brain parenchyma. This idea was further supported by
complete suppression of the neuroprotection after inhibiting
endothelial transcytosis with imatinib.19,26 Despite unambiguous
microscopic and pharmacological (i.e., neuroprotection) evidence
provided by previous studies,18,26 we did not exclude the possibility that the infarct sparing effect might have been secondary
to an endothelial action of the peptides (e.g., as proposed
for systemically administrated bFGF27). The present study with
imatinib, which allows penetration into the endothelium but
disrupts transcytosis by inhibiting the exocytosis from the endothelium to parenchyma, convincingly shows that, for neuroprotection, NPs must be exocytosed from the endothelium to the
brain parenchyma and that an endothelial action alone is not
sufﬁcient.19 We should emphasize that the total amount of bFGF
that we administered to a mouse with NPs is too small (680 ng/kg)
compared with the dose (200 μg/kg, intravenously) used in studies
reporting neuroprotection with systemically administered bFGF
to the mouse,20 supporting the idea that rather than bFGF spilled
to plasma from NPs bFGF transported to the brain provides
neuroprotection, possibly by achieving parenchymal concentrations comparable to that obtained with intracerebroventricular
injection of 30 ng of bFGF in the study by Ma et al.15 Rich and
selective expression of TfR-1 on brain vasculature unlike the TfR2
subtype expressed in other tissues may have facilitated preferential targeting of TfRMAb-conjugated NPs to the brain. Therefore,
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 469 – 475

A brain-targeted nanomedicine for stroke treatment
M Yemisci et al

474

Figure 3. Numerous nanoparticles (NPs) were detected in the brain (cortex) parenchyma 1 hour after systemic administration of the
functionalized NPs. NPs were prepared by loading peptides (here, basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF)) to chitosan–polyethyleneglycol–biotin
graft polymers and were functionalized by conjugating streptavidinylated antitransferrin receptor-1 monoclonal antibody with streptavidin–
biotin binding (A). The transmission electron micrograph in B illustrates a group of NPs in suspension; scale bar, 2 μm. (C) NPs in brain tissue
were detected by binding streptavidin–horseradish peroxidase complex to free biotin molecules on the NP surface (NPs). (D) Human bFGF
molecules on the surface of NPs were also visualized with anti-human bFGF antibody (arrows). Nonfunctionalized NPs did not penetrate to
parenchyma (E, F). Anti-human bFGF antibody has cross reactivity to the mouse bFGF, hence, labeled the cortical cells, especially their nuclei,
and caused a light background staining (D, F). In C and E, bright ﬁeld images illustrating diaminobenzidine (DAB) labeling were superimposed
with ﬂuorescent images exhibiting Hoechst 33258-labeled nuclei of the same area to show cells nearby NPs. Scale bars, 20 μm.

targeted delivery of bFGF to the brain not only provides
neuroprotection but also reduces the possibility of systemic side
effects by reducing the amount of bFGF administered ~ 300 times.
Finally, we should note that the administration of NPs either
before inducing ischemia when circulation was still intact or
1 hour after reperfusion when the ischemic tissue was at least
partly reperfused must have allowed distribution and transport of
NPs to all MCA territory. The collateral blood ﬂow to the penumbra
must have further sustained the delivery during 2 hours of MCA
occlusion.
Earlier work from our group demonstrated that chitosan NPs
loaded with small peptides were rapidly transported into the
brain when they were functionalized with TfRMAb.18,26 The neuroprotection observed and the activation of the brain bFGF–p-Akt
pathway in the present study further illustrate that they can
efﬁciently carry large peptides to the brain as well. This ﬁnding is
important from a technological viewpoint because it shows that
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 469 – 475

encapsulating large molecules does not unfavorably modify NP
transport kinetics and that the preparation procedures used do
not lead to loss of the peptide activity, which is extremely
vulnerable to minor alterations in the three-dimensional structure
or to modiﬁcations by small molecules. Importantly, the peptides
were also neuroprotective when co-administered 3 hours after
ischemia onset. This conforms to the 3-hour therapeutic window
detected after their intracerebroventricular co-administration,15
and suggests that a signiﬁcant amount of the loaded peptide
must have been released from NPs in this time window. It is
likely that, once inside the brain parenchyma, peptides are
rapidly released from the NPs due to degradation of chitosan
by enzymatically active forms of human chitinases such as the
acidic mammalian chitinase, the di-N-acetylchitobiase, and chitotriosidase.24 Supporting this, histologically detectable NPs in
parenchyma were decreased 3 hours after administration. The
upper limit of the therapeutic time window remains to be
© 2015 ISCBFM

A brain-targeted nanomedicine for stroke treatment
M Yemisci et al

475
detected by future studies, as the main aim of the present
extensive study was to replicate the neuroprotection and synergy
obtained with intracerebroventricular injection of bFGF and
z-DEVD-FMK 3 hours post-ischemia with systemically administered
NPs. The present study also shows that co-administration of NPs
loaded with different agents is a viable strategy to obtain additive
effects and, technically, is a more practical approach than
incorporating multiple agents into the same NP. Therefore, NPs
loaded with several other protease inhibitors and survival factors
shown to be neuroprotective in stroke models can be combined
for more effective suppression of cell death mechanisms without
inducing systemic toxicity.28
In conclusion, chitosan NPs targeted to the brain appear to be
promising drug carriers to transport large as well as small BBBimpermeable therapeutic agents. They are easy to prepare, rapidly
transported to the brain, readily release their content without loss
of activity, allow combination of different agents, and do not have
any gross toxicity. Therefore, these exciting ﬁndings warrant
further research to translate the developments to clinical
applications.
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

REFERENCES
1 Asahi M, Hoshimaru M, Uemura Y, Tokime T, Kojima M, Ohtsuka T et al. Expression
of interleukin-1 beta converting enzyme gene family and bcl-2 gene family in the
rat brain following permanent occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 1997; 17: 11–18.
2 Chen J, Nagayama T, Jin KL, Stetler RA, Zhu RL, Graham SH et al. Induction of
caspase-3-like protease may mediate delayed neuronal death in the hippocampus after transient cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci 1998; 18: 4914–4928.
3 Namura S, Zhu J, Fink K, Endres M, Srinivasan A, Tomaselli KJ et al. Activation and
cleavage of caspase-3 in apoptosis induced by experimental cerebral ischemia.
J Neurosci 1998; 18: 3659–3668.
4 Bredesen DE. Programmed cell death mechanisms in neurological disease.
Curr Mol Med 2008; 8: 173–186.
5 Dericioglu N, Soylemezoglu F, Gursoy-Ozdemir Y, Akalan N, Saygi S, Dalkara T.
Cell death and survival mechanisms are concomitantly active in the hippocampus
of patients with mesial temporal sclerosis. Neuroscience 2013; 237: 56–65.
6 Hara H, Friedlander RM, Gagliardini V, Ayata C, Fink K, Huang Z et al. Inhibition of
interleukin 1beta converting enzyme family proteases reduces ischemic and
excitotoxic neuronal damage. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1997; 94: 2007–2012.
7 Thornberry NA, Lazebnik Y. Caspases: enemies within. Science 1998; 281:
1312–1316.
8 Schulz JB. Caspases as treatment targets for neurodegenerative diseases. J Neurochem 1999; 73: S57–S57.
9 Datta SR, Brunet A, Greenberg ME. Cellular survival: A play in three akts. Genes Dev
1999; 13: 2905–2927.

© 2015 ISCBFM

10 Dawbarn D, Allen SJ. Neurotrophins and neurodegeneration. Neuropathol Appl
Neurobiol 2003; 29: 211–230.
11 Caban S, Capan Y, Couvreur P, Dalkara T. Preparation and characterization of
biocompatible chitosan nanoparticles for targeted brain delivery of peptides.
Methods Mol Biol 2012; 846: 321–332.
12 Taheri S, Candelario-Jalil E, Estrada EY, Rosenberg GA. Spatiotemporal correlations
between blood-brain barrier permeability and apparent diffusion coefﬁcient in a
rat model of ischemic stroke. PloS ONE 2009; 4: e6597.
13 Knowland D, Arac A, Sekiguchi KJ, Hsu M, Lutz SE, Perrino J et al. Stepwise
recruitment of transcellular and paracellular pathways underlies blood-brain
barrier breakdown in stroke. Neuron 2014; 82: 603–617.
14 Yemisci M, Gursoy-Ozdemir Y, Vural A, Can A, Topalkara K, Dalkara T. Pericyte
contraction induced by oxidative-nitrative stress impairs capillary reﬂow despite
successful opening of an occluded cerebral artery. Nat Med 2009; 15: 1031–1037.
15 Ma J, Qiu J, Hirt L, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA. Synergistic protective effect of
caspase inhibitors and bfgf against brain injury induced by transient focal
ischaemia. Br J Pharmacol 2001; 133: 345–350.
16 Kreuter J. Nanoparticulate systems for brain delivery of drugs. Adv Drug Deliv Rev
2001; 47: 65–81.
17 Nicolas J, Mura S, Brambilla D, Mackiewicz N, Couvreur P. Design, functionalization
strategies and biomedical applications of targeted biodegradable/biocompatible
polymer-based nanocarriers for drug delivery. Chem Soc Rev 2013; 42:
1147–1235.
18 Karatas H, Aktas Y, Gursoy-Ozdemir Y, Bodur E, Yemisci M, Caban S et al. A
nanomedicine transports a peptide caspase-3 inhibitor across the blood-brain
barrier and provides neuroprotection. J Neurosci 2009; 29: 13761–13769.
19 Armulik A, Genove G, Mae M, Nisancioglu MH, Wallgard E, Niaudet C et al.
Pericytes regulate the blood-brain barrier. Nature 2010; 468: 557–561.
20 Huang Z, Chen K, Huang PL, Finklestein SP, Moskowitz MA. bFGF ameliorates focal
ischemic injury by blood ﬂow-independent mechanisms in eNOS mutant mice.
Am J Physiol 1997; 272: H1401–H1405.
21 Gursoy-Ozdemir Y, Bolay H, Saribas O, Dalkara T. Role of endothelial nitric oxide
generation and peroxynitrite formation in reperfusion injury after focal cerebral
ischemia. Stroke 2000; 31: 1974–1980.
22 Huang Z, Huang PL, Panahian N, Dalkara T, Fishman MC, Moskowitz MA. Effects of
cerebral ischemia in mice deﬁcient in neuronal nitric oxide synthase. Science 1994;
265: 1883–1885.
23 Venalis P, Maurer B, Akhmetshina A, Busch N, Dees C, Sturzl M et al. Lack of
inhibitory effects of the anti-ﬁbrotic drug imatinib on endothelial cell functions
in vitro and in vivo. J Cell Mol Med 2009; 13: 4185–4191.
24 Kean T, Thanou M. Biodegradation, biodistribution and toxicity of chitosan.
Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2010; 62: 3–11.
25 Amidi M, Romeijn SG, Borchard G, Junginger HE, Hennink WE, Jiskoot W.
Preparation and characterization of protein-loaded n-trimethyl chitosan nanoparticles as nasal delivery system. J Control Release 2006; 111: 107–116.
26 Aktas Y, Yemisci M, Andrieux K, Gursoy RN, Alonso MJ, Fernandez-Megia E et al.
Development and brain delivery of chitosan-peg nanoparticles functionalized
with the monoclonal antibody OX26. Bioconjug Chem 2005; 16: 1503–1511.
27 Rosenblatt S, Irikura K, Caday CG, Finklestein SP, Moskowitz MA. Basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor dilates rat pial arterioles. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1994; 14: 70–74.
28 Kilinc M, Gursoy-Ozdemir Y, Gurer G, Erdener SE, Erdemli E, Can A et al. Lysosomal
rupture, necroapoptotic interactions and potential crosstalk between cysteine
proteases in neurons shortly after focal ischemia. Neurobiol Dis 2010; 40:
293–302.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 469 – 475

