Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92
DOI 10.1186/s13287-015-0078-1

RESEARCH

Open Access

Human adipose-derived stem cells partially
rescue the stroke syndromes by promoting spatial
learning and memory in mouse middle cerebral
artery occlusion model
Fei Zhou1†, Shane Gao2†, Lin Wang3†, Chenxi Sun2, Lu Chen2, Ping Yuan4, Haiyang Zhao5, Yi Yi1, Ying Qin2,
Zhiqiang Dong2, Limei Cao2, Haiyan Ren1, Liang Zhu2, Qiang Li1, Bing Lu2, Aibin Liang4, Guo-Tong Xu6,
Hongwen Zhu7,8, Zhengliang Gao9,10, Jie Ma3*, Jun Xu2* and Xu Chen1*

Abstract
Introduction: Growing evidence has brought stem cell therapy to the forefront as new promising approaches
towards stroke treatment. Of all candidate seeding cells, adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) are considered as one of
the most appropriate for stroke treatment. However, previous experimental data could not reach to an agreement on
the efficacy of ADSC transplantation for treating stroke in vivo as well as its mechanism which hinders their further
clinical translational application.
Methods: To explore their in vivo mechanism of hADSC administration on neurological injury, hADSC were labeled
with Enhanced Green Fluorescence Protein expressing FG12 lentivirus and injected into MCAO mouse infarct area by in
situ way. Neurological function was evaluated by Rogers Scaling System and their spatial learning and memory was
determined by Morris Test. 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride was carried out to compare the infarct area among
groups. Histoimmunostaining was used to track the injected hADSCs for their in vivo migration, transdifferentiation and
integration with the endogenous neuronal circuitry. To better address the underlying rescuing mechanism, qRT-PCR
was performed on neural markers of MBP, MAP2, GFAP, microglia marker of Iba1.
Results: It was found that hADSCs could promote both spatial learning and memory of MCAO mice. Co-localization of
GFP and MAP2 were found in the whole cortex with significantly (P<0.01) higher percentage at the contralateral cortex
compared with the ipsilateral cortex. Low percentage of GFP and GFAP co-localized cells were found at whole cortex.
Meanwhile, Iba1+ microglia and GFAP+ astrocyte cells were significantly (P<0.05) suppressed by hADSC injection.
Conclusions: hADSCs could transdifferentiate into neuron like cells (MAP2+) in vivo and probably used as seeding cells
for replacement based stem cell therapy of stroke. Also, significant immunomodulation was found. Meanwhile hADSCs
could significantly protect the endogenous neuron survival. This study demonstrated that hADSC intervention with
MCAO mice could apparently ameliorate stroke symptoms by direct cell replacement, enhanced immnunosuppression
and increasing the viability of endogenous neurons.

* Correspondence: majie365@hotmail.com; xunymc2000@yahoo.com;
cxwp65@163.com
†
Equal contributors
3
Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Xinhua Hospital of Shanghai
Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200092, China
2
East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200120, China
1
Neurology Department, Shanghai Eighth People’s Hospital Affiliated to
Jiangsu University, Shanghai 200233, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Zhou et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Introduction
Stroke is one of the most devastating diseases and most
survivors suffer persistent and severe neurologic deficits including motor, sensory, and cognitive dysfunctions. No
treatment for improving the outcome, other than i.v.
thrombolysis, has been shown to be effective in clinical
practice; however, the narrow therapeutic time window
makes thrombolysis treatment a possibility for only a small
percentage of patients [1]. Incipient protective therapies
have consistently failed as they have been directed towards
neural cells, whereas, after a stroke, not only neurons but
all components of the neurovascular unit are compromised
[2]. These problems represent the major challenges to be
overcome by stem cell-replacement therapy.
Several studies in preclinical stroke models have
shown that brain damage after stroke not only leads to
neuron loss but also to a dramatic decrease of brain
plasticity [3] and new therapeutic strategies should focus
not only on replenishing lost neurons and promoting endogenous neurogenesis but also on enhancing other related processes, such as gliagenesis, oligodendrogenesis,
remyelination, synaptic plasticity, axonal sprouting, and
angiogenesis in order to improve neurological function.
The presence of stem cells in different structures of the
organism suggests that these cells are involved in natural
cell-renewal and repair of tissues throughout the lifespan
of an individual; therefore, the administration of stem
cells seems to modulate these endogenous mechanisms
involved in brain plasticity [4]. In this sense, stem cells,
in particular mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), fulfill all
these requirements. These cells can be obtained from
various tissues and were originally described as adherent
cells with a fibroblast morphology and the capability of
differentiating into cells of mesodermal origin, such as
osteocytes, chondrocytes, and adipocytes [5]. They also
show the ability to differentiate into different embryonic
layers such as ectoderm and endoderm with excellent
self-renewal capacity [6]. Although being initially identified from bone marrow (BMSCs), MSCs have also been
successfully isolated from adipose tissue, pancreas, liver,
skeletal muscle, dermis, synovial membrane, trabecular
bone [7-9], umbilical cord blood [10], lung tissue [11], and
dental pulp and periodontal ligament [12]. Adiposederived stem cells (ADSCs) possess several advantages including abundance, easy accessibility, active self-renewal
with low senescence, being free from ethical debate and
low immunogenicity, compared with other mesenchymal
stem cells and may represent one of the most interesting
sources for cell-replacement therapy [13-16]. Comparing
the effects of intravenous administration of both BMSCs
and ADSCs for stroke therapy in middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) models, both demonstrated significant
therapeutic effects but ADSC treatment seems more
beneficial [17,18]. Lack of expression of MHC-II in

Page 2 of 13

ADSCs also advocates their allogeneic administration and
possibly allows ADSCs from healthy and younger donors
to be stored in biobanks for the treatment of stroke patients during the acute phase of the disease [4].
The functional outcome of allogeneic ADSC intervention
with neurological injury was mainly observed through biomedical studies. Most available reports have demonstrated
functional recovery after ADSC injection [17,19-22]. Despite
all these beneficial effects of ADSC therapy on stroke outcome, the mechanisms involved in this functional process
still remain elusive and should be studied in greater depth.
Previous studies have demonstrated that allogeneic
ADSCs can survive in brain parenchyma [23] and express characteristic markers of neurons and glial cells
(microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), respectively) when
injected into the lateral ventricle of the rat brain after
MCAO [21]. Another study has reported that the introduced exogenous ADSCs expressed endothelial markers
(von Willebrand factor (vWF) and endothelial barrier
antigen), but not neuronal or glial markers [22]. Nevertheless, the low number of donor cells found in the lesion area could suggest that the ADSCs suffer from
apoptotic death or autophagia in the weeks following
their administration. It is well-established that cell integration is not enough to explain the improvement in the
functional deficits. The beneficial effects of stem cell
therapy are probably also mediated by other important
mechanisms. In line with these observations, several
studies have reported that after intravenous administration, ADSCs were not yet fully implanted into the infarct
area [18,20], suggesting that it might not be necessary
for stem cells to migrate and graft into the lesion site in
order to obtain a positive functional recovery [24].
There is accumulating evidence suggesting that
ADSCs could secrete several trophic factors after poststroke administration, including brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [20], insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) [25], vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) [18], which could
be involved in the functional improvement of stroke
symptoms in animal models via the reduction in brain
injury-derived apoptosis and enhancement of the natural
repair response activated by brain injury. Therefore, the
secretion of trophic factors by ADSCs could play an important role in reducing cellular apoptosis incurred by
cerebral ischemic injury, partly by promoting the expression of Bcl-2, which participates in apoptotic signaling
after mitochondrial damage, and by inhibiting the expression of caspase-12, which mediates endoplasmic
reticulum stress-induced apoptosis [26]. Moreover,
ADSC administration decreased cell death [17,22,23] by
preventing nitric oxide release in response to cerebral ischemia [27].

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Other authors have analyzed the effects of administration
of the cell-free extract from ADSC culture in different injury models, such as oxidative stress and cerebral ischemia.
They reported that the cell free complex mixture itself is
capable of exerting a protective activity [19,28]. This protective role is observed under different stress conditions including in vitro models of cerebral infarct (oxygen and
glucose deprivation), and also in vivo models (transitory
and permanent focal cerebral ischemia and intra-cerebral
hemorrhage). More importantly, recent data also suggest
that direct communication might occur between the injured brain and administered cells. Furthermore, it has been
shown that oxidative stress stimulates the activation of p38
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and expression
of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2
(BMP2) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) in human ADSC cultured in vitro [29]. This result may indicate
that treatment with ADSCs can be considered a ‘living/
responding treatment’ that is capable of responding to and
modulating the secretion of specific trophic factors under
stress environments. In vitro study discovered that ADSCs
modulate the immune system through suppressing proliferation of stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and
inhibiting differentiation of monocyte-derived immature
dendritic cells. Moreover, in vitro cultures showed a higher
level of secretion of the cytokines that have been implicated
in the immunomodulatory modes of action of multipotent
stromal cells, such as IL-6 and transforming growth factor1 (TGF-1) [30,31]. In addition, ADSC has been shown to
attenuate the levels of IL-18, toll-like receptor (TLR)-4, and
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) [23]. However,
little is known about the immunomodulatory effects of
ADSC administration in vivo after stroke. These points are
surely relevant for recovery and should be analyzed in future research.
In all, previously published data did not reach an agreement on how ADSC works in vivo. Different animal
models, various ADSC delivery methods (intravenous delivery or in situ injection), different ADSC donors (allogeneic or autologous), tracing time (shorter or longer) and
ADSC intervention time window (acute or subacute) may
largely contribute to the treatment outcome as well as
their underlying mechanism. This study chose human
ADSCs (hADSCs) as the donor cells to treat a wild type
C57/BL6 derived stroke mouse model seven days after
surgery by an in situ injection method to observe their
therapeutic effects at the subacute phase. Immunogenicity,
immunomodulation and exogenous cell survival/integration were analyzed. The functional recovery was evaluated
by the Rogers Scale system and Morris Maze assay.

Methods
All animal experiments were performed according to protocols approved by the Ethical Committee of the Experimental

Page 3 of 13

Animal Center affiliated with the Medicine School of Tongji
University. The approval No. is TJLAC-014-012. hADSCs
were isolated from human adipose liposuction liquid, and
the processing and handling protocols were approved by the
Ethical Committee of the East Hospital Affiliated with
Tongji University. The committee director is Fu,Meng. The
Approval No. is 2015–045. The human adipose liposuction
liquid was obtained from the cosmetic plastic surgery hospital with a consent statement by the patients.
hADSC isolation, expansion and characterization

hADSCs were isolated from human fresh adipose liposuction liquid according to previously published methods
[13,16]. Flow activated cell sorting (FACS, Beckman
Coulter) was carried out to identify the CD surface antigen of the isolated hADSCs at passage 3 to 5 according to
published protocols [17,32]. Briefly, hADSCs cultured at
passage 3 to 5 were first collected by trypsin (0.25%) digestion, washed with flow wash buffer (1 × Dulbecco’s
phosphate-buffered saline, 0.5% BSA, and 0.1% sodium
azide), and blocked with wash buffer supplemented with
mouse immunoglobulin G (25 μg/ml) for 10 minutes on
ice. A total of 100 μl of this cell suspension (approximately
5 × 105cells) was aliquoted per tube. Antibodies conjugated with either tricolor fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC), phycoerythrin (PE), or allophycocyanin (APC)
were purchased including CD44-APC (Cat#47-0441-80,
eBioscience), CD29-FITC (Cat#11-0299-41, eBioscience),
CD105-PE (Cat#12-1057-41, eBioscience), CD73-FITC
(Cat#11-0739-42, eBioscience), CD34-FITC (Cat#110349-41, eBioscience), CD45-FITC (Cat#11-9459-41,
eBioscience). Matched isotype control combinations were
performed to identify the specific interaction of antigen
and antibody.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion mouse model

MCAO mouse was achieved through surgery on C57/
BL6 mice as previously described [17,24]. Briefly, six- to
eight-week old C57/BL6 mice were housed in a controlled SPF level environment (12 hour light/dark cycle
at 21C) with free access to water and standard chow
diet. Anesthesia was induced by intraperitoneal injection
of chloral hydrate (2%, w/v) at 0.15 ml/10 g body weight.
A small incision was made above the rhinal fissure to
expose and isolate the right common cerebral artery
(CCA) and the branch of the cerebral artery. The CCA
branch was permanently ligated just before its bifurcation into the frontal and parietal branches with a 9–0
suture. The external common carotid artery was then
permanently ligated at two sites and cut off at the middle of the two sites. The internal common carotid artery
was temporarily ligated. A breach was made between the
bifurcation and the ligation site on the middle cerebral
artery to let the embolus (Cat#2634-A4, Beijing Sunbio

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) infixed into the internal
common carotid artery reach to a depth of about 18 mm.
This occlusion was kept for 1.5 hours. Re-perfusion was
achieved by carefully taking out the embolus to avoid
bleeding. Then, the stitching and necessary sterilization
were done. Mice receiving surgery were evaluated for their
neurological function following the Rogers Scale score system [24,33]. The successful MCAO mice with a score between 2 and 3 were randomly grouped as the PBS control
group (MCAO-Ctrl-PBS) and the hADSC injection group
(MCAO-hADSC). To confirm the safety of the surgery, a
sham group (MCAO-Sham) which underwent blood vessel exposure without occlusion was also included as the
normal control.
hADSC labeling and stereotactic injection into MCAO
brain injury area

To trace exogenously introduced hADSCs in the MCAO
brain, enhanced GFP (EGFP) expressing lentivirus FG12
was packaged and infected into hADSCs before injection. hADSCs were observed 48 hours after infection
under a fluorescent microscope at a wavelength of 488
nm. A total of 80% to 90% percent of hADSCs labeled
with green fluorescence was regarded as successful infection. Then, EGFP-hADSCs were collected and adjusted to a final concentration of 1 × 109 cells/ml
suspended in PBS. An amount of 5 μl of this cell suspension was injected into the MCAO mouse brain injury
area through a glass micropipette and stereotaxic injector (KDS310, Muromachi-Kikai). Briefly, we injected
5 μl cell suspension from three directions within one
pole at the infarct lesion. This injection process took six
minutes. After injection, the syringe was kept in the
brain tissue for one minute to achieve good absorption.
In parallel, 5 μl of PBS was injected into the control
MCAO group of mice. For the sham group, nothing was
done.

Page 4 of 13

Mouse brain infarction area determined with TTC staining

TTC staining was performed as previously described
[34]. After the mice were sacrificed, the cerebrum was
immediately removed and put in a −4°C refrigerator for
20 minutes. Then it was sliced into six uniform coronal
sections after the olfactory bulb was removed. The sections were placed in 2% (W/V in PBS) 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC, Cat# T8877, Sigma) at 37°C in
a water bath, then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde. The
normal brain tissue was dyed pink while the infarction
area was pale. The infarction area of every six sections
was measured by using image analysis software (Scion
Image) and the volume of cerebral infarction was estimated by cerebral infarction = the infarction area ×
thickness/2.
Mouse spatial learning and memory evaluation by the
Morris test

To evaluate the hADSC rescuing function for mouse
spatial learning and memory, a Morris water maze
equipped with a digital camera was used to determine
these important physiological indexes for post-stroke
mice. The protocols follow those published by Diederich
et al. and Vorhees et al. [35,36]. To perform a Morris
test, a program was set as follows: five day training by
putting each mouse in sequence into the water from
each of the four directions every day. During this
process, the same mouse should be put into the water
with an interval of at least 20 mintutes. Also, when the
mouse finishes swimming, keeping it warm was a priority. The longest tracing time lasts for 120 seconds. The
fifth day repeats the first day program. The sixth day is
the test day with the mice starting from the opposite
side of the escape platform. The data were recorded and
handled with Any-maze software (EthoVision XT7.0,
Noldus Information Technology b.v., Netherlands).
Immunohistochemistry staining to trace hADSC fate

Neurological function evaluation by the Rogers Scaling
System

Each mouse was neurologically evaluated with the Rogers Scaling System by two researchers who were blinded
to the experimental groups. The scale categories used
followed those previously reported [24,33]. The Rogers
Scale score functional status was defined as follows: no
deficit (0); failure to extend left forepaw (1); decreased
grip of the left forelimb when the tail is pulled (2); spontaneous movement in all directions, contralateral circling
if pulled (3); circling or walking to the left (4); movement only when stimulated (5); unresponsive to stimulation (6); and dead (7). Scoring was done every week and
the statistical analysis was carried out with GraphPad
Prism 5.

The EGFP-hADSCs were traced by immunohistochemical staining with the neuronal markers MAP2
(Cat#188011, Synaptic Systems), GFAP (Cat#173011,
Synaptic Systems) and human nuclear antigen (HNA,
Cat#MAB1281) following previously published techniques [13]. Briefly, after the Morris water maze test,
mice from each group were sacrificed and underwent intracardial perfusion. Then the brain was removed, fixed
with paraformaldehyde and dehydrated with graded sucrose. Brain sections were obtained at 20 μm with a
freezing section machine (Leica CM1850) and subjected
to histoimmunochemical staining. Whole brain scanning
was used to observe the distribution of the EGFP labled
hADSCs using a confocal microscope (Leica, SP8). Also,
co-localization was carefully observed to determine

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

whether there was any transdifferentiation of hADSCs
into neuronal cells.
qRT-PCR to detect the subtypes of brain cells

To further explore how the introduced hADSCs rescue
the mouse brain function, qRT-PCR was used to detect
the gene markers Iba1 and GFAP (for microglia cells),
NeuN and Synapsin (for neuron cells), and MBP (for oligodendrocytes). Their primer information is listed in
Table 1. The protocols were previously published [13].
Statistical analyses

All data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD)
or standard error of the mean (SEM). The statistical significance was determined using one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) Bonferroni post-tests between
groups by GraphPad Prism version 5.00 for Windows
(GraphPad Software, San Diego CA, USA). P<0.05 was
considered statistically significant.

Results
hADSC morphology and CD surface antigen profiling

Isolated hADSCs possess typical spindle-like morphology after passage 3 to 5 as shown in Figure 1A. The
experimental design diagram is shown in Figure 1A. The
CD surface antigen expression pattern analyzed by flow
Jo software after FACS is shown in Figure 1B. More than
84.9% of the hADSCs express MSC CD markers, CD29,
CD44, CD73 and CD105, while no more than 0.86% of
the hADSCs express the hematopoietic stem cell
markers, CD34 and CD45.
Generation and characterization of MCAO mouse model
(stroke model)

The MCAO mouse model was made following a surgical
operation as shown in Figure 2A. The mice manifested
weakness in the contralateral limbs after the MCAO

Page 5 of 13

model was established. The representative images demonstrating the abnormal behaviors are shown in
Figure 2B. To determine the area of the brain damaged
by infarction seven days after MCAO, TTC staining was
performed and the circled pale color as shown in
Figure 2C indicates the infarcted area. TTC staining revealed significant damage to the brain, consistent with
the abnormal behavior. These data collectively confirmed the success of the MCAO mouse model. According to the Rogers Scale scoring, those mice receiving
MCAO surgery scaled as 2 to 3 scores were randomly
assigned to two groups: one used as the control group
with PBS injection only named MCAO-Ctrl-PBS (n = 7),
the other used as the cell injection group named
MCAO-hADSC (n = 7).
Functional improvements achieved by hADSC
transplantation in MCAO mice

Seven days after the MCAO surgery, EGFP-hADSCs or
PBS solution was stereostatically injected into the infarction area of the MCAO mouse brain. Their behaviors
were observed carefully and the score was recorded
every week according to the protocol diagram shown in
Figure 1A. The Rogers Scale scoring results are shown
in Figure 3A. Significant differences (P<0.05) could be
found between the MCAO-Ctrl-PBS group and the
MCAO-hADSC group at 7 days, 35 days, 42 days and 49
days after treatment. To better demonstrate the individual differences within each group, the dotting distribution is also shown in Figure 3A for reference. Seven
weeks after hADSCs injection, each group of mice was
subjected to the Morris Test. The experimental diagram
of the Morris Water Maze is shown in Figure 3B, the
water maze test duration (S) is shown in Figure 3C and
the tracking path information of representative mice in
each group is shown in Figure 3D (the tracking paths of
four representative mice for each group are shown).

Table 1 Primer sequence for the related genes
Gene symbol

Primer sequence

Tm (°C)

Product size (bp)

lba1

For 5′-GCCTGCAGACTTCATCCTCT-3′

60

245

53

176

58

170

61

181

57

63

66

363

Rev 5′-GACGCTGGTTGTCTTAGGCT-3′
MBP

For 5′-CTATAAATCGGCTCACAAGG-3′
Rev 5′-AGGCGGTTATATTAAGAAGC-3′

NeuN

For 5′-CCATCCCTTGCCTTTCCCAT-3′
Rev 5′-TCTTCTAGGACCCAGCCCTC-3′

GFAP

For 5′-TGGCCACTGTGAGGCAGAAG-3′
Rev 5′-ACCTCCTCCTCGTGGATCTT-3′

Synapsin

For 5′-GACGGAAGGGATCACATCAT-3′
Rev 5′-CTGGTGGTCACCAATGAGC-3′

GAPDH

For 5′-CAAGATCATCAGCAATGCCTCCTG-3′
Rev 5′-GCCTGCTCACCACCTTCTTGA-3′

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 6 of 13

Figure 1 Experimental diagram (A), hADSC surface antigen profiling with FACS showed that hADSCs positively express CD29, CD44, CD73 and
CD105, negatively express CD34 and CD45 (B). FACS, flow activated cell sorting; hADSCs, human adipose-derived stem cells.

After five days of training, the mice were subjected to
the final test. The MCAO-hADSC group mice regained
the ability to memorize the target and took a nearly
equal time (P>0.05) to find the escape platform in as efficient a way as the MCAO-Sham group mice (P>0.05)
(Figure 3C, D, G), indicating a significant rescuing effect.
The MCAO-hADSC group mice took a significantly

(P<0.001) shorter time to search around and find the
target compared with the MCAO-Ctrl-PBS group mice
(Figure 3C). Comparing the path length among each
group, mice in the MCAO-hADSC group went through
a shorter path length and took less time to reach the
rescuing platform than those in the MCAO-Ctrl-PBS
group at a similar swimming speed (Figure 3E-G). These

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 7 of 13

Figure 2 MCAO mouse model processing diagram (A), MCAO mouse model confirmation by abnormal behaviors (B), brain injury appearance
and TTC staining was used to confirm the success of the MCAO mouse model (C). MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

results indicate that movement ability did not hinder their
latent time. Carefully observing the latent process, mice in
the MCAO-hADSC group were always more efficient in
reaching the rescue platform than those in MCAO-CtrlPBS group, but were similar to those in the MCAO-Sham
group; the data are shown in Figure 3D and Additional
file 1: Video 1, Additional file 2: Video 2, Additional file 3:
Video 3, Additional file 4: Video 4, Additional file 5:
Video 5, Additional file 6: Video 6, Additional file 7:
Video 7, Additional file 8: Video 8 and Additional file 9:
Video 9. These data demonstrate that hADSCs transplantation apparently improved the spatial learning and
memory of the MCAO mouse indicating their promising therapeutic effects on post-stroke patients.
Infarction volume was reduced by hADSC administration

TTC staining was used to determine the brain infarction
area. The representative pictures are shown in Figure 4A.
The infarction volume obtained statistically with Scion
Image is shown in Figure 4B. The infarction volume was
significantly (P<0.05) reduced in the MCAO-hADSC
group compared with the MCAO-Ctrl-PBS group, which

indicates the apparent treatment effects, at least in the
physical and appearance levels. This result was consistent with those previously reported [17,23,24].
Transplanted hADSCs transdifferentiated into neuron-like
cells in vivo

Histoimmnochemical staining was used to trace the migration, transdifferentiation and integration of the introduced hADSCs in vivo. The staining pictures and the
statistical analysis with neuronal markers MAP2 and
GFAP are shown in Figures 5 and 6 and Additional file
10: Figure S1 and Additional file 11: Figure S2 respectively. Neuron-like cells could be found as shown in Additional file 10: Figure S1. Statistical analysis found that a
similar (P>0.05) percentage of GFP positive cells existed
in both the contralateral brain area and the ipsilateral
brain area, which indicated their robust in vivo migration and survival ability (Figure 5C and D). Moreover,
co-localization of GFP and MAP2 was found at a relatively higher (P<0.01) percentage in the contralateral
brain area indicating the neuron differentiation of introduced hADSCs in a preferred in vivo environment

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 8 of 13

Figure 3 Rogers Scale scoring for three groups of mice and the score distribution within each group (A), water maze performing protocol
diagram and the test duration (S) for each group of mice (B and C), the water maze track path information for the representative mice within
each group (D), their total distance travelled (m), their average speed (m/s) and their path efficiency (%) on the test day (D6) (E to G). *,** and
*** indicate that significant differences were found between the groups (P <0.05, P <0.01 and P <0.001, respectively).

because the injured ipsilateral area might not favor this
in vivo transdifferentiation (Figure 5D). Meanwhile, a significantly higher (P<0.001) percentage of MAP2 positive cells
was found between the MCAO-hADSC and MCAO-CtrlPBS, also between the MCAO-Sham and MCAO-Ctrl-PBS
in both of the two brain spheres, but this significant difference was not found between MCAO-hADSC and MCAOSham in both of the two brain spheres. On the other hand,
co-localization of GFP and GFAP was rarely found, implying
a minor transdifferentiation preference of hADSCs to GFAP
+
cells (Figure 6C and D), which agreed with previously published results [13]. At the same time, it was observed that
the introduced hADSCs could significantly (P<0.001) suppress the reaction of GFAP expressing cells in both brain

spheres compared with their counterparts in the PBS injection control group, implying their anti-inflammation effects
(Figure 6D). Colocalization of HNA and GFP could be observed indicating that the GFP positive cells were indeed the
introduced hADSCs (Additional file 11: Figure S2).
hADSCs protect the endogenous neurons and
oligodendrocytes while suppressing microglia cells

qRT-PCR data indicated that hADSC administration can
significantly suppress the expression of the microglia
marker Iba1 (P<0.01) and the astrocyte marker GFAP
(P<0.05) (Figure 7A and D) compared with the PBS control
group. This demonstrated that hADSCs can decrease brain
inflammation by suppressing the reaction of microglia cells

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 9 of 13

Figure 4 Brain infarction volume determined by TTC staining. Representative TTC staining pictures of mouse brain within each group (A), and the statistical
analysis by Scion Image Software (B). * means significant differences were found between groups (P <0.05). TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride.

Figure 5 hADSC tracing by histoimmunostaining with MAP2 antibody. MCAO mouse group with PBS injection instead of hADSC serving as the negative
control (MCAO-Ctrl-PBS) (A), normal mice with blood vessel exposure only but not occlusion (MCAO-Sham) (B), MCAO mouse group with hADSC injection
seven days after MCAO surgery (MCAO-hADSC) (C). Quantitative analysis of GFP labeled hADSCs, MAP2+ relative to the DAPI+ means neurons relative to
the total cells in both the ipsilateral and contralateral areas of different groups of the MCAO brain, GFP relative to the DAPI+ means the survival hADSCs take
the ratio of total brain cells, GFP+/MAP2+ relative to DAPI+ means the injected hADSCs which differentiated into MAP2+ cells take the ratio of total brain
cells (D). *, ** and *** indicates that significant differences were found between groups (P<0.05, P<0.01 and P<0.001, respectively ). DAPI, 4',6-diamidino-2phenylindole; hADSC, human adipose-derived stem cells; MAP2, microtubule-associated protein 2; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 10 of 13

Figure 6 hADSC tracing by histoimmunostaining with GFAP antibody. MCAO mouse group with PBS injection instead of hADSC serving as the negative
control (MCAO-Ctrl-PBS) (A), normal mice with blood vessel exposure only but not occlusion (MCAO-Sham) (B), MCAO mouse group with hADSC injection
seven days after MCAO surgery (MCAO-hADSC) (C). Quantitative analysis of GFP labeled hADSCs, GFAP+ relative to the DAPI+ means astrocytes cells take the
ratio of total cells in both the Ipsilateral and Contralateral of different groups of the MCAO brain, GFP relative to the DAPI+ means the survival hADSCs take
the ratio of total brain cells, GFP + /GFAP + relative to DAPI + means the hADSCs transdifferentiated into astrocytes take the ratio of total brain cells (D). *, **
and *** indicates that significant differences were found between groups (P<0.05, P<0.01 and P<0.001, respectively). DAPI, 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;
GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; hADSC, human adipose-derived stem cells; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

caused by damage. At the same time, hADSCs can significantly (P<0.05) improve the neuron related genes NeuN
and Synapsin (Figure 7B and E) compared to the PBS
injected control group mice. This implies that introduced
hADSCs can protect the endogenous neuron from damage.
Also, the oligodendrocyte marker MBP was significantly
(P<0.05) improved compared with the PBS control group.
These accumulated data support the hypothesis that
hADSCs administration can apparently improve the endoenvironment and protect the neurons and oligodendrocytes from damage-derived cell death.

Discussion
hADSCs have been regarded as one of the most promising
stem cell candidates to be translated into clinical therapies
for many hard-to-treat diseases. Stroke patients have faced
medical and economic burdens due to limited available
treatments. Stem cell based replacement therapy became attractive because of its potential to thoroughly resolve these
problems. hADSCs possess multipotency properties and can

be differentiated into neuron cells as demonstrated by many
authors [7,13,21]. Characterization of isolated cells indicated
that these isolated and expanded spindle like cells at passage
3 to 5 were mostly (>84.9%) composed of adipose derived
mesenchymal stem cells. This type of CD antigen profiling
is similar to the requirement for MSCs and adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells [37]. Based on our previous findings with regard to hADSC treatment of traumatic brain injury (TBI) in mice, hADSCs could survive in mouse brain
and reduce the injury lesion [13]. This study demonstrated
that the infarction area was reduced in MCAO mouse brain
and mouse memory and spatial learning were significantly
improved, which is consistent with the previously published
results [17,23,24]. Our results indicated that hADSC injection may promote endogenous neuron survival after stroke
damage, which is also consistent with previously published
results [21,25-27,38]. hADSC transplantation can significantly suppress the reaction of GFAP and Iba1 expressing
cells indicating their immunomodulation. These results are
consistent with previously published findings [22,23,39].

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 11 of 13

Figure 7 qRT-PCR to detect different endogenous cell marker expression: (A) Iba1 for microglia cells, (B) NeuN for neurons, (C) MBP for oligodendrocytes,
(D) GFAP for astrocytes, (E) Synapsin for neurons. *, ** and *** indicate that significant differences were found between groups (P<0.05, P<0.01 and
P<0.001, respectively). GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein.

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Current data on the efficacy of animal treatment using
hADSCs differ with each other due to different animal
models, various cell delivery methods and the time window
of cell introduction [17,24]. In our study, we injected
hADSCs into the mouse brain lesion using an in situ
method seven days after MCAO surgery. We could trace
the injected GFP labled hADSCs and observed GFP and
MAP2 double positive cells. This agrees with previously
published data [13,21,23]. With qRT-PCR, we further demonstrated that hADSC injection could promote the survival
of endogenous neuron and oligodendrocyte cells and modulate the brain immune response. These results agree with
[14,17]. Although scientists have made diligent efforts to determine how ADSCs rescue the brain function of ischemic
mice, many doubts still exist including whether hADSC derived neurons can integrate into the neuronal circuitry, how
the hADSCs modulate the immune response to brain damage, and so on. Further exploration should be performed to
make full use of ADSCs as the seeding cells for various
neurological diseases.

Page 12 of 13

Additional file 5: Video 5. MCAO-Ctrl-PBS water maze track on D5
(D5-MCAO-PBS-16).
Additional file 6: Video 6. MCAO-Ctrl-PBS water maze track on D6-test
(Test-MCAO-PBS-16).
Additional file 7: Video 7. MCAO-hADSC water maze track on D1
(D1-MCAO-hADSC-10).
Additional file 8: Video 8. MCAO-hADSC water maze track on D5
(D5-MCAO-hADSC-10).
Additional file 9: Video 9. MCAO-hADSC water maze track on D6-test
(Test-MCAO-hADSC-10).
Additional file 10: Figure S1. GFP positive cells showed neuron like
morphology.
Additional file 11: Figure S2. Histoimmunostaining with human nuclear
antigen (HNA) to trace the transplanted hADSCs in mouse MCAO model brain.

Abbreviations
APC: allophycocyanin; BDNF: brain-derived neurotrophic factor;
BMSCs: bone marrow stem cells; bp: base pair; BSA: bovine serum albumin;
EGFP: enhanced green fluorescence protein; FACS: flow activated cell sorting;
FITC: fluorescein isothiocyanate; GFAP: glial fibrillary acidic protein; hADSCs:
human adipose-derived stem cells; HGF: hepatocyte growth factor; HNA:
human nuclear antigen; IGF-1: insulin-like growth factor-1; IL: interleukin;
MAP2: microtubule-associated protein 2; MCAO: middle cerebral artery occlusion;
MSCs: mesenchymal stem cells; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PE: phycoerythrin;
TTC: 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor.

Conclusions

Presently, MSCs therapy is becoming a promising new
therapeutic option for stroke. Of all MSCs, ADSCs are of
special interest. Our results demonstrate that hADSC treatment significantly promotes the spatial learning and memory of MCAO mice. Meanwhile, the infarction volume of
MCAO mice could also apparently be reduced implying
promising clinical treatment effects. Interestingly, in situ introduced hADSCs were partially transdifferentiated into
MAP2 positive neuron-like cells with minor GFAP positive
ones in the in vivo microenvironment. This result implies
that probable stem cell replacement based therapy has occurred. Meanwhile, injection of hADSCs could significantly
promote the survival of damaged neurons and oligodendrocyte cells. Moreover, significantly decreased expression of
GFAP and Iba1 in the MCAO-hADSC mouse group compared with the MCAO-Ctrl-PBS mouse group showed that
an immunomodulatory function should occur due to
hADSC injection at the subacute phase of stroke disease.
Ongoing clinical trials should provide more useful and attractive new information on the safety and efficacy of
hADSC for stroke patients in the very near future.

Additional files
Additional file 1: Video 1. MCAO-Sham water maze track on D1
(D1-Sham-20).
Additional file 2: Video 2. MCAO-Sham water maze track on D5
(D5-Sham-20).
Additional file 3: Video 3. MCAO-Sham water maze track on D6-test
(Test-Sham-20).
Additional file 4: Video 4. MCAO-Ctrl-PBS water maze track on D1
(D1-MCAO-PBS-16).

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
FZ, SG, LW, JM, XC and JX conceived and designed the experiments and
coordinated the work. FZ, SG, CS, QL, Haiyang Z, Lu C, HR and YYisolated
and characterized the hADSCs. FZ, SG, LW, PY, BL and Limei C developed the
protocols to carry out the Morris test. FZ and SG performed the MCAO
surgery. LW, PY, AL, ZG, ZD, LZ and YQ are responsible for establishing the
MCAO model. SG, YQ, AL, GX, ZG and Hongwen Z evaluated and treated the
MCAO mouse model with hADSCs. SG and Lu C carried out the IHC studies
for characterization of transplanted hADSCs in vivo. FZ, SG, LW, GX, ZG,
Hongwen Z, JX and XC analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China
(2010CB945200, 2011CB966200); the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (31471029, 81070910, 81200832, 81271382); National program for support
of Top-notch young professionals (J.X.); Shanghai City, the medical cooperation
projects (11DZ192130C); Projects of International Cooperation and Exchanges
NSFC (81261130318); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities; Tongji University Talents Training Program (2011KJ051); New
Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-10-0606); 51th China Postdoctoral
surface Project (2012 M510890); Shanghai Postdoctoral Research Funding
Scheme of 2012 (12R21416200).
Author details
1
Neurology Department, Shanghai Eighth People’s Hospital Affiliated to
Jiangsu University, Shanghai 200233, China. 2East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200120, China. 3Department of Pediatric
Neurosurgery, Xinhua Hospital of Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai
200092, China. 4Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200442, China. 5Shanghai Xu Hui District Hospital Affiliated to
Jiangsu University, Shanghai 200031, China. 6Laboratory of Clinical Visual
Science, Tongji Eye Institute, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai
200092, China. 7Tianjin Hospital, Tianjin 300211, China. 8Tianjin Academy of
Integrative Medicine, Tianjin 300100, China. 9Institute of Translational
Medicine, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, China.
10
Tenth People’s Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, Shanghai 200092,
China.

Zhou et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy (2015) 6:92

Page 13 of 13

Received: 27 April 2014 Revised: 21 May 2014
Accepted: 10 April 2015
23.
References
1. Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, Brozman M, Davalos A, Guidetti D, et al.
Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic stroke.
N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1317–29.
2. del Zoppo GJ. Inflammation and the neurovascular unit in the setting of
focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience. 2009;158:972–82.
3. Gould E, Tanapat P. Lesion-induced proliferation of neuronal progenitors in
the dentate gyrus of the adult rat. Neuroscience. 1997;80:427–36.
4. Gutierrez-Fernandez M, Fuentes B, Rodriguez-Frutos B, Ramos-Cejudo J,
Vallejo-Cremades MT, Diez-Tejedor E. Trophic factors and cell therapy to stimulate
brain repair after ischaemic stroke. J Cell Mol Med. 2012;16:2280–90.
5. Friedenstein AJ, Deriglasova UF, Kulagina NN, Panasuk AF, Rudakowa SF,
Luria EA, et al. Precursors for fibroblasts in different populations of
hematopoietic cells as detected by the in vitro colony assay method.
Exp Hematol. 1974;2:83–92.
6. Lakshmipathy U, Verfaillie C. Stem cell plasticity. Blood Rev. 2005;19:29–38.
7. Baksh D, Song L, Tuan RS. Adult mesenchymal stem cells: characterization,
differentiation, and application in cell and gene therapy. J Cell Mol Med.
2004;8:301–16.
8. Kern S, Eichler H, Stoeve J, Kluter H, Bieback K. Comparative analysis of
mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow, umbilical cord blood, or
adipose tissue. Stem Cells. 2006;24:1294–301.
9. Wagner W, Wein F, Seckinger A, Frankhauser M, Wirkner U, Krause U, et al.
Comparative characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells from human bone
marrow, adipose tissue, and umbilical cord blood. Exp Hematol.
2005;33:1402–16.
10. Bieback K, Kern S, Kluter H, Eichler H. Critical parameters for the isolation of
mesenchymal stem cells from umbilical cord blood. Stem Cells.
2004;22:625–34.
11. Sabatini F, Petecchia L, Tavian M, Jodon de Villeroche V, Rossi GA,
Brouty-Boye D. Human bronchial fibroblasts exhibit a mesenchymal stem
cell phenotype and multilineage differentiating potentialities. Lab Invest.
2005;85:962–71.
12. Shi S, Bartold PM, Miura M, Seo BM, Robey PG, Gronthos S. The efficacy of
mesenchymal stem cells to regenerate and repair dental structures. Orthod
Craniofac Res. 2005;8:191–9.
13. Gao S, Zhao P, Lin C, Sun Y, Wang Y, Zhou Z, et al. Differentiation of human
adipose-derived stem cells into neuron-like cells which are compatible with
photocurable three-dimensional scaffolds. Tissue Eng Part A. 2014;20:1271–84.
14. Puissant B, Barreau C, Bourin P, Clavel C, Corre J, Bousquet C, et al.
Immunomodulatory effect of human adipose tissue-derived adult stem cells:
comparison with bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. Br J Haematol.
2005;129:118–29.
15. Tobita M, Orbay H, Mizuno H. Adipose-derived stem cells: current findings
and future perspectives. Discov Med. 2011;11:160–70.
16. Zuk PA, Zhu M, Mizuno H, Huang J, Futrell JW, Katz AJ, et al. Multilineage
cells from human adipose tissue: implications for cell-based therapies.
Tissue Eng. 2001;7:211–28.
17. Gutierrez-Fernandez M, Rodriguez-Frutos B, Ramos-Cejudo J, Teresa
Vallejo-Cremades M, Fuentes B, Cerdan S, et al. Effects of intravenous
administration of allogenic bone marrow- and adipose tissue-derived
mesenchymal stem cells on functional recovery and brain repair markers
in experimental ischemic stroke. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013;4:11.
18. Ikegame Y, Yamashita K, Hayashi S, Mizuno H, Tawada M, You F, et al.
Comparison of mesenchymal stem cells from adipose tissue and bone
marrow for ischemic stroke therapy. Cytotherapy. 2011;13:675–85.
19. Cho YJ, Song HS, Bhang S, Lee S, Kang BG, Lee JC, et al. Therapeutic effects
of human adipose stem cell-conditioned medium on stroke. J Neurosci Res.
2012;90:1794–802.
20. Chung JY, Kim W, Im W, Yoo DY, Choi JH, Hwang IK, et al. Neuroprotective
effects of adipose-derived stem cells against ischemic neuronal damage in
the rabbit spinal cord. J Neurol Sci. 2012;317:40–6.
21. Kang SK, Lee DH, Bae YC, Kim HK, Baik SY, Jung JS. Improvement of
neurological deficits by intracerebral transplantation of human adipose
tissue-derived stromal cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. Exp Neurol.
2003;183:355–66.
22. Kim JM, Lee ST, Chu K, Jung KH, Song EC, Kim SJ, et al. Systemic
transplantation of human adipose stem cells attenuated cerebral

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.
39.

inflammation and degeneration in a hemorrhagic stroke model. Brain Res.
2007;1183:43–50.
Leu S, Lin YC, Yuen CM, Yen CH, Kao YH, Sun CK, et al. Adipose-derived
mesenchymal stem cells markedly attenuate brain infarct size and improve
neurological function in rats. J Transl Med. 2010;8:63.
Gutierrez-Fernandez M, Rodriguez-Frutos B, Alvarez-Grech J, VallejoCremades MT, Exposito-Alcaide M, Merino J, et al. Functional recovery after
hematic administration of allogenic mesenchymal stem cells in acute
ischemic stroke in rats. Neuroscience. 2011;175:394–405.
Wei X, Zhao L, Zhong J, Gu H, Feng D, Johnstone BH, et al. Adipose stromal
cells-secreted neuroprotective media against neuronal apoptosis.
Neurosci Lett. 2009;462:76–9.
Lin XH, Liu N, Xiao YC, Chen RH, Du HW, Wang JH, et al. Effects of adiposederived stem cells transplantation on the neuronal apoptosis and the expression
of Bcl-2 and caspase-12 in the brain post focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Xi Bao Yu
Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011;27:40–3. Chinese.
Li D, Fang Y, Wang P, Shan W, Zuo Z, Xie L. Autologous transplantation of
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells attenuates cerebral ischemia and
reperfusion injury through suppressing apoptosis and inducible nitric oxide
synthase. Int J Mol Med. 2012;29:848–54.
Jeon D, Chu K, Lee ST, Jung KH, Ban JJ, Park DK, et al. Neuroprotective
effect of a cell-free extract derived from human adipose stem cells in
experimental stroke models. Neurobiol Dis. 2013;54:414–20.
Moriyama M, Moriyama H, Ueda A, Nishibata Y, Okura H, Ichinose A, et al.
Human adipose tissue-derived multilineage progenitor cells exposed to
oxidative stress induce neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells through p38 MAPK
signaling. BMC Cell Biol. 2012;13:21.
Melief SM, Zwaginga JJ, Fibbe WE, Roelofs H. Adipose tissue-derived multipotent
stromal cells have a higher immunomodulatory capacity than their bone
marrow-derived counterparts. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2013;2:455–63.
Xu C, Yu P, Han X, Du L, Gan J, Wang Y, et al. TGF-beta promotes immune
responses in the presence of mesenchymal stem cells. J Immunol.
2014;192:103–9.
Mitchell JB, McIntosh K, Zvonic S, Garrett S, Floyd ZE, Kloster A, et al.
Immunophenotype of human adipose-derived cells: temporal changes in
stromal-associated and stem cell-associated markers. Stem Cells.
2006;24:376–85.
Alonso de Lecinana M, Gutierrez M, Roda JM, Carceller F, Diez-Tejedor E.
Effect of combined therapy with thrombolysis and citicoline in a rat model
of embolic stroke. J Neurol Sci. 2006;247:121–9.
Wang H, Zhang K, Zhao L, Tang J, Gao L, Wei Z. Anti-inflammatory effects of
vinpocetine on the functional expression of nuclear factor-kappa B and
tumor necrosis factor-alpha in a rat model of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion
injury. Neurosci Lett. 2014;566:247–51.
Diederich K, Schmidt A, Strecker JK, Schabitz WR, Schilling M, Minnerup J.
Cortical photothrombotic infarcts impair the recall of previously acquired
memories but spare the formation of new ones. Stroke. 2014;45:614–8.
Vorhees CV, Williams MT. Morris water maze: procedures for assessing spatial
and related forms of learning and memory. Nat Protoc. 2006;1:848–58.
Gronthos S, Franklin DM, Leddy HA, Robey PG, Storms RW, Gimble JM.
Surface protein characterization of human adipose tissue-derived stromal
cells. J Cell Physiol. 2001;189:54–63.
Gimble JM, Bunnell BA, Guilak F. Human adipose-derived cells: an update
on the transition to clinical translation. Regen Med. 2012;7:225–35.
Bhang SH, Lee S, Shin JY, Lee TJ, Jang HK, Kim BS. Efficacious and clinically
relevant conditioned medium of human adipose-derived stem cells for
therapeutic angiogenesis. Mol Ther. 2013;22:862–72.

