Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99
DOI 10.1186/s12974-015-0295-7

JOURNAL OF
NEUROINFLAMMATION

RESEARCH

Open Access

The role of PPAR activation during the systemic
response to brain injury
Patrick Losey1,2, Emma Ladds3, Maud Laprais2, Borna Geuvel1, Laura Burns1, Regis Bordet2*
and Daniel C Anthony1,2*

Abstract
Background: Fenofibrate, a PPAR-α activator, has shown promising results as a neuroprotective therapy, with
proposed anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant effects. However, it displays poor blood-brain barrier permeability
leading to some ambiguity over its mechanism of action. Experimentally induced brain injury has been shown to
elicit a hepatic acute phase response that modulates leukocyte recruitment to the injured brain. Here, we sought to
discover whether one effect of fenofibrate might include the suppression of the acute phase response (APR)
following brain injury.
Methods: A 1-h intraluminal thread middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model followed by a 6-h reperfusion
was performed in C57/BL6 mice. Quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was then used to
measure hepatic expression of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1 (CXCL1), chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10) and
serum amyloid A-1 (SAA-1), and immunohistochemical analysis was used to quantify brain and hepatic neutrophil
infiltration following stroke.
Results: The MCAO and sham surgery induced the expression of all three acute phase reactants. A 14-day
fenofibrate pre-treatment decreased reactant production, infarct volume, and neutrophil recruitment to the brain
and liver, which is a hallmark of the APR.
Conclusions: The data highlight a novel mechanism of action for fenofibrate and lend further evidence towards
the promotion of its use as a prophylactic therapy in patients at risk of cerebral ischaemia. Further research is
required to elucidate the mechanistic explanation underlying its actions.
Keywords: Fenofibrate, PPAR-α activator, Acute phase response, Middle cerebral artery occlusion

Background
Worldwide, approximately 15 million individuals suffer a
stroke each year [1], with over 150,000 taking place in
the United Kingdom (UK) [2]. Whilst 20% are fatal,
making stroke the fourth leading cause of death in the
UK [2], more than 50% of sufferers survive but remain
dependent on others for daily activities [3]. Stroke is
therefore a significant public health concern, estimated
to exert health and social costs of more than £4 million

* Correspondence: regis.bordet@univ-lille2.fr; daniel.anthony@pharm.ox.ac.uk
2
EA 1046, Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Research Branch, IMPRT,
University of Lille North of France, Place de Verdun, Lille, Cedex 59045,
France
1
Department of Pharmacology, Experimental Neuropathology, University of
Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

within the UK [2] and placing considerable pressures on
individuals and healthcare systems worldwide.
Pathologically, more than 85% of strokes are primarily
ischaemic, with the remaining minority being haemorrhagic in origin. Both produce an ischaemic core surrounded by a threatened penumbra [4] which, whilst
hypoxic and functionally impaired, initially manages to
preserve its metabolic status [5]. Common neuroprotective strategies have targeted this area shortly after the
primary cerebrovascular event in an attempt to minimise
tissue loss. However, whilst moderately effective in
otherwise healthy rodents, in humans, this strategy has
proved less successful and alternative approaches have
been sought [6]. One possibility involves highlighting
high-risk individuals and prophylactically deploying

© 2015 Losey et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

long-acting neuroprotective agents in an attempt to reduce stroke incidence or outcomes [7].
Peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptors [PPARs]
have been proposed as possible neuroprotectants. These
ligand-activated transcription factors [8] exist in three
currently identified isoforms: PPARα, PPARγ and PPARβ/δ
[9, 10] with fibrates, such as the widely used and well-tolerated lipid-lowering agent fenofibrate, having greatest affinity for the former [11]. Upon activation, PPARα forms a
heterodimer with the retinoid x receptor, binds to peroxisome proliferator response elements on enhancer regions
and initiates or represses gene transcription [12].
Whilst the lipid-lowering effects of PPARα agonists
are well known, the demonstration of independent neuroprotection in permanent [13] and transient [14] ischaemic stroke models has been proposed to result from
local anti-inflammatory actions, including a reduction of
oxidative stress [15]. Supporting evidence for such a role
includes the discovery of the pro-inflammatory leukotriene B4 as a PPARα activating ligand [16]; regulatory effects on the pro-inflammatory mediators IL-6 and IL-12
[17] via induction of IκBα [15] and increased expression
of copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione
peroxidase (GPX), glutathione reductase (GR) and glutathione S-transferase (GST) - all potent mediators of oxidative stress [18]. Moreover, pre-treatment with specific
PPARα agonists has been shown to lower the postischaemic levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inflammatory markers - at least partially through negative
transcriptional effects on the NF-kB pathway [19].
These anti-inflammatory effects were initially proposed to occur centrally due to the known distribution
of PPARα [20]; however, synthetic agonists have a poor
brain bioavailability [18]. Thus, the neuroprotective actions mediated by fibrates may be primarily, or at least
partially, occurring within the periphery and this has
been supported by the discovery of a more widespread
PPARα distribution [21]. Indeed, brain injury alone has
been shown to elicit a hepatic acute phase response
(APR) [22, 23]. Initiated by macrophages or monocytes,
this peripheral response to central homeostatic disturbances promotes the production of cytokines and other
hepatic acute phase proteins [18] and thus enhances
centrally directed leukocytosis [22] as well as initiating
other homeostatic pro-inflammatory alterations [24].
Pharmacologically targeting the APR in experimentally
derived brain injury models has been shown to reduce
hepatic and central neutrophil migration [25]. Central
inflammation is generally accepted to be detrimental to
neurons [26], exacerbating neurodegeneration, and longterm neutrophil recruitment has been linked to axonal
damage [27], blood-brain barrier [BBB] breakdown and
axonal demyelination [28]. Therefore, reducing this inflammatory response to the initial injury caused by the

Page 2 of 10

primary cerebrovascular event may result in neuroprotective effects within the ischaemic penumbra.
The significance of the role of the liver in the APR following brain injury has been demonstrated by the depletion of hepatic Kupffer cells, which markedly reduces
central neutrophil recruitment [29]. Moreover, inhibition
of increased hepatic NFkB expression following brain injury resulted in considerable reduction of neutrophil migration to the central nervous system [30]. There is
good evidence that such a peripheral systemic inflammatory response is induced following stroke. Ischaemic
stroke patients undergo an increase in peripheral CRP
and IL-6 [31], with higher levels of the latter related to
larger lesion volumes and poorer outcomes [32]. Experimentally induced peripheral inflammatory responses are
linked with poorer stroke outcomes [33], with a reduction in the volume of ischaemic damage associated with
an antibody-mediated depletion of peripheral neutrophils [25].
Subsequent studies have attempted to identify mechanistic links between the peripheral hepatic APR and the
central inflammatory response. Ischaemic stroke models
and peripheral IL-1 administration have been shown to
increase levels of CXCL10/interferon-inducible protein10 in unstimulated splenocytes [26], activating its receptor CXCR3. CXCL10 has been shown to be important in
central leukocyte recruitment in stroke models [34], particularly in ischaemic cortex [35], with elevated levels
also seen in a variety of other diseases [35]. Alongside its
role as a chemoattractant for monocytes and activated T
lymphocytes, CXCL10 has been implicated in glial cell
migration [36] - making its splenic upregulation in stroke
models a point of particular interest [26] and raising the
possibility of a role for CXCL10 in the coordination of
leukocyte migration in response to stroke.
This dual-purpose study aims to characterise the hepatic
APR following brain injury in experimental stroke models
and examine whether the neuroprotective actions of fenofibrate could be exerted through an attenuation of this
peripheral response.

Materials and methods
Animals and fenofibrate administration

All animal protocols were performed in strict accordance
with the Ethical Committee in Animal Experimentation of
Nord-Pas-de-Calais (C2EA-75) and the European community legislation (2010/63/UE). The experiments are reported in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines. Male
Wistar rats (mean weight 300 g) (Elevage Janvier, Le
Genest Saint-Isle, France) were used. Animals were randomly assigned to three different groups (naive, sham and
MCAO). Experimental data were monitored by blinded
investigator for group allocation. Forty-two rats were fed a
control diet (standard chow for Harlan), and 42 were fed a

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

diet containing 0.2 % fenofibrate (roughly equal to around
200 mg/kg) for 14 days prior to the induction of ischaemia. This dose was selected following previous studies
that have been found to be neuroprotective and able to
normalise the ischaemic proteome [37].
Focal cerebral ischaemia model

Transient focal cerebral ischaemia was induced by a 60min middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) procedure as previously described [38]. Briefly, anaesthesia was
induced by intraperitoneal chloral hydrate administration (300 mg/kg). The caudal artery was exposed, cannulated with a 24G polyethylene catheter and connected to
a blood pressure monitor. The mean arterial blood pressure was monitored throughout, and blood samples were
taken before, during and after ischaemia to measure
blood pH, PaO2 and PaCO2. The right carotid arteries
were exposed through a midline cervical incision, and
the common and external carotid arteries were ligated
with a silk suture. An aneurysm clip was placed across
the internal carotid artery, and an arteriotomy was made
in the common carotid artery stump, allowing the introduction of a monofilament nylon suture. The suture was
gently advanced into the internal carotid artery and
passed into the intracranial circulatory system as far as
the start of the middle cerebral artery. After 60 min, the
suture was carefully removed to allow reperfusion. Sham
control animals were subjected to the same procedure
up to and including insertion of the filament, but this
was then quickly removed. Forty-two (n = 7 per group)
animals were killed 6 h after the procedure, fresh frozen
tissue was collected and 42 (n = 7 per group) were killed
and perfusion fixed at 24 h for estimation of infarct size
and histology. For infarct volume measurements, sections were stained by cresyl violet. The unstained area of
the brain was defined as the infarct zone. Infarcted cortical and subcortical areas and hemispheric areas were
calculated separately for each coronal slice using the image
analysis software Color Image 1.32 (NIMH, Bethesda, MD,
USA) after digitization. It should be noted that no infarct
was detectable in the sham animals. The sham experiments served as a control for the non-CNS trauma associated with the insertion of the filament, which would be
expected to induce an acute phase response in the liver.
Tissue processing/collection

Six hours after the procedure, rats were anaesthetised
with IP sodium pentobarbitone (CEVA Sante Animale)
and transcardially perfused with heparinised 0.9% saline. Hepatic tissue samples for PCR analysis were rapidly dissected to minimise mRNA degradation and
stored at −80°C. Further, animals were killed at 24 h
and were perfusion fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA); samples of the liver and the brain were removed

Page 3 of 10

and placed in 100% neutral buffered formalin for 7 days
at 4°C before being processed to wax.
Immunohistochemical analysis

The wax blocks containing the liver samples were cut in
10-μm-thick sections. Three sections were taken per rat
and mounted onto SuperFrost Plus slides (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Antigen retrieval was performed using a Sequenza staining system. For the
hepatic samples, the rabbit anti-mouse antibody MBS-2
(a neutrophil-specific in-house antibody) was used as the
primary antibody and omitted from control slides. A biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody was added as a
secondary antibody to label bound MBS-2. Finally, the
bound MBS-2-anti-IgG complexes were revealed by application of an avidin (A) biotinylated (B) horseradish
peroxidase macromolecular complex (C) and its substrate diaminobenzidine (DAB) (VectorElite ABC kit,
Vector Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA). The
colour change at the sites of localised reaction facilitated
identification of the complexes and counterstaining with
Mayer’s haematoxylin solution-aided neutrophil identification (Supplementary methods).
When processing the brain tissue, wax blocks were cut
until the MCAO was reached. Three sections were cut
sequentially and then three omitted prior to the next
sections, in order to get a representation of the whole
area affected. The neutrophil-staining process was similar to the liver except that an anti-polymorphonuclear
antibody (anti-PMN) was the primary antibody and
0.05% cresyl violet was the counterstain. For both tissue
types, sections were subsequently dehydrated with increasing concentrations of ethanol, washed in xylene
and preserved using a DePeX mounting medium (VWR
International Ltd, Poole, England).
Each slide was blinded, randomly assigned a number
and subsequently subjected to analysis using light microscopy. This involved counting the cells present within
the five areas of highest neutrophil density using a
Nikon eclipse E200 microscope fitted with an eyepiece
graticule of known area, thus revealing the average neutrophils per square millimeter.
RNA analysis

Total RNA extraction from snap-frozen liver samples
was undertaken using the Qiagen RNeasy® Mini Kit
(Qiagen Ltd, Crawley, UK) and cDNA then synthesised
using a Taqman Reverse Transcription reagent kit
(Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) - both according
to manufacturers’ instructions (Supplementary methods).
The primer and probe sequences (Table 1) for the acute
phase protein serum amyloid A-1 (SAA-1), and the mouse
chemokines CXCL1 and CXCL10 were added to 10 ng
RNA and a Roche Light Cycler 480 (Roche Diagnostics,

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

Page 4 of 10

Table 1 Primers and probes for the mouse chemokines CXCL1, CXCL10 (IP-10) and for the acute phase protein SAA-1
Marker and probe

Forward primer

Reverse primer

CXCL1 (probe #83)

AGCCACACTCCAACACAGC

CAGCGCTGCACAGAGAAG

SAA-1 (probe #32)

CCAGGATGAAGCTACTCACCA

TAGGCTCGCCACATGTCC

CXCL10 (probe #3)

GCTGCCGTCATTTTCTGC

TCTCACTGGCCCGTCATC

Welwyn Garden City, UK) used to perform a quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR). The housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde 3phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used to normalise the input RNA for each reaction. Results were
expressed as copies of chemokines or SAA/ng of input
RNA corrected to GAPDH.

Brain neutrophil recruitment following focal cerebral
ischaemia is attenuated by 14-day fenofibrate
pre-treatment

In the same animals, immunohistochemistry was used to
assess the effects of experimental stroke on hepatic and
brain neutrophil recruitment. Both sham and MCAO
procedures increased the levels of neutrophils present in
the liver after 24 h, and fenofibrate diet had a significant
impact on the number of neutrophils recruited to the
liver after surgery (Figure 2a-d). The number of neutrophils present in the liver has been shown to be a good
surrogate for assessing the APR induction, and the diet
produced a 78% reduction (P = 0.034) in the number of
neutrophils present in the liver following MCAO at 24 h
(Figure 3a). Indeed, in the fenofibrate-treated animals,
the number of neutrophils present was reduced to near
control levels. The reduction in infarct volume brought
about by the fenofibrate treatment was also associated
with a significant reduction in the number of neutrophils
present within the brain parenchyma (Figure 3b). No
neutrophils could be detected in the brains of naive or
sham animals.

Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed using the Prism 6.0
(GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA) statistical analysis software. Normality was determined using a KolmogorovSmirnov (K-S) test and Levene’s test was carried out to
test for equality of variance. Two-way ANOVA was used
throughout followed by post hoc t-tests corrected for
multiple comparisons using the Holm-Sidak method.

Results
Fenofibrate pre-treatment reduces the total infarct
volume

Whilst it has been shown previously that fenofibrate pretreatment in MCAO animals significantly reduces the
total infarct volume [39], it was important to show that
this was also the case in the present set of experiments.
Here, infarct volume was reduced by the fenofibrate diet
from 50 to 28 mm3, which was mostly attributable to a
reduction in cortical infarct (Figure 1a,b).

Hepatic CXCL10, CXCL1 and SAA-1 expression levels
increase following focal cerebral ischaemia or sham
surgery and are reduced by fenofibrate pre-treatment

A significant increase was observed in hepatic mRNA
expression for CXCL10, CXCL1 and SAA-1 following

B

A

Infarct volumes

(i)
60

Control diet

50
40
mm3

(ii)

*
30
*
20

(iii)
10
0
Total infarct

Cortical infarct

Subcortical infarct

Figure 1 Pre-treatment with fenofibrate significantly reduces total infarct volume in MCAO mice compared to standard diet regimes. (a) Photomicrographs of
representative cresyl-violet-stained coronal sections through the territory of the MCA reveal infarcts in the (i) control diet and (ii) fenofibrate treated animals and
absence of infarct in a (iii) sham surgery animal. (b) Total, cortical and subcortical infarct volumes in the fenofibrate-treated and control animal group. Statistical
significance denoted by asterisks where P < 0.05. Bars are mean ± SD.

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

Page 5 of 10

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 2 Representative photomicrographs of hepatic MBS1-stained neutrophils (brown stain) 24 h after (a, c) transient MCAO or (b, d) sham surgery.
The liver of animals fed with the fenofibrate diet, (c, d), contained fewer neutrophils compared to standard diet animals and were not, in appearance,
different from naive controls. The livers are counterstained with haematoxylin (blue). Photomicrographs of neutrophils in infarcted cortical
tissue of animals at 24 h in animals fed (e) standard diet or (f) the fenofibrate diet.

both sham surgery and the MCAO procedures compared to naïve rat (Figure 4). Two-way ANOVA revealed
that diet and group had a significant impact on the outcome for all transcripts (P < 0.05). When the effect of
diet on the outcome in each surgical group was compared in post hoc tests, the fenofibrate diet significantly
reduced the expression of each of the acute phase reactants in the sham group (Figure 4). In the MCAO group,
only CXCL10 (P = 0.0055) and SAA-1 (P = 0.0014) expression levels were significantly reduced by the fenofibrate diet.

Discussion
Experimental stroke induces peripheral inflammatory
markers associated with the hepatic APR

Acute brain injuries have been shown to induce a peripheral APR, including an increase in hepatic inflammatory markers [23]. If modified, post-injury outcomes are
improved [39], highlighting this response as a favourable
therapeutic target. In this study, we have demonstrated
increased levels of the hepatic inflammatory markers

CXCL1, CXCL10 and SAA following ischaemic injury
caused by MCAO occlusion and sham procedures. We
have also shown that this is accompanied by an increase
in the number of neutrophils present within the liver.
Both the markers of the APR and the neutrophil recruitment to the brain and to the liver are inhibited by the
administration of the PPARα agonist.
MCAO occlusion and the sham procedures resulted in
the induction of a peripheral APR. We suspect that part
of the response in the latter group was due to systemic
injury resulting from the surgical procedure per se [40].
Whilst sham procedures including insertion of monofilaments into the external carotid artery have also been
shown to generate ischaemic lesions independently from
those generated by MCAO, there was no evidence of
any infarct following closer histological inspection. It is
therefore most likely that the tissue injury associated
with the induction of the MCAO lesions contributes towards the systemic APR [41]. Most would now accept
that peripheral immune status is likely to affect the outcome of an ischaemic brain lesion. Thus, the transient

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

Control diet

Hepatic neutrophils

150

0

B
300

Naive

Sham

*
MCAO

Brain neutrophils

150
*

0

Naive

Sham

MCAO

Figure 3 Neutrophil recruitment after 24 h. The number of
neutrophils present after 24 h in the (a) liver or (b) brain of naive,
sham-operated or transient MCAO rats which have been either fed a
standard or fenofibrate-enhanced diet. Note that pre-treatment with
fenofibrate significantly reduced the number of hepatic neutrophils
present at 24 h following MCAO and the number of neutrophil in
the brain. Bars represent mean ± SD. Statistical significance denoted
by asterisks where P < 0.05.

model of MCAO seems to be inherently associated with
peripheral activation of the immune system, which needs
to be considered when evaluating the impact of new
therapy. As such, therapy that effectively reduces the
APR induced by the sham surgery is likely to have a
more beneficial effect on the outcome of the ischaemic
brain injury than would be the case if the induction of
the MCAO was atraumatic. This might account for
some of the differences that are observed between the
transient lesion induced by endothelin-1 and the filament and is likely to bias results.
The early acute phase protein CXCL1 is structurally
and functionally homologous to human interleukin-8
(IL-8), with a role in mediating neutrophil chemotaxis
and lysosomal enzyme release [42]. Increased hepatic
levels have been demonstrated following direct intrastriatal challenge with IL-1β, suggesting its involvement
in a generic hepatic response to brain injury [33], and elevated IL-8 levels have been identified as early predictive
markers of mortality in humans following severe traumatic

700

CXCL10
Control diet

350

***
0

Naive

Sham

*
MCAO

B
3
mRNA copies/ng input total RNA (x10 )

*

neutrophils/mm2

A
3
mRNA copies/ng input total RNA (x10 )

300

30

CXCL1

15

***
0

C
mRNA copies/ng input total RNA (x105)

neutrophils/mm2

A

Page 6 of 10

700

Naive

Sham

MCAO

*

*

Sham

MCAO

SAA-1

350

0

Naive

Figuret 4 Effect of fenofibrate pretreatment on the acute phase
response at 6 h following surgery. (a) The expression of hepatic
CXCL10 (mRNA copies/ng of total RNA input corrected to GAPDH),
(b) the expression of hepatic CXCL1 and (c) hepatic expression of
SAA-1. Note that sham surgery alone induces the induction of all
transcripts, which are sensitive to fenofibrate pre-treatment. Bars are
mean ± SD. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.0001.

brain injury [36]. CXCL1/IL-8 is therefore an attractive
target both in terms of attenuating the APR and improving
functional outcomes. Indeed, CINC-1 neutralisation has
been shown to reduce hepatic neutrophil recruitment [33],
whilst inhibition of the CXCL1/IL-8 receptor CXCR2 in a
transient MCAO model resulted in reduced infarct size
and improved neurological functional recovery [35], suggesting that theoretical benefits translate in practice.
Increased brain levels of CXCL10 and its receptor
CXCR3 have previously been demonstrated in response

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

to focal stroke [43] and have recently been seen in
splenocytes following ischaemic brain injury [44]. In
this study, and for the first time, we also demonstrate
an increase in hepatic expression of this chemokine.
CXCL-10 has been shown to be chemotactic for
monocytes and activated T lymphocytes [45], but it is
also known to be chemoattractant for neutrophils [46]
and thus the inhibition of CXCL10 might be particularly useful as it would inhibit early recruitment of
neutrophils and the ongoing recruitment of monocytes
that continues for a longer period after a stroke.
SAA-1, along with SAP, has been identified as the
major murine acute phase protein in the APR [19].
Intrastriatal challenge with recombinant IL-1β has
been associated with significantly increased hepatic
SAA-1 expression [22]. In this study, hepatic levels
were increased tenfold over the magnitude seen previously, raising the possibility of a greater specific role
for SAA-1 following ischaemic brain injury, or, more
likely, that the MCAO model produces a greater hepatic APR than direct central inflammatory challenge.
SAA-1 enhances the migration of monocytes and polymorphonuclear cells to sites of inflammation [47],
with potentially detrimental effects. For example,
chronically raised levels have been shown to correlate
with the severity of atherosclerotic lesions [48] and
the protein has also been associated with the production of reactive oxygen species [49]. It is interesting to
speculate about whether the levels seen in our experiment would have remained chronically elevated following ischaemic injury and the detrimental impact
this may have inflicted on the ischaemic penumbra
and potential functional outcome.
In this study, we have shown increased levels of hepatic and brain neutrophils in both sham and MCAO
animals associated with generation of a hepatic APR
in response to ischaemic brain injury and upregulation
of peripheral chemokines. This neutrophil infiltration
is in accordance with the results of previous studies,
which have also demonstrated significant hepatic
damage following neutrophil recruitment [33]. Mechanistically, neutrophil-mediated oxidative stress and
subsequent cellular dysfunction or necrosis may contribute to the hepatic derangement seen in patients
who have suffered acute CNS injury [50]. Early acute
hepatic failure has been shown to upregulate central
cyto/chemokines, including CXCL1, which mediate
neurotoxic effects independently of microglial activation [51]. It is therefore easy to postulate the
development of a feedforward cycle of ongoing peripheral inflammation and organ dysfunction following
ischaemic brain injury that results in ongoing central
inflammation, impeding the response to stroke and
worsening functional outcomes.

Page 7 of 10

Mechanistic underpinnings for peripheral APR generation

The mechanistic signalling pathways that underlie hepatic APR generation following ischaemic brain injury are
currently unknown. The rapid temporal profile of acute
phase protein increase at a significant distance from the
site of direct injury has led to speculation that neural
mechanisms may be responsible. Neuro-immune interplay
has previously been reported: sympathetic stimulation has
been shown to induce local release of norepinephrine in
lymphoid tissues, resulting in T cell differentiation and secretion of cytokines such as TNF, IFN-y [44] and IL-6
[52], whilst direct acetylcholine inhibits release of hepatic
pro-inflammatory cytokines [42].
An alternative or complementary hypothesis centres
around humoral messengers within the CNS released
following generalised brain injury into the vascular bed
via the perivascular spaces [33]. However, no such
messenger has currently been identified. Presumed candidates would include pro-inflammatory cytokines, however both IL-6 and IL-1b knockout mice can produce a
normal APR and there is no increase in plasma cytokine
levels following brain injury, which would be expected if
such a signalling pathway were responsible [33]. This
study also does not provide any supportive evidence for
this theory, and further research is therefore needed to
identify humeral messengers if they do indeed contribute
to APR generation.
Fenofibrate pre-treatment reduces hepatic and brain
neutrophil recruitment following ischaemic brain injury
and is associated with a limited APR

In this study, dietary pre-treatment with fenofibrate
reduced brain and hepatic neutrophil recruitment following
ischaemic brain injury. The damaging contribution of neutrophils to ischaemic brain damage is well documented
[53], with reduction of the PMN infiltration associated with
reduced infarct volume [54], increased cerebrovascular perfusion [55] and improved neurological outcomes in MCAO
models [53]. Therefore, it seems likely that prevention of
PMN infiltration is one mechanism by which fenofibrate
may exert its neuroprotective effects. However, it is expected that a reduction in infarct volume would be associated with a reduction in brain neutrophil numbers. Thus, it
is difficult to argue that the fenofibrate diet has a direct action on neutrophil recruitment to the brain and that it is
this that leads to a reduction in infarct volume. However,
the early suppression of hepatic chemokine expression and
leukocyte recruitment to the liver can be directly attributed
to the fenofibrate treatment that is well known to exert
anti-inflammatory actions by antagonising nuclear factor
(NF)-κB [56]. To further support the argument that fenofibrate exerts its principal beneficial action after ischaemia
in the periphery is that, under normal physiological conditions, the blood-brain barrier is highly impermeable to

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

fenofibrate [18]. Whilst direct local administration of
fenofibrate-loaded microparticles have been shown to reduce infarct volumes following ischaemic stroke [57], the
fenofibrate employed in this study, as in others, was given
systemically and would be excluded from the brain. Thus,
it can be speculated that both the hepatic and central reductions in neutrophil recruitment are mediated by peripheral signalling via the attenuating effects on cytokine
expression. The temporal expression profile of the chemoattractant CXCL1 following MCAO generation demonstrates a rapid transient increase, with a peak at 4 h,
followed by a decline to baseline [33]. Mechanistically, this
rapid rise may result in neutrophil mobilisation from the
bone marrow, whilst the decline allows for generation of a
central-peripheral chemokine gradient resulting in central
neutrophil migration, which is supported by multiple
studies demonstrating a delay in peak brain neutrophil
levels relative to plasma expression of CXCL1 [34].
One of the major challenges to neuroprotective agents
is the cascade of detrimental interconnected but independent dysregulated immune pathways that contribute
to and are exacerbated by ischaemic brain injury. Inflammation is a major contributor to all the major central and
peripheral comorbidities associated with stroke including
atherosclerosis, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes, obesity, hypertension and infection [58], thus the most effective neuroprotective agents must be able to exert inhibiting effects
over multiple elements of the immune response underlying these processes. In this study, fenofibrate is shown to
reduce CXCL1 expression and neutrophil levels, CXCL10
and thus mononuclear infiltration and SAA-1 and therefore general systemic inflammation. Such a variety of direct anti-inflammatory effects, along with those already
demonstrated on oxidative stress [15] and production of
reactive oxygen species [19], supports the potential
efficacy of fenofibrate, a widely used, well-tolerated lipidlowering agent, as a neuroprotective agent.

Conclusions
In this study, we quantified the hepatic APR following
ischaemic brain injury and demonstrated an associated
increase in hepatic and central neutrophil recruitment.
Pre-treatment with peripheral fenofibrate reduced levels
of hepatic CXCL1, IP-10 and SAA-1, which was associated with reduction in infarct volume and brain and
hepatic neutrophil influx, which provides a mechanistic
insight into how fenofibrate can be an effective neuroprotective agent following ischaemic stroke.
Supplementary methods
Immunohistochemical analysis

Antigen retrieval was undertaken by microwaving
(650 W) the slides in 0.01-M citrate acid buffer (pH 6)
before washing them in a solution of PBS and 0.05%

Page 8 of 10

Tween 20 (PBS-T). Endogenous peroxidase activity was
quenched by incubation in a solution of 0.3% H2O2 in
methanol for 20 min. Following three further washes
with PBS-T, the tissues were placed in a Sequenza staining system (Shandon, UK) for 1 h, with non-specific
binding sites blocked using 10% normal goat serum
(Vector Laboratories Inc., Peterborough, UK). Avidin
was added in a 1:50 ratio to eliminate endogenous hepatic biotin, with excess avidin subsequently removed in a
PBS-T wash.
All solutions of antibodies were diluted using PBS.
The initial overnight incubation consisted of an application of biotin and a 1:1,000 dilution of the rabbit antimouse antibody MBS-2 (neutrophil-specific antibody
made in-house), with the latter omitted from control
slides. Following a PBS-T wash, the slides were incubated with a 1:1,000 biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG solution (Vector Laboratories Inc, Burlingame, CA, USA),
as a secondary antibody to label the bound MBS-2.
The avidin (A) biotinylated (B) horseradish peroxidase
macromolecular complex (C) was prepared and added in
a 1:100 dilution using the VectorElite ABC kit (Vector
Laboratories Inc, Burlingame, CA, USA) for 45 min.
After each stage, the slides were washed with PBS-T.
The substrate of the enzyme complex, diaminobenzidine
(DAB), was added with 125 μl of 30% hydrogen peroxide
and 250 ml of 0.1-M phosphate buffer to visualise the
peroxide labelling. The reaction localised to the ABCbound sites, producing a brown product. The sections
were then washed with PBS, overstaining was excluded by
microscopic examinations and Mayer’s haematoxylin
solution was added as a counterstain to aid neutrophil
identification.
RNA extraction

A single tissue sample was taken from the frozen
autoclaved Eppendorf tube containing a few pieces of
liver tissue dissected earlier on in the experiment. This
was transferred to another Eppendorf tube where
300 μl of RLT buffer containing 0.001% β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME) was added. The β-ME is mixed with
the buffer to break up the disulphide bonds that stabilise any ribonucleases present in the sample and as a
result irreversibly denatures any RNases present.
Using a motor-driven plastic pestle, the tissue samples
were then mixed with the buffer before a further
300 μl was added and transferred to QiaShredder® mini
spin columns (Qiagen, Venlo, Limburg, Netherlands).
These were centrifuged at maximum speed for 3 min to
homogenise the lysate as it passed through the column.
The lysate was then added to one volume of 70% ethanol
made up of RNAse free water to help precipitate out the
RNA. A 600 μl of the sample was taken and transferred to
an RNeasy® mini spin column sitting in a 2-ml collection

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

tube and centrifuged for 15 s at 10,000 rpm. This step was
repeated before washing with RW1 buffer and centrifuging. The column was then treated with DNAse 1 for
15 min, using 10 μl of DNAse 1 diluted in 70 μl of buffer
per tissue sample, to remove any genomic DNA contamination. The column was then washed again with RW1 before transferring the RNeasy column to a new un-capped
Eppendorf and applying RPE buffer. This step was repeated, and in each step, the columns were centrifuged,
working alongside the buffers in removing any remaining
contaminants. The RNeasy columns were dried by discarding the supernatant and centrifuging the tubes at
maximum speed. Finally, the column was transferred to a
new collection tube where 50 μl of RNase free water was
added to the membrane before being centrifuged for
1 min at 10,000 rpm to elute the purified RNA. To preserve it, they were transferred to a final Eppendorf and
stored at −80°C.

cDNA production

The cDNA was synthesised using a Taqman Reverse Transcription reagent kit (Applied Biosystems, Warrington,
UK) according to manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the
concentration of the original RNA sample was determined
spectrophotometrically at 260 nm by diluting the purified
sample of RNA produced above 1:25 in RNase free water
and placing it in a spectrophotometer (Eppendorf,
Cambridge, UK). The samples were then diluted as appropriate to input 200 ng of RNA into the reverse transcription reaction. The rest of the reverse transcription
mastermix was made up of multiscribe reverse transcriptase, random hexamers, magnesium chloride, reverse transcriptase buffer, deoxynucleotides and an RNase inhibitor
to stop degradation. To control for any genomic DNA
contamination in subsequent PCR reactions, a control
tube was included in all batches of cDNA that contained
no reverse transcriptase. The tubes containing the mastermix, and RNA samples were vortexed to mix them together and centrifuged to remove any bubbles that might
interfere with efficient transcription. They were then
placed in the progene machine where the temperature
sequence for processing them was 10 min at 25°C to remove any hexameric primers extended by reverse transcriptase, 30 min at 48°C for reverse transcription and
5 min at 95°C to inactivate the reverse transcriptase
enzyme.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
PL, ML, BG and LB carried out the in vivo and molecular studies and
participated in drafting of the manuscript. EL drafted the manuscript and
prepared the figures. DA and RB designed the experiments, edited the
manuscript and performed the analysis. DA and EL performed the statistical

Page 9 of 10

analysis. DA and RB conceived of the study and participated in its design
and coordination and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Author details
1
Department of Pharmacology, Experimental Neuropathology, University of
Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK. 2EA 1046, Pharmacology,
Faculty of Medicine, Research Branch, IMPRT, University of Lille North of
France, Place de Verdun, Lille, Cedex 59045, France. 3North Bristol NHS Trust,
Southmead Road, Bristol BS10 5NB, UK.
Received: 18 September 2014 Accepted: 2 April 2015

References
1. Mackay J, Mensah G. Global burden of stroke. In: The atlas of heart disease
and stroke. Geneva: World Health Organisation; 2004. p. 50–2.
2. Townsend N, Wickramasinghe K, Bhatnagar P, Smolina K, Nichols M, Leal J,
et al. Coronary heart disease statistics 2012 edition. London: British Heart
Foundation; 2012.
3. PArty ISW. RCP National Sentinel Stroke Clinical Audit 2010 Round 7 Public
Report for England, Wales and Northern Ireland. May 2011:43.
4. Astrup J, Siesjo BK, Symon L. Thresholds in cerebral ischemia - the ischemic
penumbra. Stroke. 1981;12:723–5.
5. Paciaroni M, Caso V, Agnelli G. The concept of ischemic penumbra in acute
stroke and therapeutic opportunities. Eur Neurol. 2009;61:321–30.
6. Turner RC, Dodson SC, Rosen CL, Huber JD. The science of cerebral
ischemia and the quest for neuroprotection: navigating past failure to
future success. J Neurosurg. 2013;118:1072–85.
7. Luna JM, Moon YP, Liu KM, Spitalnik S, Paik MC, Cheung K, et al. High-sensitivity
C-reactive protein and interleukin-6-dominant inflammation and ischemic
stroke risk: the northern Manhattan study. Stroke. 2014;45:979–87.
8. Blanquart C, Barbier O, Fruchart JC, Staels B, Glineur C. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors: regulation of transcriptional activities and
roles in inflammation. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003;85:267–73.
9. Bishop-Bailey D. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors in the cardiovascular
system. Br J Pharmacol. 2000;129:823–34.
10. Issemann I, Green S. Activation of a member of the steroid hormone receptor
superfamily by peroxisome proliferators. Nature. 1990;347:645–50.
11. Guo Q, Wang G, Namura S. Fenofibrate improves cerebral blood flow after
middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2010;30:70–8.
12. Berger J, Moller DE. The mechanisms of action of PPARs. Annu Rev Med.
2002;53:409–35.
13. Ravindranath V. Animal models and molecular markers for cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion injury in brain. Methods Enzymol.
1994;233:610–9.
14. Collino M, Aragno M, Mastrocola R, Gallicchio M, Rosa AC, Dianzani C, et al.
Modulation of the oxidative stress and inflammatory response by PPAR-gamma
agonists in the hippocampus of rats exposed to cerebral ischemia/reperfusion.
Eur J Pharmacol. 2006;530:70–80.
15. Delerive P, Gervois P, Fruchart JC, Staels B. Induction of IkappaBalpha
expression as a mechanism contributing to the anti-inflammatory activities
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha activators. J Biol Chem.
2000;275:36703–7.
16. Devchand PR, Keller H, Peters JM, Vazquez M, Gonzalez FJ, Wahli W. The
PPARalpha-leukotriene B4 pathway to inflammation control. Nature.
1996;384:39–43.
17. Moraes LA, Piqueras L, Bishop-Bailey D. Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors and inflammation. Pharmacol Ther. 2006;110:371–85.
18. Baumann H, Gauldie J. The acute phase response. Immunol Today.
1994;15:74–80.
19. Uhlar CM, Whitehead AS. Serum amyloid A, the major vertebrate acute-phase
reactant. Eur J Biochem. 1999;265:501–23.
20. Kainu T, Wikstrom AC, Gustafsson JA, Pelto-Huikko M. Localization of the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor in the brain. Neuroreport.
1994;5:2481–5.
21. Moreno S, Farioli-Vecchioli S, Ceru MP. Immunolocalization of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors and retinoid X receptors in the adult rat
CNS. Neuroscience. 2004;123:131–45.

Losey et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:99

22. Campbell SJ, Anthony DC, Oakley F, Carlsen H, Elsharkawy AM, Blomhoff R,
et al. Hepatic nuclear factor kappa B regulates neutrophil recruitment to the
injured brain. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2008;67:223–30.
23. Wilcockson DC, Campbell SJ, Anthony DC, Perry VH. The systemic and local
acute phase response following acute brain injury. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 2002;22:318–26.
24. Campbell SJ, Jiang Y, Davis AE, Farrands R, Holbrook J, Leppert D, et al.
Immunomodulatory effects of etanercept in a model of brain injury act
through attenuation of the acute-phase response. J Neurochem.
2007;103:2245–55.
25. Campbell SJ, Hughes PM, Iredale JP, Wilcockson DC, Waters S, Docagne F,
et al. CINC-1 is an acute-phase protein induced by focal brain injury causing
leukocyte mobilization and liver injury. FASEB J. 2003;17:1168–70.
26. Offner H, Subramanian S, Parker SM, Afentoulis ME, Vandenbark AA, Hurn
PD. Experimental stroke induces massive, rapid activation of the peripheral
immune system. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2006;26:654–65.
27. Campbell SJ, Deacon RM, Jiang Y, Ferrari C, Pitossi FJ, Anthony DC.
Overexpression of IL-1beta by adenoviral-mediated gene transfer in the rat
brain causes a prolonged hepatic chemokine response, axonal injury and
the suppression of spontaneous behaviour. Neurobiol Dis. 2007;27:151–63.
28. Ferrari CC, Depino AM, Prada F, Muraro N, Campbell S, Podhajcer O, et al.
Reversible demyelination, blood-brain barrier breakdown, and pronounced
neutrophil recruitment induced by chronic IL-1 expression in the brain.
Am J Pathol. 2004;165:1827–37.
29. Cartier L, Hartley O, Dubois-Dauphin M, Krause KH. Chemokine receptors in
the central nervous system: role in brain inflammation and neurodegenerative
diseases. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2005;48:16–42.
30. Koizumi J, Yoshida Y, Nakazawa T, Ooneda G. Experimental studies of
ischemic brain edema. I: a new experimental model of cerebral embolism in
rats in which recirculation can be introduced in the ischemic area. Jpn J
Stroke. 1986;8:1–8.
31. Emsley HC, Smith CJ, Gavin CM, Georgiou RF, Vail A, Barberan EM, et al.
An early and sustained peripheral inflammatory response in acute
ischaemic stroke: relationships with infection and atherosclerosis.
J Neuroimmunol. 2003;139:93–101.
32. Waje-Andreassen U, Krakenes J, Ulvestad E, Thomassen L, Myhr KM, Aarseth
J, et al. IL-6: an early marker for outcome in acute ischemic stroke. Acta
Neurol Scand. 2005;111:360–5.
33. McColl BW, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM. Systemic inflammatory stimulus potentiates
the acute phase and CXC chemokine responses to experimental stroke and
exacerbates brain damage via interleukin-1- and neutrophil-dependent
mechanisms. J Neurosci. 2007;27:4403–12.
34. Wang X. Prolonged expression of interferon-inducible protein-10 in ischaemic
cortex after permanent occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in rat. Journal
of Neurochemistry. 1998;71:1190–8.
35. Villa P, Triulzi S, Cavalieri B, Di Bitondo R, Bertini R, Barbera S, et al. The
interleukin-8/CXCL8 receptor inhibitor reparixin improves neurological
deficits and reduces long-term inflammation in permanent and transient
cerebral ischaemia in rats. Mol Med. 2007;13:125–33.
36. Gopcevic A, Mazul-Sunko B, Marout J, Sekulic A, Antoljak N, Siranovic M,
et al. Plasma interleukin-8 as a potential predictor of mortality in adult
patients with severe traumatic brain injury. Tohoku J Exp Med.
2007;211:387–93.
37. Gele P, Vingtdeux V, Potey C, Drobecq H, Ghestem A, Melnyk P, et al. Recovery of
brain biomarkers following peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonist
neuroprotective treatment before ischemic stroke. Proteome Sci. 2014;12:24.
38. Ouk T, Laprais M, Bastide M, Mostafa K, Gautier S, Bordet R. Withdrawal of
fenofibrate treatment partially abrogates preventive neuroprotection in
stroke via loss of vascular protection. Vascul Pharmacol. 2009;51:323–30.
39. Ouk T, Gautier S, Petrault M, Montaigne D, Marechal X, Masse I, et al. Effects
of the PPAR-alpha agonist fenofibrate on acute and short-term consequences
of brain ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2014;34:542–51.
40. Sheeran P, Hall GM. Cytokines in anaesthesia. Br J Anaesth. 1997;78:201–19.
41. Bland ST, Schallert T, Strong R, Aronowski J, Grotta JC, Feeney DM. Early
exclusive use of the affected forelimb after moderate transient focal
ischemia in rats : functional and anatomic outcome. Stroke. 2000;31:1144–52.
42. Borovikova LV, Ivanova S, Zhang M, Yang H, Botchkina GI, Watkins LR, et al.
Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory response to
endotoxin. Nature. 2000;405:458–62.
43. Wang X, Li X, Schmidt DB, Foley JJ, Barone FC, Ames RS, et al. Identification
and molecular characterization of rat CXCR3: receptor expression and

Page 10 of 10

44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

interferon-inducible protein-10 binding are increased in focal stroke. Mol
Pharmacol. 2000;57:1190–8.
Himi T, Yoshioka I, Kataura A. Production and gene expression of IL-8-like
cytokine GRO/CINC-1 in rat nasal mucosa. Acta Otolaryngol. 1997;117:123–7.
Taub DD, Lloyd AR, Conlon K, Wang JM, Ortaldo JR, Harada A, et al.
Recombinant human interferon-inducible protein 10 is a chemoattractant
for human monocytes and T lymphocytes and promotes T cell adhesion to
endothelial cells. J Exp Med. 1993;177:1809–14.
Michalec L, Choudhury BK, Postlethwait E, Wild JS, Alam R, Lett-Brown M,
et al. CCL7 and CXCL10 orchestrate oxidative stress-induced neutrophilic
lung inflammation. J Immunol. 2002;168:846–52.
Badolato R, Wang JM, Murphy WJ, Lloyd AR, Michiel DF, Bausserman LL,
et al. Serum amyloid A is a chemoattractant: induction of migration,
adhesion, and tissue infiltration of monocytes and polymorphonuclear
leukocytes. J Exp Med. 1994;180:203–9.
Mezaki T, Matsubara T, Hori T, Higuchi K, Nakamura A, Nakagawa I, et al.
Plasma levels of soluble thrombomodulin, C-reactive protein, and serum
amyloid A protein in the atherosclerotic coronary circulation. Jpn Heart J.
2003;44:601–12.
Hatanaka E, Dermargos A, Armelin HA, Curi R, Campa A. Serum amyloid A
induces reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and proliferation of
fibroblast. Clin Exp Immunol. 2011;163:362–7.
Sanfilippo F, Veenith T, Santonocito C, Vrettou CS, Matta BF. Liver function
test abnormalities after traumatic brain injury: is hepato-biliary ultrasound a
sensitive diagnostic tool? Br J Anaesth. 2014;112:298–303.
Faleiros BE, Miranda AS, Campos AC, Gomides LF, Kangussu LM, Guatimosim C,
et al. Up-regulation of brain cytokines and chemokines mediates neurotoxicity
in early acute liver failure by a mechanism independent of microglial activation.
Brain Res. 2014;1578:49–59.
Song DK, Im YB, Jung JS, Suh HW, Huh SO, Song JH, et al. Central injection
of nicotine increases hepatic and splenic interleukin 6 (IL-6) mRNA
expression and plasma IL-6 levels in mice: involvement of the peripheral
sympathetic nervous system. FASEB J. 1999;13:1259–67.
Schroeter M, Jander S, Stoll G. Non-invasive induction of focal cerebral ischemia
in mice by photothrombosis of cortical microvessels: characterization of
inflammatory responses. J Neurosci Methods. 2002;117:43–9.
Connolly Jr ES, Winfree CJ, Springer TA, Naka Y, Liao H, Yan SD, et al.
Cerebral protection in homozygous null ICAM-1 mice after middle cerebral
artery occlusion. Role of neutrophil adhesion in the pathogenesis of stroke.
J Clin Invest. 1996;97:209–16.
Dawson DA, Ruetzler CA, Carlos TM, Kochanek PM, Hallenbeck JM.
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes and microcirculatory perfusion in acute
stroke in the SHR. Keio J Med. 1996;45:248–52. discussion 252–243.
Staels B, Koenig W, Habib A, Merval R, Lebret M, Torra IP, et al. Activation of
human aortic smooth-muscle cells is inhibited by PPARalpha but not by
PPAR gamma activators. Nature. 1998;393:790–3.
Klose D, Laprais M, Leroux V, Siepmann F, Deprez B, Bordet R, et al.
Fenofibrate-loaded PLGA microparticles: effects on ischemic stroke.
Eur J Pharm Sci. 2009;37:43–52.
Denes A, Thornton P, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM. Inflammation and brain injury:
acute cerebral ischaemia, peripheral and central inflammation. Brain Behav
Immun. 2010;24:708–23.

