[Link]
mailto:urban.lendahl@ki.se
This year marks 100 years since the discovery, by Thomas 
Hunt Morgan, of notched wings in Drosophila melanogaster resulting from mutations in a gene that was thereafter
identified as Notch. The Notch signalling pathway 
has thus been known for a century, and our knowledge 
of the core signalling mechanisms and disease processes 
in which aberrant Notch signalling has a role is currently 
expanding very rapidly, making it timely to review the 
prospects for pharmaceutical intervention in this pathway.
Deregulated Notch signalling was first implicated 
in disease by studies indicating that Notch mutations 
were associated with specific forms of leukaemia, notably
T cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL)1. 
However, the links between Notch and disease are now 
extending to a larger number of disorders, including 
CADASIL syndrome (cerebral autosomal-dominant 
arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
)2, Alagille syndrome3,4, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia5,6 and spondylocostal dysostosis7–9, which further 
fuels the motivation to develop therapies that modulate 
Notch signalling.
The core Notch signalling pathway is now understood
in reasonable detail10,11, which opens up multiple 
avenues for its modulation. Current approaches include 
inhibition of the ligand–receptor interaction or interference
with the proteolytic processing of the receptor12,13. 
Furthermore, although the pathway appears to be deceptively
simple at its core, there are a number of auxiliary 
proteins that, in various ways, affect Notch signalling10,14. 
The increasing number of auxiliary proteins provides 
additional possibilities for regulating Notch signalling 
— for example, by modulating various Notch-modifying 
enzymes, such as E3 ubiquitin ligases, kinases and 
hydroxylases that act on Notch15–18. Collectively, there are 
several approaches that are in various stages of development
, ranging from early preclinical studies in cultured 
cells to clinical trials. γ-secretase inhibitors (GSIs), for 
example, are being tested in clinical trials to block Notch 
signalling in tumours, and they also have the potential to 
be used in the treatment of acoustic trauma.
This Review summarizes current efforts to pharmacologically
intervene in the Notch signalling pathway, 
and discusses recent progress in a number of disease 
areas, as well as the hurdles that remain. Some areas of 
controversy and the most promising avenues of current 
and future research are also highlighted.
The Notch pathway: where to intervene
There are a small number of evolutionarily highly conserved
signalling mechanisms that operate across multicellular
organisms and are critical for development and 
homeostasis in most tissues. This group includes the 
WNT pathway, the sonic hedgehog pathway, the bone 
morphogenetic protein (BMP)–transforming growth 
factor-β (TGFβ) pathway and the Notch signalling pathway19. The Notch signalling pathway has been extensively 
reviewed elsewhere10,11, and here we briefly summarize 
the core signalling mechanism, focusing on the steps in the 
signalling pathway that are amenable to various types of 
modulation.
In brief, Notch signalling is a cell–cell communication 
system, wherein a membrane-tethered Notch ligand on one 
cell (the signal-sending cell) interacts with a transmembrane 
Notch receptor on a juxtaposed cell (the signal-receiving cell) 
Department of Cell 
and Molecular Biology, 
Karolinska Institute, 
SE-171 77 Stockholm, 
Sweden.
Correspondence to U.L. 
e-mail: urban.lendahl@ki.se
doi:10.1038/nrd4252
Signal-sending cell
The cell on which the ligand is 
expressed. Canonical Notch 
signalling is seen as a 
uni-directional signalling 
pathway in which the ligand 
is expressed on one cell, 
which ‘sends’ the signal, 
and the receptor is expressed 
on a contacting cell, which 
‘receives’ the signal.
Signal-receiving cell
The cell on which the receptor 
is expressed. Canonical 
Notch signalling is seen as 
a uni-directional signalling 
pathway in which the ligand 
is expressed on one cell, 
which ‘sends’ the signal, 
and the receptor is expressed 
on a contacting cell, which 
‘receives’ the signal.
Therapeutic modulation of Notch 
signalling — are we there yet? 
Emma R. Andersson and Urban Lendahl
Abstract | The Notch signalling pathway is evolutionarily conserved and is crucial for the 
development and homeostasis of most tissues. Deregulated Notch signalling leads to 
various diseases, such as T cell leukaemia, Alagille syndrome and a stroke and dementia 
syndrome known as CADASIL, and so strategies to therapeutically modulate Notch 
signalling are of interest. Clinical trials of Notch pathway inhibitors in patients with solid 
tumours have been reported, and several approaches are under preclinical evaluation. 
In this Review, we focus on aspects of the pathway that are amenable to therapeutic 
intervention, diseases that could be targeted and the various Notch pathway modulation 
strategies that are currently being explored.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 357
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(8.0.0.2542,19436499 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
CSL
Notch
target
genes
NICD
MAML
Intracellular
space
Intracellular
space
Extracellular
space Notch ligand
(Delta-like,
Jagged)
Notch
receptor
Receptorpresenting
cell
Nucleus
Ligandpresenting
cell
Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery
(FIG. 1). This induces a series of proteolytic events, liberating 
the Notch intracellular domain (NICD), which translocates
to the nucleus and subsequently interacts with 
the DNA-binding protein CSL (CBF1/Suppressor of 
Hairless/LAG-1; also known as RBPJ) and Mastermindlike
protein (MAML) to induce the transcription of 
Notch downstream target genes.
Ligand–receptor interaction. The first step in the Notch 
signalling pathway that can be modulated is the ligand–
receptor interaction (BOX 1; FIG. 2). In mammals, there 
are five ligands from two closely related subfamilies 
(Delta-like 1 (DLL1), DLL3 and DLL4, as well as Jagged 1 
(JAG1) and JAG2) and four closely related Notch receptors 
(Notch 1 to Notch 4). It is important, from a modulation
standpoint, to understand ligand–receptor specificity
and whether individual receptors and ligands are 
endowed with specific functions; however, knowledge 
in this area is still limited. All ligands, except for DLL3, 
can activate receptors in trans (on juxtaposed cells)20,21. 
Notably, introduction of Dll3 into the Dll1 locus in mice 
demonstrated that these ligands have dissimilar effects on 
Notch signalling21. So far, there are only a few examples 
of ligand–receptor specificity, but a specific mutation in 
the D. melanogaster  Notch receptor or in mouse Notch 2 
recently identified epidermal growth factor (EGF) repeat 
8 as being essential for the specific binding of JAG1 
(Serrate in D. melanogaster) but not DLL1 (Delta in 
D. melanogaster)22. Interestingly, the EGF repeats 6–15 
of Notch 1 are sufficient to transmit Notch signalling in 
response to ligand binding, and these repeats show much 
higher affinity for DLL4 than for DLL1 (REF. 23), which 
indicates that some ligand–receptor affinity exists, but 
this remains to be explored further.
Furthermore, distinct downstream effects of ligand–
receptor interactions are observed during the maturation
of various T cell types24. The extent to which Notch 
receptors are modified by Fringe-mediated glycosylation 
also affects receptor binding to Delta or Jagged: modification
by Fringe enhances the response of the Notch 
receptor to Delta, but blunts Jagged- or Serrate-induced 
signalling25–27. Whether this results in a qualitatively different
signalling output is, however, not known. Jagged 
and Delta ligands generate very similar transcriptomal 
responses in the same cell type, but induce different gene 
sets in different cell types, which indicates that cell context
, rather than ligand subtype, substantially contributes 
to shaping the Notch downstream response28.
The ligand–receptor interaction requires the DSL 
(Delta–Serrate–LAG-2) domain at the amino terminus 
of the ligand and EGF repeats 11–12 in the Notch receptors
to activate signalling29,30, and this information has 
been used to design antibodies that can block ligand–
receptor interactions. Single-chain antibodies targeting 
the ligand-binding domain of the Notch 1 and Notch 2 
receptors have been developed, which reduce Notch 
signalling in some — but not all — assays31, with the 
potential advantage of blocking specific Notch receptors. 
This approach could prove to be useful when a particular 
receptor is mutated. On the ligand side, DLL4-blocking 
antibodies have been developed32, which could, for 
example, be useful for inhibiting angiogenesis in cancer.
Information about Notch ligands can be used not 
only to block Notch signalling but also to activate it. 
To this end, engineered extracellular domains of ligands 
fused to the Fc domain of immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies
can be immobilized on cell culture plates33–35, or 
clustered by Fc-targeting antibodies36 to activate Notch 
signalling in cultured cells. Ligand clustering, induced 
by self-aggregation of the Fc domain in ligand–Fc fusion 
proteins, by immobilization of the ligand to cell culture 
plates or by clustering with Fc-targeting antibodies37, 
appears to be important for activation, but the mechanistic
basis for this is not yet clearly understood. It is 
worth noting that ligand–Fc fusion proteins are often 
presented as dimers owing to the Fc domain, so these 
ligands are already pre-clustered as dimers37. This has 
become a widely used strategy to activate endogenous 
Notch receptors in cultured cells, but for obvious reasons
it is more difficult to convert this approach to the 
in vivo setting, although the use of various engineered 
scaffolds may make this more feasible. In some studies, 
more advanced scaffolds are being investigated, and an 
Figure 1 | The Notch signalling pathway. The core 
Notch signalling pathway is a very simple signalling 
mechanism in which a ligand on one cell induces a series 
of proteolytic cleavage events in a Notch receptor on a 
contacting cell. These cleavage events release the Notch 
intracellular domain (NICD), which translocates to the 
nucleus to activate the transcription of Notch target genes 
together with CSL (CBF1/Suppressor of Hairless/LAG-1; 
also known as RBPJ) and Mastermind-like protein (MAML). 
REVIEWS
358 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
( 8.0.0.2542.1307335273 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
[Link]
www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan
Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery
Notch receptors (Notch 1)
Notch ligand (JAG1) Notch ligand (DLL1)
Signal
peptide
MNNL
DSL
protein
DOS
domain
16 EGF
domains
36 EGF domains
8 EGF
domains
vWF type C
domain
TMD
Signal
peptide
EGF repeat-specific roles LNR
TMD
HD domain
S1 (1664/1665)
RAM TAD PEST
Signal
peptide
MNNL
DSL
protein
DOS
domain
TMD
ANK
S2 (1710/1711)
S3 (1743/1744)
important observation is that the orientation of immobilized
ligands is essential to the activation of Notch signalling
and is in fact more important than the concentration 
of the ligand used38,39.
Whether the extracellular domain of the soluble 
ligand can be used to activate Notch signalling is a somewhat
controversial area. Although a number of studies 
have shown that extracellular domains of soluble ligands 
do not activate Notch signalling in culture, but instead 
inhibit or have no effect on Notch receptor activation33–36,40–43, there are also reports indicating that soluble
ligands, in particular short peptides comprising 
the DSL domain, can be used to activate Notch signalling44–46. Interestingly, a recent report indicates that 
human endothelial cells secrete a soluble form of JAG1 
that activates Notch signalling in cancer stem cells47. In 
this context, it is interesting to note that the extracellular 
domain of JAG1, which is released from cells through 
a process requiring proteolysis, binds to components 
in the extracellular matrix (ECM), such as microfibrilassociated
glycoprotein 2 (MAGP2), and may thus be 
oriented and stabilized by the ECM, providing the traction
necessary for the pulling forces required for Notch 
cleavage48. Although detailed structural information is 
available on the MNNL domain (N-terminal domain of 
Notch ligands), the DSL domain and three EGF repeats 
of the JAG1 extracellular domain49,50, further studies
are required to better understand ligand–receptor 
interactions in Notch signalling.
Modulating receptor processing. The Notch receptor 
is proteolytically processed at several different sites, of 
which three are associated with canonical signalling 
(FIG. 2). The site 1 (S1) cleavage is controlled by furin 
convertase and is executed in the Golgi en route to the 
plasma membrane51. S1 processing is required for productive
ligand–receptor interaction51,52, and the use of 
furin inhibitors could therefore hypothetically block 
Notch signalling; however, this does not seem to be the 
case53,54. For example, full-length, uncleaved Notch 1 can 
suppress C2C12 myoblast differentiation53, although this 
may proceed through the non-canonical Notch signalling
pathway. Similarly, most Notch 1 in D. melanogaster 
appears at the cell surface in its uncleaved form54 and 
is capable of signalling. It is thus possible that furin 
interference would bias Notch signalling towards 
specific outputs, but not necessarily block it. Interestingly, 
Notch paralogues are differentially sensitive to the abrogation
of S1 processing52; Notch 2 is insensitive to this 
loss, whereas the surface expression of Notch 1 is mildly 
reduced when S1 processing is impeded. Furin convertase 
has a number of other target proteins — such as TGFβ, the 
insulin receptor, adhesion molecules and matrix metalloproteinases
, to name but a few55 — which considerably 
increases the risk of off-target effects. 
Notch receptors also undergo extensive post-translational 
modifications by various glycans, which may also provide
new avenues for signal modulation. These modifications
include the addition of O-linked glucose by 
protein O-glucosytransferase 1 (POGLUT1; known as 
Rumi in D. melanogaster)56,57, fucosylation by peptide-
O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1)58, xylosylation of the 
glucose moieties by O-xylosyltransferases such as glucoside
xylotransferase 1 (GXYLT1) and GXYLT2 (REF. 59), 
or glycosylation by Fringe glycosyltransferases25,26,60–62. 
The second cleavage, S2 cleavage, occurs in response 
to ligand interaction, and a prevalent view for the mechanism
of ligand activation is a ‘pulling model’ in which 
Box 1 | Notch receptor and ligand domains and isoforms
Notch receptors and ligands are single-pass transmembrane receptors that, in the 
classical view of canonical Notch signalling, mediate cell-contact-dependent cell 
signalling. In mammals, there are four highly conserved receptors (Notch 1 to Notch 4) 
and five ligands of two classes, categorized based on their similarity to Drosophila 
melanogaster Serrate (Jagged 1 (JAG1) and JAG2) or the Delta-like ligands (DLL1, 
DLL3 and DLL4)279.
As shown in the figure, Notch receptors contain 29–36 epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
repeats, of which EGF repeats 11–12 are essential for ligand binding, EGF repeats 24–29 
(in D. melanogaster Notch) are known as the Abruptex region, and EGF repeat 8 confers 
ligand specificity. The EGF repeats are followed by three Lin–Notch repeats (LNRs). 
Furin S1 cleavage generates a bipartite protein maintained by non-covalent bonds. 
Upon ligand binding, ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing 
protein) secretases cleave Notch at the S2 site, generating a Notch extracellular 
truncation (NEXT) product, which is a substrate for γ-secretase S3 cleavage (BOX 2), 
yielding the active Notch intracellular domain (NICD). The NICD contains the 
RBPJ-associated molecule (RAM) domain, two nuclear localization signals, six ankyrin 
(ANK) repeats and a PEST (Pro-Glu-Ser-Thr) sequence that regulates NICD degradation.
Also shown in the figure are Notch ligands. Notch ligands contain an amino-terminal 
Notch ligand motif, which — in all ligands except for the Notch inhibitory ligand DLL3 
— is followed by a DSL (Delta–Serrate–LAG-2) protein domain and a DOS (Delta and 
OSM-11) domain (containing two atypical EGF repeats). In Jagged family ligands, the 
DSL domain is followed by 15–16 EGF repeats, a von Willebrand Factor (vWF) type C 
domain, six Jagged family domains and a transmembrane domain. In Delta-like 
ligands, the DSL domain is generally followed by 6–8 EGF repeats and a 
transmembrane domain. The carboxy-terminal domains of the ligands are relatively 
short, around 125 or 155 amino acids in JAG1 and DLL1, respectively. However, 
as Jagged ligands contain PDZ-binding motifs280 and transcriptional activities have 
been reported281, additional roles for the C-terminal fragments, other than merely 
mediating endocytosis, have been suggested. There are also reports on more 
unconventional Notch ligands, such as microfibril-associated glycoprotein 1 
(MAGP1), MAGP2 and Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1). 
HD, heterodimerization domain; MNNL, N-terminal domain of Notch ligands; 
TAD, transactivation domain; TMD, transmembrane domain. Protein domains 
predicted using InterProScan 4. 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 359
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(8.0.0.2542,613749355 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
CSL
NICD
MAML
Ligand
Ligand
ECD
Fc
Receptor
Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery
Furin
convertase
Non-canonical
dnMAML,
MAML peptide NICD:
• Phosphorylation
• Ubiquitylation
• Hydroxylation
• Acetylation
γ-secretase
γ-secretase
Antibodies
blocking
cleavage ADAM17
Ligand–
receptor
interaction
a
b
c
c
d
e
f g
h
i
j
Glycosylation, fucosylation, etc.
the ligand exerts a pulling force on the receptor, which 
enables S2 cleavage. The ligand then removes the extracellular
domain of the Notch receptor and internalizes it 
into lysosomes of the ligand-expressing cell63–66. S2 cleavage
is mediated by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 
domain-containing protein 10 (ADAM10; also known 
as Kuzbanian protein homolog) or ADAM17 (also known as 
TACE)67–70 (reviewed in REF. 71), which are known for 
their roles in ectodomain shedding. Notch signalling
could also be reduced by using ADAM inhibitors, 
in particular as S2 cleavage is the rate-limiting step in 
Notch signalling and the subsequent S3 cleavage occurs 
constitutively after S2 cleavage. Again, however, ADAMs 
control the processing of several other proteins, including
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and the interleukin-6 
receptor (IL-6R). In addition, ADAMs are themselves 
targets of intramembrane proteolysis, which releases 
the ICD and may also have transcriptional roles in the 
nucleus72,73, again increasing the risk of off-target effects. 
A more direct route of inhibiting the ADAM-mediated 
processing of Notch receptors is with antibodies targeted 
to the negative regulatory region (NRR) of Notch, which 
thus prevents unfolding of the NRR in response to ligand 
binding74. These antibodies are more specific as they are 
targeted to specific receptor paralogues and avoid the 
potential pitfalls of broad-spectrum ADAM inhibition.
S2 cleavage is followed by constitutive proteolysis 
via the multi-protein γ-secretase75,76 complex (BOX 2) at 
site 3 (S3), and GSIs can therefore be used to inhibit Notch 
activity. GSIs were originally developed for a different purpose
— to block the production of the amyloid-β peptide 
from amyloid precursor protein (APP) — and the fact 
that they impinge on Notch signalling has been a major 
obstacle for using GSIs as a therapy for Alzheimer’s disease (BOX 3). Modulation of Notch through GSIs affects 
all Notch receptors, which makes this a less specific intervention
strategy when compared to ligand- or receptorspecific
strategies. Cleavage of Notch via γ-secretase occurs 
either at the plasma membrane, liberating the NICD 
cleaved at Val1744 (NICD-V)77–79, or in the acidic environment
of endocytic vesicles, releasing NICD-S (cleaved 
at Ser1747)80,81; these NICD forms have different half-lives. 
In addition to S3 cleavage, the Notch transmembrane 
domain is cleaved by γ-secretase at site 4 (S4), which 
releases the Notch β-peptide extracellularly, in a manner
reminiscent of the cleavage of amyloid-β by APP82,83. 
Interestingly, mutations in presenilin 1, which cause familial
Alzheimer’s disease as a result of aberrant cleavage of 
APP, also affect the precision of Notch S4 cleavage82.
NICD and CSL. Following S3 cleavage by γ-secretase, 
NICD translocates to the nucleus and interacts with CSL 
and MAML. The CSL–NICD–MAML complex directs 
the expression of Notch downstream target genes. The 
traditional view is that CSL, in the absence of Notch 
activation, is bound to DNA and represses the transcription
of target genes, but recent data suggest that the 
interaction may be dynamic: that is, CSL is recruited to 
DNA-binding sites in the context of active Notch signalling
rather than CSL being bound as a repressor in the 
inactive state84,85.
Various strategies to modulate Notch signalling at 
the level of the CSL–NICD–MAML complex have been 
tested. If CSL is to be inhibited — for example, by knockout
or small interfering RNA (siRNA) strategies — it is 
also important to fully understand whether CSL serves 
as a repressor or whether it is recruited along with NICD. 
If CSL is a repressor, its removal may lead to de-repression 
of CSL-controlled genes, which is not the case in a more 
dynamic DNA-interactive situation. As an alternative 
strategy, the expression of a dominant negative version of 
MAML, consisting of the amino-terminal part of MAML 
that binds to Notch and CSL86–88 but does not recruit 
Figure 2 | The Notch pathway from a modulation perspective. There are several 
nodes in the Notch signalling pathway that are putative targets for drug intervention. 
Cleavage by furin (part a), a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing 
protein 17 (ADAM17) secretase (part b) and γ-secretase (part c) can be inhibited 
pharmacologically to limit Notch signalling effectively. Interfering with the 
interaction between the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) and the cofactors 
Mastermind-like protein (MAML) (part d) or CSL (CBF1/Suppressor of Hairless/LAG-1; 
also known as RBPJ) (part e) — for example, with small peptides — abrogates 
canonical Notch signalling. Interfering with glycosylation, fucosylation (part f) or 
other EGF-specific modifications (part g) by inhibiting Fringe activity, for example 
with small interfering RNAs, may modulate specific Notch pathways. Similarly, Notch 
antibodies targeting particular Notch ligands (part h) or receptors (part i) would 
specifically target individual receptor pathways. Finally, Notch ligand fusion 
peptides (part j) can be used to activate or inhibit Notch signalling depending 
on their structure and the disease context. dnMAML, dominant-negative MAML. 
ECD, extracellular domain. 
REVIEWS
360 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1767978655)
Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery
PSEN1/PSEN2
(catalytic
component)
PEN2 APH1 Nicastrin
transcriptional machinery, effectively blocks Notch 
signalling and has consistently produced Notch-related 
phenotypes in both cultured cells and transgenic mouse 
models89–92. However, the fact that MAML can have 
effects outside the Notch pathway, notably on tumour 
suppressor p53, β-catenin and myocyte enhancer factor 
2C (MEF2C)93–95, is a hypothetical concern when using 
dominant-negative MAML to block Notch signalling. 
A related and potentially more precise strategy is the use 
of a cell-permeable stapled peptide of the most important
region in MAML96, which may alleviate some of the 
potential off-target problems associated with the use 
of dominant-negative MAML; however, this approach 
remains to be verified in other systems.
On the basis of our current understanding of the 
Notch signalling system, inhibition of CSL should abrogate
all canonical Notch signalling, and so CSL is an 
attractive therapeutic target. Additionally, recent studies
have indicated that specific residues in CSL are differentially
involved in binding to the ICDs of specific 
Notch receptor subtypes97,98, yielding a potential degree 
of specific therapeutic targeting. More specifically, interfering
with the beta trefoil domain in CSL, which interacts
with the RBPJ-associated molecule (RAM) domain 
of the NICD, has distinct effects with different NICDs. 
Although CSL is crucial for Notch function, it is also 
important from an off-target perspective with regard 
to its potential Notch-independent functions. Studies 
of pancreas development indicate that CSL functions 
together with pancreas transcription factor 1 (PTF1) 
rather than NICD99, which may complicate potential 
CSL-based intervention.
NICD is subject to several types of post-translational 
modifications that are likely to modify its function and 
that may be important for attempts to fine-tune Notch 
activity. Notch is phosphorylated by at least three kinases: 
glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β)17,100, cyclindependent
kinase 8 (CDK8)101 and atypical protein 
kinase C102. In addition, NICD is subject to less common
modifications, such as hydroxylation by hypoxiainducible
factor 1α inhibitor (HIF1AN; also known as 
FIH1)15,16 as well as deacetylation by sirtuin 1 (SIRT1)103. 
NICD is short-lived, which is important for the 
dynamic control of Notch signalling, and its half-life is 
fine-tuned by ubiquitylation and proteasome-mediated 
degradation.
NICD is ubiquitylated by a number of E3 ubiquitin 
ligases (reviewed in REF. 104), including atrophin 1-interacting
protein 4 (AIP4; also known as NAPP1 and 
ITCH) and F-box and WD40 domain-containing protein
7 (FBXW7; also known as SEL10). Notably, FBXW7 
ubiquitylates NICD following phosphorylation at the 
carboxy-terminal PEST (Pro-Glu-Ser-Thr) domain, and 
loss of FBXW7 prolongs the half-life of NICD, the consequences
of which are evident in leukaemia and other 
cancers105–108. Furthermore, ITCH ubiquitylates NICD 
at the membrane, preventing its targeting for degradation
before it is sent to the nucleus109,110. In some cases, 
Box 2 | γ-secretase — a multi-faceted complex
γ-secretase is a multi-protein integral membrane complex that catalyses the intramembrane proteolysis of several different 
substrates, including Notch receptors, amyloid precursor protein (APP), ERBB4, E-cadherin, ephrin B2, CD44 and others. 
The catalytic subunit of γ-secretase is provided by the bipartite, endoproteolysed protein presenilin (PSEN1 or PSEN2), 
which is composed of an amino-terminal fragment (NTF) with six transmembrane domains (TMDs), and a carboxy-terminal 
fragment with three TMDs (see figure). Catalytic function relies on two aspartates, found in TMD6 and TMD7. In addition 
to presenilins, γ-secretase is composed of presenilin enhancer 2 (PEN2), anterior pharynx defective 1 (APH1) and nicastrin. 
PEN2, APH1 and nicastrin can, together with presenilin, reconstitute γ-secretase activity, but transfection of any 
component alone cannot.
PEN2 contributes to the endoproteolysis of presenilin, and nicastrin has been suggested to participate in the recruitment 
of substrates to γ-secretase, although this remains controversial. APH1 has been ascribed scaffolding properties, 
catalytic function, and a role in substrate recruitment. In addition to these four factors, numerous proteins associate with 
γ-secretase and are thought to modulate its activity or localization.
Agents that modulate γ-secretase activity can be 
classified as γ-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) or γ-secretase 
modulators (GSMs), and different targeting strategies 
have been used. First-generation GSIs included a peptide 
aldehyde calpain inhibitor282 and difluoroketone 
peptidomimetic inhibitor, whereas second-generation 
GSIs included DAPT (N-[N-(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-
l-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine t-butyl ester), a non-transitionstate
analogue widely used in vitro, and L685458 
((5S)-(t-butoxycarbonylamino)-6-phenyl-(4R)-hydroxy-
(2R)-benzylhexanoyl)-l-leucy-l-phenylalaninamide), 
a transition-state analogue. These inhibitors rely on 
locking γ-secretase in a closed conformation, rendering 
it unable to cleave substrates. More recent attempts have 
been made to increase the specificity of modulation of 
γ-secretase by targeting γ-secretase substrate recruiting 
factors such as γ-secretase activating protein (GSAP), 
which binds to APP carboxy-terminal fragments and 
recruits them to γ-secretase.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 361
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.969086995)
Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery
PEN2 APH1 Nicastrin
ERBB4
N-cadherin
E-cadherin
Notch 1 to Notch 4 NICD
Notch target genes in nucleus
APP
APLP1
APLP2
CD44
PSEN1/PSEN2
(catalytic
component)
ubiquitylation actually increases Notch signalling, as 
is the case with the murine E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 
MDM2 (REF. 111). A number of deubiquitylases that act 
on Notch signalling have been identified in D. melanogaster, and they may also be interesting targets for 
pharmaceutical intervention112.
In recent years, it has become increasingly apparent 
that Notch signalling crosstalks with several other signalling
pathways, which enhances the diversity of the signalling 
output. Crosstalk with the WNT and BMP–TGFβ signalling
pathways, as well as with the cellular hypoxic 
response, relies on NICD serving as a hub for crosstalk 
by interacting with key intracellular components of these 
pathways. Thus, NICD interacts with adenomatous polyposis
coli (APC), AXIN113,114, GSK3β17,100, β-catenin115–117
and Dishevelled118,119 in the WNT pathway; with SMADs 
in the BMP–TGFβ pathway120–122; and with HIF and 
HIFAN1 in the cellular hypoxic response15,16,123 (reviewed 
in REF. 10). The ramifications of this crosstalk remain to 
be fully explored, but they are of interest from a therapeutic
perspective, as crosstalk may open up the possibilities 
for combinatorial therapies.
Finally, another level at which to modulate Notch 
signalling for therapeutic purposes is to interfere with 
the transport of the receptors or ligands to the cell surface.
For example, in cancers in which Notch is activated, 
modulation of Notch receptor transport by inhibiting
the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium 
ATPase (SERCA) channel induced a G0/G1 cell cycle 
arrest in leukaemia cells124,125.
Non-canonical Notch signalling. In addition to the 
CSL–NICD-based mode of signalling discussed so far, 
it is increasingly appreciated that there are other outputs 
from the Notch signalling pathway, collectively referred 
to as non-canonical Notch signalling. Non-canonical 
Notch signalling can occur without the need for CSL28
or independently of Notch ligand stimulation, or it can 
be regulated by non-canonical ligands (reviewed in 
REFS 126,127). At the mechanistic level, non-canonical 
Notch signalling is not as well understood, but it may be 
biologically important and is therefore worth considering 
from a modulation perspective. For example, strategies to 
interfere with CSL or the CSL–NICD interaction may be 
irrelevant if a particular facet of Notch signalling proceeds 
through the non-canonical pathway.
Notch and disease
Notch signalling has a role in most organs, and the role 
of Notch in normal development has been the subject 
of several recent reviews10,128–134. Elegant genetic studies
have provided clear evidence of situations in which 
Notch is required and what it can do, whereas studies 
in human diseases have revealed the many instances in 
which Notch is deregulated. Below, we focus on some 
of the organs in which deregulated Notch signalling is 
linked to disease, and which could provide opportunities 
for therapeutic intervention (TABLE 1).
Currently, a limitation in the field is the dearth of reagents
, in particular specific and good antibodies for each 
of the activated receptors, to allow efficient visualization 
Box 3 | The ‘dark side’ of Notch: Notch signalling as an off-target effect in treating Alzheimer’s disease
γ-secretase inhibitors (GSIs) were not originally 
designed with Notch signalling in mind; rather, they 
were developed as therapeutic strategies to lower 
amyloid-β peptide load in Alzheimer’s disease. These 
studies rapidly showed the limitations of broadly 
targeting γ-secretase, as patients had severe 
gastrointestinal toxicity, among other side effects, 
owing to off-target effects on Notch signalling in the 
intestine. Similarly, if using GSIs to target Notch 
signalling, it is important to take into consideration 
the myriad other pathways that are regulated by 
γ-secretase (reviewed in REF. 283), in which 
cadherins, ERBB4, CD44 and other proteins are also 
substrates for γ-secretase cleavage (see figure). 
Off-target effects on these pathways could have 
confusing and surprising effects in many disease 
contexts.
To circumvent these problems, considerable 
effort is being made towards the development of 
γ-secretase modulators that bias γ-secretase towards 
or away from specific substrates, or shift the location 
of the cleavage event by a few amino acids284, which 
have profound effects on downstream signalling or 
phenotypes. However, the majority of current efforts 
are aimed at producing Notch-sparing GSIs that are 
specific for amyloid-β cleavage inhibition.
APH1, anterior pharynx defective 1; APLP, amyloid-like 
protein; APP, amyloid precursor protein; NICD, Notch 
intracellular domain; PEN2, presenilin enhancer 2; 
PSEN, presenilin. 
REVIEWS
362 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
of active Notch signalling in vivo. This restricts our 
capacity to measure levels of Notch activation in clinical
samples. Gene expression profiling may provide an 
alternative approach to reveal whether Notch signalling 
is active, but this method is complicated by the fact that 
the core Notch transcriptome appears to be quite diverse 
across different cell types28 (reviewed in REF. 10).
The haematopoietic system. Notch has critical roles 
at various differentiation steps in the haematopoietic 
system. Notch is important for the development of 
fetal haematopoietic stem cells135, commitment to the 
lymphoid lineage, T cell development136–138 and cell fate 
decisions in the myeloid45,139–141 and erythroid142 lineages. 
Reduced Notch signalling in mice is associated with an 
increased pool of granulocyte-monocyte progenitors, 
leading to a leukaemia-like phenotype143. Notch has also 
been implicated as a regulator of haematopoietic regeneration
, but whether Notch controls adult haematopoietic 
stem cells is still controversial91,144,145.
Deregulated Notch signalling in the haematopoietic 
system has been linked to leukaemia and lymphoma. 
Initial evidence came from chromosomal translocations
involving NOTCH1 in patients with T-ALL1; more 
than 50% of patients with T-ALL carry gain-of-function 
NOTCH1 mutations146, leading to enhanced receptor 
cleavage or a more long-lived NICD. Some patients with 
T-ALL carry loss-of-function mutations in FBXW7, 
which leads to reduced turnover of the NICD107,147 but 
also affects MYC stability18. Meanwhile, the first clue 
that Notch signalling has an important role in B cells 
came from the discovery that Epstein–Barr virus 
nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) binds to CSL148 to activate 
the transcription of Notch target genes in B cells149–151. 
Activating NOTCH1 mutations in B cell disorders are 
observed in more aggressive forms of chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia (CLL)5,6 and mantle cell lymphoma 
(MCL)152.
In contrast to the gain-of-function NOTCH mutations 
in T-ALL and CLL, loss-of-function mutations in NOTCH
or auxiliary proteins have also recently been reported 
in blood diseases. Notably, mutations in NOTCH2, 
MAML1, nicastrin (NCSTN) or the γ-secretase subunit 
anterior pharynx defective 1A (APH1A) were linked to 
chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia (CMML) in more 
than 10% of patients143. However, in this study, only 
the MAML1 mutations seemed to result in a loss of function
, which may impinge on other signalling pathways, 
as discussed above. In stark contrast to these results, 
inhibition of canonical Notch signalling through overexpression
of dominant-negative MAML1 in haematopoietic
progenitors did not abrogate stable long-term 
reconstitution in irradiated hosts, nor did it result in 
expansion of the myeloid lineage91. Furthermore, loss 
of Notch 1 and Notch 2 in the bone marrow leads to a 
non-transplantable, non-cell-autonomous, myeloproliferative
disorder153. In humans, analysis of acute myeloid
leukaemias by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 
Research Network did not reveal any mutations in the 
Notch pathway154, although JAG1 does appear to be 
upregulated in acute promyelocytic leukaemia155.
In conclusion, gain-of-function mutations result in 
lymphoid leukaemias, whereas the role of Notch signalling
in myeloid leukaemias is currently controversial.
The vasculature. The vasculature is composed of networks
of tubes with an endothelial lining and surrounding
mural cells — pericytes and vascular smooth muscle 
cells (VSMCs). Genetic manipulation in mice has revealed 
that Notch signalling is crucial for proper vasculogenesis 
and has a key role in the development and function of 
both endothelial cells and VSMCs156–163. Notch signalling 
is important for arterial versus venous differentiation in 
the vasculature. To become functional, the early vascular 
system develops into two distinct parts: the arterial and 
venous sides, which are the afferent high-pressure 
and efferent low-pressure loops, respectively. Via sonic 
hedgehog and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
activation, Notch signalling is activated on the arterial 
side164, and loss of Notch signalling promotes a venous 
rather than arterial fate165. During angiogenesis — that 
is, when the vasculature is sprouting from existing blood 
vessels — Notch controls the balance between stalk cells 
and the tip cells that are at the leading edge of the sprouts. 
When sprouting, VEGF upregulates the DLL4 ligand, 
which then downregulates VEGFR receptor (VEGFR) 
expression in adjacent cells166. The DLL4-expressing cell 
becomes the tip cell, and the generation of more tip cells 
leads to enhanced sprouting.
Modifying the balance between tip and stalk cells 
by modulating Notch signalling is an especially interesting
therapeutic avenue, in particular with regard to 
anticancer therapeutics. In addition to the role of Notch 
in the development and homeostasis of the vasculature, 
sporadic loss of Notch 1 heterozygosity in tumours of 
the murine endothelium indicates that this pathway acts 
as a tumour suppressor in this system167, in contrast to 
its oncogenic role in most other organ systems. Chronic 
inhibition of DLL4 using antibodies induces pathological
activation of endothelial cells and leads to vascular 
neoplasms, which also supports a tumour-suppressive 
role for Notch in the vasculature168. However, in perivascular
smooth muscle cells, Notch may act as an oncogene 
as many glomus (vascular pericyte) tumours harbour 
gain-of-function mutations in NOTCH1, NOTCH2 and
NOTCH3 (REF. 169).
With regard to mural cells, VSMC function and 
maintenance is controlled by Notch signalling, and the 
Notch 3 receptor and JAG1 ligand are particularly 
important. Mice deficient in Notch3 are viable but show 
a progressive loss of VSMCs. Furthermore, mutations 
in human NOTCH3 cause CADASIL syndrome2,170. 
Patients with CADASIL syndrome have degeneration 
of VSMCs, leading to strokes in vessels of the brain, 
which are accompanied by changes in white matter. 
The mutational spectrum shows that the majority of 
mutations in NOTCH3 are missense mutations that 
affect the distribution of cysteine residues in the EGF 
repeats of the receptor: either a cysteine residue is lost 
or a new cysteine residue added. It has been suggested 
that aberrant aggregation of the extracellular domain 
of the mutated Notch 3 receptor carrying an unpaired 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 363
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1165516613)
cysteine residue causes the accumulation of so-called 
granular osmiophilic material around the VSMC171,172. 
How this granular osmiophilic material accumulation 
causes VSMCs to succumb — and whether aberrant 
Notch signalling per se is involved — is, however, not 
fully established.
The function of Notch 3 is important not only in 
CADASIL syndrome but also in pulmonary arterial 
hypertension (PAH). Patients with PAH have increased 
pulmonary resistance and right ventricular failure, 
which eventually lead to death. Patients with PAH show 
elevated NOTCH3 expression, and Notch3−/− mice do not 
Table 1 | Notch in development and disease and where to intervene
Organ or 
systems
Role of Notch Disorder Associated Notch mutation Refs
Breast Alveolar development, luminal cell 
fate maintenance, control of basal 
cell proliferation
Breast cancer Gain of function activating 
mutations in NOTCH1 or NOTCH2
226
Ear Definition of presumptive sensory 
epithelium, hair cell-supporting 
cell fate determination
•	Deafness (sometimes seen in 
Alagille syndrome)
•	Hearing loss (sometimes seen 
in Hajdu–Cheney syndrome)
•	Balance defects in mice
•	Loss-of-function mutations in 
JAG1 and NOTCH2
•	Gain-of-function mutation in 
NOTCH2
•	Inhibition of Notch can rescue 
hearing loss after acoustic trauma
132,261
Heart and tissues 
derived from 
cardiac neural 
crest cells
Cardiac patterning, cardiomyocyte 
differentiation, valve development, 
ventricular trabeculation, outflow 
tract development. Patterning of 
neural crest precursors for outflow 
tract region
Aortic valve disease (including 
ventricular septal defect and 
tetralogy of Fallot), congenital 
aortic valve stenosis and Alagille 
syndrome (inherited autosomal 
dominant disorder) 
•	Gain–of-function mutations 
in NOTCH1
•	Loss-of-function mutations in 
JAG1 and NOTCH2
175,285
Haematopoietic, 
immune and 
lymphatic system
•	Required for the second wave of 
haematopoiesis in development
•	Controls B cell versus T cell 
development, maintains 
haematopoietic stem cells and 
myeloid homeostasis
•	Regulates generation of 
T lineage-restricted progenitors 
and marginal zone B cell 
development in the spleen
•	Controls homeostasis of dendritic 
cells in the spleen
•	Thymic morphogenesis, 
differentiation of γδ lineage T cells
•	T cell acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia (T-ALL)
•	Chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia (CLL)
•	Isolated juvenile or chronic 
myelomonocytic leukaemia 
(CMML)
•	NOTCH1-activating, FBXW7
loss-of-function mutations
•	NOTCH1-activating mutations
•	NOTCH1 loss of function 
mutations
5,6,18,107,
143,145,
146,286
Liver Regulates ductal plate formation 
and intrahepatic bile duct 
morphogenesis in mice
Alagille syndrome (bile 
duct paucity), cholestasis, 
cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocellular 
carcinoma and fatty liver
Loss-of-function mutations in JAG1
and NOTCH2
220,221,287
Skin and 
epithelia
Cell adhesion, control of cell 
proliferation, hair follicle or 
feather papillae differentiation 
and homeostasis
•	Infantile myofibromatosis 2
•	Psoriasis vulgaris
•	Head and neck cancer
•	Cutaneous and lung squamous 
cell carcinoma
•	NOTCH3-activating single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in NOTCH2 and NOTCH4
•	Copy number increase in JAG1, 
or inactivating mutations in 
NOTCH1, NOTCH2 and NOTCH3
•	Loss-of-function mutations in 
NOTCH1 or NOTCH2
200,288–295
Vertebral column •	Somite segmentation through 
gene expression oscillation
•	Osteoblast and osteoclast 
differentiation
•	Spondylocostal dysostosis
•	Hajdu–Cheney syndrome 
(bone resorption disease)
•	Mutations in DLL3, MESP3, LFNG
and HES7
•	Gain-of-function mutation in 
NOTCH2
189,190,208,
296,297
Vasculature •	Regulates arteriovenous 
specification and differentiation 
of endothelial cells and vascular 
smooth muscle cells
•	Regulates blood vessel sprouting 
and branching
•	CADASIL syndrome (cerebral 
autosomal dominant arteriopathy 
with subcortical infarcts and 
lesions), vascular dementia
•	Pulmonary arterial hypertension 
(PAH)
•	Alagille syndrome (associated 
with vascular accidents)
•	NOTCH3 mutations have an 
unclear effect on signalling 
(lead to aggregates of Notch 3)
•	Notch 3 is required for PAH 
development
•	Loss-of-function mutations 
in JAG1 and NOTCH2
173,285,
298,299
DLL3, Delta-like 3; FBXW7, F-box and WD40 domain-containing protein 7; HES7, hairy and enhancer of split 7; JAG, Jagged; LFNG, O-fucosylpeptide 3-beta-N-
acetylglucosaminyltransferase; MESP3, mesoderm posterior protein 3.
REVIEWS
364 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Epithelial to 
mesenchymal transition
(EMT). A phenotypic change in 
cells where they lose epithelial 
and/or adhesive properties and 
become more motile. This is 
often associated with the onset 
of cancer metastasis.
Wolff–Parkinson–
White syndrome
A heart condition in which 
aberrant conductance between 
atria and ventricles leads to an 
increased heart rate. 
develop PAH under hypoxic conditions173. More recently, 
the link between NOTCH3 and PAH has been corroborated
by analysis of the gene encoding CC-chemokine 
receptor 2 (CCR2). Ccr2−/− mice showed more severe 
PAH following hypoxia, and this was linked to elevated 
Notch 3 signalling174.
Heart. Heart development occurs early in embryogenesis 
and requires functional Notch signalling; Notch has roles 
in the patterning of cardiac regions, in the differentiation
of various cell types in the heart, in the development 
of valves and the outflow tract as well as in ventricular 
trabeculation175. In Notch loss-of-function experiments 
in mice, endocardial — but not myocardial — patterning
in the developing heart is impaired176,177. Lack of 
Notch signalling also leads to a hampered development 
of the endocardial cushions in a process that involves 
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)176. In addition, 
Notch signalling has a role in organizing the outflow 
tract, which is required for emptying the left and right 
ventricles into the aorta and pulmonary trunk, respectively.
The formation of the outflow tract requires the 
involvement of various cell types, both from the heart 
and from the neural crest. Interestingly, Notch signalling
is required in both neural crest cells131 and the 
secondary heart field178,179 for normal outflow tract 
development. Notch is also involved in trabeculation of 
the heart, and mouse embryos lacking Notch 1 or CSL 
show defective trabeculation177. Notch confines BMP2 
expression to the atrioventricular canal myocardium, 
which is located between the prospective atrial and ventricular
chamber regions180–182, and BMP2 later remodels 
this tissue. Overexpression of Notch in the developing 
myocardium in mice results in aberrant conduction 
and ventricular pre-excitation, similar to that observed 
in Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome183. 
In light of the importance of Notch in multiple stages 
of heart development, it is not surprising that NOTCH
mutations are found in a number of heart diseases. 
Calcific aortic valve disease is an age-associated acquired 
valve disease associated with NOTCH1 mutations that 
presumably generate hypomorphic Notch 1 receptors184. 
NOTCH1 haploinsufficiency with missense mutations is 
found in bicuspid aortic valve disease185,186, which may 
also predispose to calcification. In keeping with this, 
Notch1+/− and Csl+/− (also known as Rbpj+/−) mice, when 
kept on a high-fat diet, develop signs of aortic valve 
calcification187,188. Several heart defects, including branch 
pulmonary artery stenosis, tetralogy of Fallot and septal 
defects, are observed in patients with Alagille syndrome, 
which is caused by mutations in JAG1 or NOTCH2 
(REFS 3,4). Cardiac defects, along with kidney and bone 
defects, are also observed in patients with Hajdu–Cheney 
syndrome, who carry NOTCH2 mutations that are 
believed to lead to elevated Notch signalling189,190.
Skin. The role of Notch in the skin is uncharacteristic 
in the sense that Notch signalling seems to promote 
differentiation rather than maintain a more immature 
cell state. The innermost part of the epidermis contains
progenitor cells that generate differentiated cells, 
forming the barrier that shields the body from the outside 
world. Expression of the DLL1 ligand is highest in stem 
cells191,192, and overexpression of Notch 1 triggers cell 
cycle withdrawal and differentiation by inducing p21 
expression in a process that also involves nuclear factor 
of activated T cells (NFAT)–calcineurin signalling193,194. 
Gene targeting experiments, in which Notch1 or Csl are 
conditionally ablated in the skin, result in epidermal 
hyperproliferation in mice143,146. This confirms the role 
of Notch in promoting differentiation, and additionally
demonstrates that Notch controls a commitment 
switch between spinous and basal cell types195.
With regard to skin cancers, NOTCH1 serves as a 
tumour suppressor gene in the skin196, which is in line 
with a differentiation-promoting effect, as ablation of 
Notch 1 in the epidermis facilitates chemical-induced 
skin carcinogenesis. Recent observations show that 
loss of Notch in the skin leads to the disruption of barrier
function197. This results in the secretion of thymic 
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), which in turn causes 
systemic B lymphoproliferative disorder153,197, as discussed
in the section on B cell lymphomas. There is 
also a role for TSLP in tumour protection, and TSLP-
mediated inflammation protects against cutaneous 
carcinogenesis198,199. Loss-of-function mutations in 
Notch components are commonly found in squamous 
cell carcinomas of the head and neck, skin and oesophagus
, with up to 66% of patients with oral squamous cell 
carcinoma displaying deregulation of the Notch pathway200. Epigenetic deregulation of Notch signalling 
has also been described in these patients201. However, 
Notch signalling also seems to be activated at the invasive
tumour front of oral squamous cell carcinoma202, 
which indicates that Notch may have several roles in 
this tumour type. Papilloma virus infection leads to 
proliferative epithelial lesions, which may be due to the 
inhibition of Notch signalling; in fact, E6 papilloma 
virus proteins bind to MAML and thus repress Notch 
signalling in epithelia.
The vertebral column. The vertebral column is important 
for body posture as well as protection of the spinal cord. 
It originates from parts of the somites, and its segmented 
structure — which is key to flexibility in the trunk — can 
be traced back to the segmental organization of somites. 
Each vertebra is formed by the rostral part of one somite 
combined with the caudal part of an adjacent somite. 
Notch signalling is important from the early stages of 
somitogenesis to the patterning of the vertebral column. 
Somites are laid down during somitogenesis with the 
help of an oscillating expression pattern of several genes 
known as the ‘segmentation clock’, which includes components
of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF), WNT and 
Notch pathways203,204, although the concept of an oscillating
segmentation clock requirement has recently been 
challenged205. Several Notch pathway genes have been 
shown to be involved in proper somite formation and 
patterning, including DLL1, DLL3, O-fucosylpeptide 
3-beta-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (LFNG), mind 
bomb homolog 1 (MIB1), NOTCH1 and CSL (reviewed 
in REF. 134). 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 365
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-52774658)
Notch signalling is equally important for human 
vertebral column organization, and mutations in the 
pathway are linked to several types of vertebral disorders.
Mutations in the DLL3 gene were originally 
found to cause spondylocostal dysostosis206. The DLL3 
ligand is unique among Notch ligands because it inhibits
Notch signalling in cis but cannot activate Notch 
signalling in trans21. Following the initial discovery of 
mutations in DLL3, mutations in mesoderm posterior 
protein 2 (MESP2), a downstream gene in the Notch 
signalling pathway, as well as in LFNG and HES7 (hairy 
and enhancer of split 7), were found in spondylocostal 
dysostosis7–9. MESP2 mutations have also been found in 
spondylothoracid dysostosis207. A recent exciting discovery
is that the severity of scoliosis in a genetic mouse 
model haploinsufficient for Notch signalling (Hes7+/- or 
Mesp1+/− mice), is modified by an environmental component
: a short pulse of hypoxia, which blocked FGF 
signalling, was sufficient to enhance the phenotype208.
Inner ear. The inner ear is important for hearing and 
balance, and has an intricate architecture with semicircular
canals and cochlea. Whereas the semicircular 
canals control balance, the hair cells in the cochlea are 
responsible for converting sound to nerve impulses that 
are transmitted through the acoustic nerve to the brain. 
Based on the role of Notch in bristle development in 
D. melanogaster, it was hypothesized that Notch signalling
could be important for generating hair cells209. This 
hypothesis is supported by expression data as well as data 
obtained from modulating Notch signalling in mice, 
zebrafish and chicks; disruption of Notch signalling led 
to an increase in hair cells at the expense of the number of 
supporting cells210–212. Mechanistically, the choice between 
hair cell differentiation or support cell differentiation is 
controlled by lateral inhibition, a process whereby differentiation
of one phenotype in a field of initially homogeneous
cells inhibits neighbouring cells to take on the 
same fate. At the molecular level, Notch signalling upregulates HEY (Hairy/enhancer-of-split-related with YRPW 
motif) and HES genes213, which in turn negatively regulate
the transcription factor atonal homolog 1 (ATOH1). 
Reduced Notch signalling thus leads to elevated ATOH1 
levels, which promotes the hair cell fate. The importance 
of Notch in maintaining balance is underscored by observations
of inner ear defects in mice with reduced Notch 
signalling; the Slalom, Headturner, Ozzy and Nodder 
mice, as the names imply, have head-shaking phenotypes 
owing to heterozygous Jag1 missense mutations64,214–216.
Liver. Notch has an important role in cell fate decisions 
in early liver development. Loss of Notch signalling leads 
to blocked development of bile duct cells, and bile duct 
paucity is observed in mutant mice, such as the Notch2
and Jag1 heterozygous mice217, as well as in patients with 
Alagille syndrome (see above). The liver has a unique 
ability to regenerate, and a role for Notch signalling has 
been demonstrated in the regeneration process, where 
Notch signalling is sufficient to reprogramme hepatocytes
into endothelial biliary cells218. Notch signalling is 
also involved in the regulation of lipid content in the liver, 
which is of interest from a diabetes perspective. Increased 
Notch signalling causes fatty liver through activation 
of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex
; conversely, inhibition of Notch by a decoy Notch 
receptor reduces hepatic glucose production219, which 
indicates that Notch also has homeostatic functions in 
the liver. Elevated Notch signalling has been demonstrated
to cause tumours in the liver. Notably, transgenic 
mice overexpressing Notch 1 ICD developed intrahepatic
cholangiocellular carcinomas, which were linked 
to the upregulation of cyclin E220. Overexpression of 
Notch 1 ICD in mice results in hepatocellular carcinoma221. 
In humans, elevated levels of NOTCH1 and NOTCH3
as well as JAG1 are seen in cholangiocarcinoma cells220, 
whereas JAG1 is often upregulated in hepatocellular 
carcinoma221.
Mammary development and cancer. Breast cancer affects 
more than 1.5 million women worldwide each year and, 
although treatment has improved considerably, it remains 
a major medical problem with a high rate of relapse. 
Normal development of the mammary tissue proceeds 
via the differentiation of mammary stem cells to luminal, 
alveolar and myoepithelial cells, and the epithelium 
undergoes morphogenetic changes during puberty, 
pregnancy and lactation. The Notch pathway has been 
implicated in several steps of mammary development, 
and inhibition of Notch signalling increases the stem/
progenitor cell pool and leads to disturbed ductal morphogenesis222. Notch signalling also promotes commitment to 
the luminal fate instead of the myoepithelial lineage222,223.
Accordingly, it is not surprising that deregulated 
Notch signalling has been implicated in breast cancer, 
and Notch signalling appears to be upregulated in many 
breast tumours, frequently in association with the loss 
or downregulation of its negative regulator Numb224,225. 
Gain-of-function mutations in NOTCH1, similar to 
those found in T-ALL and non-small-cell lung cancer, 
have been reported226 but they seem to be rare in comparison
with, for example, mutations in TP53, breast 
cancer susceptibility 1 (BRCA1) and BRCA2. However, 
5–10% of triple-negative breast cancers, cancers that do 
not express oestrogen receptor, progesterone receptor 
or HER2 (also known as ERBB2 and Neu), and therefore
offer few treatment options, have activating fusion 
mutations in NOTCH1 or NOTCH2 (REF. 226), which 
provide attractive alternatives for targeted drugs227. 
It thus seems reasonable to assume that hyperactivation
of Notch can emerge independently or as a consequence
of other tumour-initiating events, rather than 
as a result of direct mutations in the pathway.
A role for elevated Notch signalling in breast cancer 
is consistent with data from mouse models in which 
Notch is overexpressed in mammary tissues. Thus, 
expression of the Notch 4 ICD from a mammary-specific 
whey acidic protein (WAP) promoter in transgenic 
mice leads to mammary tumours228, similar to the effect 
of insertional mutagenesis by the mouse mammary 
tumour virus (MMTV) into the Notch 4 locus (previously
known as Int3)229. Similarly, xenografting human 
breast cancer cells that have heightened Notch activity 
REVIEWS
366 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1542127052)
[Link]
http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v13/n5/full/nrd4252.html#supplementary-information
[Link]
http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v13/n5/full/nrd4252.html#supplementary-information
Maximum tolerated dose
The highest dose of a 
treatment that will produce 
the desired effect without 
causing unacceptable toxicity.
leads to more dramatic tumour development, coupled 
with a metabolic switch to a glycolytic state230. Studies of 
Notch have also contributed to our understanding of cell 
lineage in the mammary epithelium, as recent lineage 
tracing of Notch 2-expressing cells led to the identification
of a novel mammary stem cell type231. An important 
consideration is that different Notch receptors may have 
different — even opposing — roles in breast cancer. 
Elevated NOTCH2 levels are associated with more differentiated
tumour types, whereas higher NOTCH1 levels 
are found in poorly differentiated tumours232. In support 
of this, ectopic expression of the Notch 2 ICD induces 
cell death in basal-like breast cancer cells233, whereas the 
Notch 4 ICD induces proliferation. Another tumour that 
is related to aberrant Notch signalling and that affects 
mammary tissue as well as several other organs, including
salivary glands and head and neck tissue, is adenoid 
cystic carcinoma, a malignancy that arises in secretory 
glands, in which mutations in NOTCH1 and NOTCH2
have been observed234.
Clinical trials
Clinical studies inhibiting Notch have focused on 
cancer, and the first attempts were reported in 2006 at 
the annual meeting of the American Society for Clinical 
Oncology (ASCO)235. In this first trial, six adults and two 
children with T-ALL or acute myeloid leukaemia were 
administered the GSI MK-0752 daily using an accelerated
escalation scheme. Treatment was discontinued  
owing to severe diarrhoea in the patients. However, one 
patient with T-ALL showed a promising 45% reduction
in mediastinal mass at 28 days, but unfortunately 
the cancer progressed by 56 days. These first results 
were both disappointing and exciting, and prompted a 
flurry of subsequent studies that aimed to determine the 
maximum tolerated dose of MK-0752 to test the effect 
of this GSI and others in various cancers and explore 
avenues for more specific Notch targeting.
As mentioned previously, Notch is an oncogene in 
most systems. However, in the skin and vasculature, as 
well as in squamous epithelia, Notch acts as a tumour 
suppressor. Given these diverse actions, it is imperative
that Notch modulation is spatially targeted and 
specific. For several different types of cancers, modulation
of Notch signalling has reached clinical trials, and 
currently there are two main types of approaches: the 
use of antibodies against the Notch receptor or ligand; 
and inhibition of γ-secretase. These two approaches are 
discussed below.
Targeting DLL4 with antibodies. The DLL4 ligand has 
a special role in fine-tuning the vasculature by regulating
the interaction between tip cells and stalk cells in 
the endothelium. DLL4-blocking antibodies or decoy 
fusion peptides (DLL4–Fc) have been used to modulate 
tumour vascularization in animal tumour models236,237
or in small-cell lung cancer cell lines238, and several 
DLL4 antibodies are being tested in Phase I clinical trials 
to assess their safety, toxicity and antitumour activity 
(TABLES 2,3; more details can be found in Supplementary 
information S1 (table)). MEDI0639, a DLL4 (IgG1λ) 
monoclonal antibody that abrogates the DLL4–Notch 1 
interaction239, is being tested in patients with solid 
tumours, whereas another monoclonal DLL4 antibody, 
demcizumab (also known as OMP-21M18), is being tested 
in non-small-cell lung cancer, ovarian, fallopian and peritoneal
cancer, pancreatic cancer and colorectal cancer, 
among others (TABLE 3; Supplementary information S1 
(table)).
Although promising, the long-term use of such 
approaches may have off-target effects. Initial experiments
using DLL4-targeting antibodies or soluble 
DLL4–Fc, which acts in an inhibitory fashion, showed 
robust antitumour effects in mice, which were caused 
by an increased but vastly disorganized tumour vasculature
that did not supply the tumour with blood240,241. 
However, long-term use of these agents caused pathological
changes in liver endothelial cells and resulted in 
vascular tumours168. An elegant strategy for modulating 
the tumour vasculature in an alternative manner, which 
is still at the preclinical stage but which may circumvent 
some of the off-target effects, is to direct the ligand to 
endothelial cells by using an arginine-glycine-aspartate 
(RGD) motif fused to the DSL domain of DLL1 (REF. 242). 
The RGD motif targets αVβ3 integrin, which is expressed 
on endothelial cells, and this therefore activates Notch 
signalling exclusively on endothelial cells. In these experiments
, Notch signalling is specifically activated, rather 
than inhibited, in endothelial cells, and there are effects 
on tumour growth in animal models242. Further improvements
in fine-tuning the targeting of specific Notch pathways
have been achieved using antibodies that selectively 
block either Notch 1 or Notch 2, and that, when used 
individually, block tumour vascularization and growth 
without eliciting the formation of intestinal endothelial 
tumours74.
Targeting Notch with antibodies. Antibodies have been 
developed that target specific Notch receptors, such 
as Notch 1 or Notch 2, and that work in both humans 
and mice74. This approach shows promise, as blocking 
both Notch 1 and Notch 2 with antibodies or with GSIs 
leads to widespread gastrointestinal toxicity, whereas 
inhibition of either receptor alone does not have toxic 
effects. Targeting specific regions of the receptor, such 
as the extracellular NRR of Notch 1, Notch 2 (REF. 74)
or Notch 3 (REF. 243), locks the receptor in a ligandunresponsive
state. Clinical trials focusing on the specific 
inhibition of Notch receptors are underway, and include 
the testing of antibodies against Notch 1 and Notch 2 
or Notch 3. OMP-59R5 is an IgG2 antibody that inhibits 
Notch 2 and Notch 3 (REF. 244) (TABLE 3; Supplementary 
information S1(table)). Although patients receiving 
this antibody have reported side effects similar to those 
originally reported in patients receiving GSIs, such as 
mild to moderate diarrhoea, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, 
decreased appetite and constipation, the antibody stabilized
disease in a patient with Kaposi’s sarcoma and 
an adenoid cystic carcinoma. Further studies are underway
to test the effect of OMP-59R5 in pancreatic cancer 
and small-cell lung cancer (TABLE 3; Supplementary 
information S1(table)). 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 367
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.696724045)
Data for the Notch  1-targeting IgG2 antibody 
OMP-52M51 were recently presented at the American 
Association for Cancer Research AACR-NCI-EORTC 
International Conference on Molecular Targets and 
Cancer Therapeutics. The poster by Davis and colleagues245
showed that although over 50% of patients receiving this 
treatment also experience diarrhoea, the antibody reduced 
the number of circulating tumour cells and showed some 
efficacy in a patient with metastatic colorectal cancer.
GSIs. Various clinical trials are underway to investigate 
how and whether targeting Notch using GSIs can ameliorate
various diseases, notably in oncology (TABLE 3; 
Supplementary information S1(table)). Inhibition of 
γ-secretase bluntly inhibits production of the NICD from 
membrane-tethered Notch receptors, but nonetheless 
shows great promise in several systems, and over the 
years a range of GSIs have been developed for the potential
inhibition of APP processing in Alzheimer’s disease. 
However, the clinical trials of Eli Lilly’s semagacestat 
had to be halted prematurely when an interim analysis
revealed that, when compared with placebo-treated 
controls, GSI-treated patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
performed worse cognitively and even had increased 
rates of skin cancer, which may be related to off-target 
effects246. Improved dosage regimens have now been 
reported that seem to exert an effect on Notch in the 
disease setting while avoiding systemic Notch-related 
side effects such as diarrhoea, thrombocytopaenia, fever, 
nausea, vomiting, anorexia and fatigue247.
Most current trials focus on the safety and efficacy of 
the GSIs MK-0752 and RO4929097, but others are also 
currently being tested, such as PF-03084014.MK-0752 
was first developed as an inhibitor of amyloid-β cleavage 
for Alzheimer’s disease248, but has since been increasingly
used as an inhibitor of Notch cleavage (TABLE 3; 
Supplementary information S1(table)). A large Phase I 
clinical trial examining the efficacy and safety of 
MK-0752 in treating solid tumours placed 103 patients 
on three different schedules of treatment249. Patients 
either received 450mg or 600mg once daily, or three 
times a week, or they received between 600 and 4,200mg 
once a week. Dose-limiting diarrhoea and fatigue 
occurred in the first two schedule formats, and so the 
once-weekly treatment was deemed optimal; the maximum
tolerated dose in this regimen was determined 
to be 3,200mg. Some positive responses were seen in 
this study: one patient with anaplastic astrocytoma had 
a complete response, whereas 12 patients displayed 
stable disease for over 1 year, 10 of whom had been diagnosed
with glioma (24% of patients with glioma in this 
study showed stable disease in response to MK-0752). 
This study also emphasized that there was no effect of 
MK-0752 observed in extracranial tumours, based in 
particular on a lack of effect in 24 patients with breast 
cancer, or in 16 patients with colorectal cancer. It is 
worth considering that MK-0752 reached maximum 
levels in the serum of patients after 3–8.4 hours, and had a 
half-life of ~15 hours, which indicates that weekly dosing 
could not achieve steady-state levels of Notch inhibition.
Additional studies on the best dosing regimen 
might further improve treatment.
The tolerability and efficacy of MK-0752 has also 
been tested in 23 children with malignant central nervous
system (CNS) tumours. No objective responses were 
reported, and the recommended regimen after assessing 
dose-limiting toxicities was 260mg per m2 once daily, 
with a ‘3 days on, 4 days off ’ schedule. The most common
side effects were lymphopaenia (observed in 15 
out of 23 patients) and fatigue (observed in 11 out of 23 
patients); by contrast, diarrhoea was a rare side effect 
(observed in 2 out of 23 patients). All tumours in this 
cohort showed strong immunoreactivity for the Notch 
target genes HES1 and HES5, but only 20 were positive 
for NOTCH1 itself. The antibody used to detect Notch 1 
does not discriminate between active or membranebound
forms of Notch 1, and it is therefore difficult to 
assess the signalling state of Notch 1. As a proxy, this 
study assessed the effect of Notch inhibition by examining
levels of the Notch 1 ICD in peripheral blood 
Table 2 | γ-secretase inhibitors in clinical trials
Drug name Sponsor or collaborator Structure
DAPT Eli Lilly & Co.
F F
N
H
O
H
N
O
O
O
BMS-906024 Bristol-Myers Squibb
N
N
CH3
O
N
H
O
F
F
F
O
NH2
F F
F
MK0752 Merck
S
Cl
O
O
F
F
HO
O
PF-03084014 Pfizer
O
NH
F
F
N
N
HN
RO4929097 US National 
Cancer Institute
N
H
N
H
O
F F 
O
H
N O
F
F
F
REVIEWS
368 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
( 8.0.0.2542.1879317077 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
Table 3 | Ongoing and completed clinical studies with Notch targeting
Agent Mechanism of 
action
Sponsor and 
collaborator
ClinicalTrials.
gov identifier
Phase Status Tumour type
BMS-906024 Pan-Notch 
inhibitor
Bristol-Myers Squibb NCT01653470 I Recruiting Advanced or metastatic 
solid tumours
BMS-906024 Pan-Notch 
inhibitor
Bristol-Myers Squibb NCT01292655 I Recruiting Advanced solid 
tumours
BMS-906024 Pan-Notch 
inhibitor
Bristol-Myers Squibb NCT01363817 I Recruiting Acute T cell 
lymphoblastic 
leukaemia or T cell 
lymphoblastic 
lymphoma
LBH589 
(parabinostat)
Histone 
deacetylase 
inhibitor
University of 
Wisconsin–Madison 
and Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT01013597 II Suspended 
participant 
recruitment 
(interim analysis)
Metastatic medullary 
thyroid cancer 
and radioactive 
iodine-resistant 
differentiated thyroid 
cancer
LBH589 
(parabinostat)
Histone 
deacetylase 
inhibitor
University of 
Wisconsin–Madison 
and Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT00985946 II Completed Neuroendocrine 
tumours
MEDI0639 DLL4-specific 
antibody
MedImmune NCT01577745 I Ongoing Advanced solid tumours
OMP-21M18 
(demcizumab)
DLL4-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals and 
Novotech 
NCT01189968 Ib Recruiting Non-squamous 
non-small-cell lung 
cancer
OMP-21M18 
(demcizumab)
DLL4-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals and 
Novotech
NCT01189929 Ib Recruiting Pancreatic cancer
OMP-21M18 
(demcizumab)
DLL4-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT01952249 Ib Recruiting Ovarian, primary 
peritoneal or fallopian 
tube cancer
OMP-21M18 
(demcizumab)
DLL4-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT01957007 Ib Recruiting Non-small-cell lung 
cancer
OMP-21M18 
(demcizumab)
DLL4-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT00744562 I Completed Solid tumours
OMP-21M18 
(demcizumab)
DLL4-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals and 
Novotech
NCT01189942 Ib Ongoing Metastatic colorectal 
cancer
OMP-52M51 Notch 1-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals and 
GlaxoSmithKline
NCT01778439 I Recruiting Solid tumours
OMP-52M51 Notch 1-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals and 
GlaxoSmithKline
NCT01703572 I Recruiting Lymphoid malignancies
OMP-59R5 Notch 2- and 
Notch 3-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT01647828 Ib/II Recruiting Pancreatic cancer
OMP-59R5 Notch 2- and 
Notch 3-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT01859741 Ib/II Recruiting Small-cell lung cancer
OMP-59R5 Notch 2- and 
Notch 3-specific  
antibody
OncoMed 
Pharmaceuticals
NCT01277146 I Ongoing Solid tumours
MK0752 GSI Merck NCT01243762 I Terminated Ovarian cancer, 
fallopian tube cancer, 
primary peritoneal 
cancer, metastatic or 
recurrent colorectal 
cancer
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 369
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
MK0752 GSI Merck NCT00106145 I Completed Metastatic or locally 
advanced breast cancer 
and other solid tumours
MK0752 GSI Merck NCT00100152 I Terminated T cell acute 
lymphoblastic 
leukaemia
MK0752 GSI Merck NCT00803894 I Completed Healthy volunteers
MK0752 GSI Cancer Research UK NCT01098344 I/II Recruiting Pancreatic cancer
MK0752 GSI Loyola University and 
Merck
NCT00756717 Pilot 
study; 
not 
provided
Unknown Breast cancer
MK0752 GSI Merck NCT00803894 I Completed Healthy male volunteers
MK0752 GSI University of Michigan 
Cancer Center
NCT00645333 I/II Completed Metastatic breast 
cancer
MK0752 GSI Merck NCT01295632 I Recruiting Advanced solid tumours
MK0752 GSI Pediatric Brain Tumor 
Consortium (PBTC) and 
the US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT00572182 I Terminated* CNS tumours
Not stated Notch inhibitor Eli Lilly & Co. NCT01158404 I Completed Advanced cancer
PF-03084014 GSI Pfizer NCT00878189 I Ongoing Advanced solid tumour 
malignancy and T cell 
acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia or 
lymphoblastic lymphoma
Resveratrol A stilbenoid with 
effects still under 
study
University of Wisconsin–
Madison
NCT01476592 Not 
provided
Recruiting Low-grade 
gastrointestinal 
tumours
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01119599 I Ongoing Malignant glioma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01116687 II Completed (results 
now available) 
Metastatic colorectal 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01238133 I Recruiting Stage II or stage III 
triple-negative breast 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01151449 II Ongoing Advanced, metastatic 
or recurrent 
triple-negative invasive 
breast carcinoma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01154452 Ib/II Recruiting Advanced or metastatic 
sarcoma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01120275 II Ongoing Stage IV melanoma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01198184 I Ongoing Recurrent or metastatic 
endometrial and renal 
cell cancers
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01232829 II Ongoing Metastatic pancreas 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01196416 Ib/II Ongoing Recurrent or metastatic 
melanoma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01232829 II Ongoing Metastatic pancreatic 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01071564 I Recruiting Advanced breast cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01122901 II Ongoing Progressive 
glioblastoma
Table 3 (cont.) | Ongoing and completed clinical studies with Notch targeting 
Agent Mechanism 
of action
Sponsor and 
collaborator
ClinicalTrials.
gov identifier
Phase Status Tumour type
REVIEWS
370 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-555963638)
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01251172 II Withdrawn Multiple myeloma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01218620 Not 
provided
Ongoing Advanced solid tumours
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01208441 I Terminated Stage II/III hormone 
receptor-positive breast 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01193868 II Recruiting Non-small-cell lung 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01198535 I Terminated Metastatic colorectal 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01192763 I Terminated Pancreatic cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01216787 II Withdrawn Stage IIIb, stage IIIc or 
stage IV melanoma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01269411 I Terminated Recurrent invasive 
gliomas
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01158274 I Ongoing Refractory solid 
tumours
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01145456 I Ongoing Advanced solid tumours
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01141569 II Ongoing Advanced renal cell 
carcinoma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01200810 II Ongoing Adenocarcinoma of the 
prostate
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01217411 I/II Terminated Brain metastases from 
breast cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01131234 I Ongoing Advanced solid tumours
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01270438 II Ongoing Metastatic colorectal 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01189240 I/II Ongoing Progressive or recurrent 
malignant glioma
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01175343 II Ongoing Recurrent and/or 
metastatic epithelial 
ovarian cancer, 
fallopian tube cancer 
or primary peritoneal 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01096355 I Ongoing Advanced solid cancers
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01149356 I/II Ongoing Advanced or metastatic 
breast cancer
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01088763 I/II Terminated Relapsed or refractory 
solid tumours, CNS 
tumours, lymphoma or 
T cell leukaemia
RO4929097 GSI US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01193881 Not 
provided
Ongoing Non-small-cell lung 
cancer
RO4929097 GSI NIH Clinical Center and 
the US National Cancer 
Institute
NCT01236586 I Withdrawn Paediatric relapsed/
refractory solid or 
CNS tumours, 
lymphoma or T cell 
leukaemia
CNS, central nervous system; DLL4, Delta-like 4; GSI, γ-secretase inhibitor; NIH, US National Institutes of Health. *This Phase I study was permanently closed 
to patient accrual on 23 February 2011 owing to the discontinuation of support from Merck. For more details on the agents in this table, see Supplementary 
information S1 (table).
Table 3 (cont.) | Ongoing and completed clinical studies with Notch targeting 
Agent Mechanism 
of action
Sponsor and 
collaborator
ClinicalTrials.
gov identifier
Phase Status Tumour type
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 371
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.968028742)
mononuclear cells; levels were decreased in five patients 
and increased in four patients, which indicates a mixed 
response to this treatment. These results are not so surprising
in light of animal studies in which RO3929097 
was unable to inhibit the growth of childhood tumours 
(such as medulloblastoma) that were xenografted into 
mice250.
The GSI RO4929097 was first shown to inhibit Notch 
signalling and inhibit tumour growth in a mouse xenograft
model251, and is now being assessed in various clinical
trials (TABLE 3; Supplementary information S1(table)). 
No positive effects of RO4929097 were seen in 33 
patients with colorectal carcinoma receiving 10mg in 
a ‘3 days on, 4 days off ’ dosing regimen252. In this study, 
no patients suffered from diarrhoea; instead, mild grade 
1 or grade 2 nausea and vomiting were most commonly 
reported. HES1 expression was better correlated with 
Notch 1 ICD expression than with overall NOTCH1
expression, but several tumours were also negative for 
these markers.
Similar to the large study by Krop et al.249 examining 
MK-0752 in 103 patients, RO4929097 has been studied
in a large Phase I study with 110 patients who were 
also placed on three different dosage schedules247. Side 
effects included nausea, diarrhoea and fatigue, and positive
effects with tumour response or stable disease were 
seen for colorectal adenocarcinoma with neuroendocrine 
features, epithelioid sarcoma, melanoma and ovarian 
carcinoma.
Inhibition of Notch signalling has also been shown 
to sensitize cancer cells to chemotherapy and radiotherapy253,254. Consequently, several clinical trials are 
underway to test how well GSIs can be tolerated when 
combined with chemotherapy, and whether any added 
benefit is observed. However, not all GSIs have the 
same effects, and it is becoming increasingly apparent 
that GSIs may differentially affect Notch signalling and 
sensitivity to chemotherapy or radiotherapy. For example
, colorectal cancer is often treated with oxaliplatin, 
a platinum-based chemotherapy that inhibits DNA 
synthesis. Oxaliplatin activates Notch signalling via 
activation of the γ-secretase complex, and GSIs (GSI34 
and MRK-003) have therefore been used to suppress 
Notch signalling in combination with oxaliplatin255,256. 
Intriguingly, although NICD protects colon cancer cells 
from the apoptotic effects of oxaliplatin256, and GSI34 
sensitizes colon cancer cells to oxaliplatin256, the GSI 
MRK-003 abolishes the apoptotic effect of oxaliplatin 
chemotherapy via the activation of myeloid cell leukaemia
1 (MCL1)–BCL (B cell lymphoma) signalling255. 
Another cautionary example is seen in T-ALL cells, in 
which GSIs synergize with chemotherapies to induce 
apoptosis in some T-ALL cell lines but cause chemoresistance
in others257. This emphasizes the importance
of understanding the genetic, transcriptomic and 
proteomic signatures of specific cancers (FIG. 3) before 
initiating treatments.
In 2013, three clinical trials were reported that 
investigated the effect of combination therapies using 
RO492907 in conjunction with cediranib258 (also known 
as AZD2171; a VEGFR inhibitor), temsirolimus259
(CCI-779; an mTOR inhibitor) or gemcitabine260
(a nucleoside analogue used in chemotherapy) in solid 
tumours. All three studies concluded that these combinations
were safe. Inhibition of Notch and VEGFR 
showed some promise258, in that 11 out of 20 patients 
displayed stable disease, and one achieved a partial 
response, although it is unclear whether the response 
was due to the combination of these two treatments. 
Diarrhoea and hypertension were the most common side 
effects, occurring in up to 86% of patients depending on 
the dosage regimen. Inhibition of Notch and mTOR did 
not result in any objective response259, and 11 out of 17 
patients displayed stable disease as their best response. 
In this study, fatigue (82%) and mucositis (71%) were 
the most common side effects. Finally, a combination 
of a GSI with a nucleoside analogue showed a partial 
response in nasopharyngeal cancer and stable disease 
in three patients (with pancreatic, tracheal or cervical 
cancer), with nausea (61%) and fatigue (56%) being the 
most common side effects260.
Emerging indications
The broad range of medical conditions in which Notch 
is directly or indirectly involved has spurred intense 
research into the identification of various strategies 
to modulate Notch signalling in conditions besides 
cancer. Below, we discuss efforts that are currently at the 
preclinical stage.
Acoustic trauma. Notch inhibition was recently shown 
to partially rescue hearing loss in an animal model of 
acoustic trauma. Specifically, the GSI LY411575 caused 
transdifferentiation of supporting cells into hair cells 
in mice that had been subjected to acoustic overexposure261,262. In this experimental model, mice were 
subjected to 8–16kHz octave band noise, at 116dB for 
2 hours to simulate acoustic overexposure. This is a disease
state in which Notch per se is not abrogated but 
where modulation of Notch signalling may prove to have 
a therapeutic effect, given the promising data obtained 
from mouse models.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension. Another interesting 
use of Notch inhibition is for PAH, where hypoxia upregulates
the Notch 3 receptor173, mediating smooth muscle 
cell proliferation. Notch3−/− mice that were maintained 
in 10% oxygen for 6 weeks, which causes a PAH phenotype
in wild-type and Notch3+/− mice, were protected 
from hypoxia-induced PAH-like symptoms173. This led 
to interest in testing the pharmacological inhibition 
of Notch; indeed, a moderate, non-toxic dose of a GSI 
similarly protected wild-type mice from developing PAH 
in response to hypoxia173. Notch 3 is likely to be the key 
receptor in VSMCs and has been shown to control crucial 
downstream genes such as platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor beta (PDGFRB)263, which makes a strong case for 
the development of Notch 3-specific therapies for PAH. 
Although several treatment options are currently available
for PAH, there is no cure and the prognosis is poor. 
Key signalling pathways involved in PAH development 
include the BMP–TGFβ signalling pathway264, in which 
REVIEWS
372 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.309897489)
[Link]
http://www.oncomine.org
[Link]
http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/software/GENE-E/
Nature Reviews | Drug Discovery
Bladder cancer
Brain and CNS cancer
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Colorectal cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Gastric cancer
Head and neck cancer
Kidney cancer
Leukaemia
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Lymphoma
Melanoma
Myeloma
Other cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Prostate cancer
Sarcoma
Notch 1 Notch 2 Notch 3 Notch 4 JAG1 JAG2 DLL1 DLL3 DLL4
Bladder cancer
Brain and CNS cancer
Breast cancer
Cervical cancer
Colorectal cancer
Oesophageal cancer
Gastric cancer
Head and neck cancer
Kidney cancer
Leukaemia
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Lymphoma
Melanoma
Myeloma
Other cancer
Ovarian cancer
Pancreatic cancer
Prostate cancer
Sarcoma
Notch 1 Notch 2 Notch 3 Notch 4 JAG1 JAG2 DLL1 DLL3 DLL4
a b
Global
0 0.10 0.25 0.3846
Global
0 0.15 0.30 0.50
BMP receptor type 2 (BMPR2) mutations are common. 
This prompts the question of how Notch interacts with 
BMP–TGFβ in PAH and opens up the possibility of combinatorial
therapies. It is estimated that 15–50 people per 
1 million have PAH, and this disease can be caused by 
a number of different factors, including genetic factors 
(which cause idiopathic PAH), or it can be associated 
with drug use, HIV infection, schistosomiasis infection 
or congenital heart disease, to name just a few265. Efforts 
to tackle this condition are therefore very worthwhile and 
may have widespread utility.
Graft-versus-host disease. Attempts have also been 
made to explore the role of Notch inhibition in models 
of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). GVHD can be a 
life-threatening condition following bone marrow transfer
(autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT)), and 
current immunosuppressive strategies do not work in all 
cases. Identifying alternative strategies to modulate the 
graft immune response is therefore a prioritized research 
area, and a recent report demonstrated that GVHD in 
mice requires Notch 1 and DLL1 and/or DLL4 (REF. 266). 
Blockade of Notch 1 using humanized antibodies was 
sufficient to abrogate GVHD upon transplantation, but 
it also resulted in treatment-limiting toxicity266. Blockade 
of DLL1 and/or DLL4, however, did not result in adverse 
effects but nonetheless limited GVHD266.
Hepatic fibrosis. Hepatic fibrosis is a scarring response 
to liver injury, which can severely limit the function of 
the liver. A rat model of liver fibrosis, in which scarring is 
induced by treatment with carbon tetrachloride (CCl
4
), 
revealed that Notch 3, JAG1 and HES1 are upregulated 
upon injury, and that inhibition of Notch signalling 
using the Notch signalling inhibitor DAPT (N-[N-
(3,5-difluorophenacetyl)-l-alanyl]-S-phenylglycine 
t-butyl ester) protected the rats from developing fibrosis267. Modulation of Notch signalling may therefore 
be of use in the wide array of patients who succumb to 
cirrhosis owing to chronic hepatitis infection, alcoholic 
liver disease or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Future outlook
Modulating Notch signalling is a nascent research area, 
and although we can target Notch signalling efficiently 
in cell culture, the importance of Notch signalling in 
many tissues necessitates careful approaches when 
targeting this pathway in human disease. Indeed, the 
off-target Notch-associated effects in the early GSI 
trials for Alzheimer’s disease, which led to widespread 
gastrointestinal toxicity246,268,269, underscore that targeting 
of Notch has to be tackled with a great deal of precision.
The fact that Notch signalling crosstalks with several
other signalling mechanisms10,15–17,100,113–123 opens 
up interesting possibilities for combining Notch modulation
with other therapeutic strategies. Indeed, the 
combined targeting of Notch and HER2 signalling by a 
combination of a GSI and trastuzumab completely prevented
breast tumour recurrence in a mouse xenograft 
model of breast cancer270,271. Similarly, combinatorial 
therapies have been explored in vitro for various types 
of cancer stem cells. Thus, inhibition of Notch signalling
, combined with inhibition of WNT–β-catenin 
signalling, sensitizes osteosarcoma cells to methotrexate-induced death272, and inhibition of Notch and AKT 
limits glioma cell migration273 and T-ALL survival274. 
Combined inhibition of Notch and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) also shows therapeutic 
effects in vitro for gastric cancer275. Thus, simultaneously
targeting several developmental pathways may 
be more efficient at limiting the stem-like potential of 
cancer cells.
As discussed, there are several strategies that are in 
various stages of testing, at both the preclinical and, 
increasingly, clinical stage. Most clinical trials thus far 
have been centred on GSIs and there may in fact be 
room for improving their function with regard to Notch 
inhibition. The current GSIs were all originally designed 
for a different purpose — to inhibit amyloid-β production
in Alzheimer’s disease — which means that they 
are designed for long-term systemic treatments and 
penetration of the blood–brain barrier rather than for 
more localized uses.
It is clear that GSIs hold great promise as therapies 
for modulating the Notch signalling pathway, and efforts 
to improve the selectivity of GSIs for amyloid-β, Notch 
or other substrates must continue. Given the extensive 
knowledge about GSIs, it would also be interesting to 
explore whether they could be engineered to act more 
Figure 3 | Divergent expression of Notch pathway genes in cancer. Notch receptors 
and ligands are often overexpressed (part a) or underexpressed (part b) in various 
tumour types. Each receptor or ligand mRNA was assessed for statistically significant 
(P <1E–4) differences (>two-fold) in tumour tissue compared to the corresponding 
normal tissue from over 300 independent analyses of microarray data assembled at 
Oncomine. Darker red or darker blue reflects greater fold differences from controls. 
The Oncomine Platform (Compendia Bioscience, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA) was used 
for analysis and the GENE-E Platform (Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, USA) was 
used for visualization. CNS, central nervous system.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 373
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1030788886)
locally and have shorter half-lives, as this would facilitate 
better spatial and temporal control of treatments. A further
improvement would be to spatially target GSIs or 
peptides using vehicles for targeted delivery; for example
, mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNPs)276,277 or 
polyHEMA (poly (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)) scaffolds278 could be used to deliver the therapeutic agent in 
a localized fashion.
Another important consideration in oncology is the 
fact that tumours are sometimes the result of chromosomal
rearrangements in Notch receptor genes, which 
lead to hyperactivation of the Notch pathway by a 
mechanism that bypasses ligand-induced signalling 
and γ-secretase cleavage; that is, the rearrangements 
result in de facto production of active NICD (as seen, 
for example, in T-ALL with NOTCH1 (REF. 1) and in 
breast cancer with NOTCH2 (REF. 226)) or in prolongation
of Notch signalling (as seen in FBXW7 mutations
)18,107. These tumours would therefore be resistant 
to therapy targeting receptors or ligands with antibodies
, or γ-secretase inhibition, and would be better 
tackled through direct inhibition of the NICD–CSL 
transcriptional complex. Such approaches are currently
being developed in the laboratory96 but have not 
yet reached clinical trials. It is of note that xenograft 
models have tested R04929097 in T-ALL grafts with 
either PEST domain mutations (which should be GSI-
insensitive) and heterodimerization domain mutations 
(which should be GSI-sensitive), without showing an 
effect of GSIs in either250, which is in accordance with 
the lack of an effect of GSIs observed in clinical trials 
of patients with T-ALL235.
However, T-ALLs with NOTCH1 translocations 
or breast cancers with NOTCH1 rearrangements are 
GSI-sensitive, whereas breast cancers with NOTCH2
rearrangements are not, which again emphasizes the 
need to consider the specific Notch pathway that has 
been disrupted and highlights the importance of individual
profiling of patient tumours. In this regard, it is a 
curious oversight that no clinical trial aimed at limiting 
cancer progression in patients by inhibiting Notch has so 
far selected patients based on evidence of Notch signalling
being overactivated in the malignancy. Considering 
the variety of mutations in numerous pathways, found 
in different tumours, it seems that the best chance of 
carrying out a successful clinical trial would be achieved 
by treating patients with malignancies that are in fact 
characterized by deregulated Notch signalling.
In addition to GSIs, other promising strategies to 
modulate Notch are emerging, including antibodies 
targeting specific Notch receptors and ligands. With an 
improved understanding of the Notch pathway and the 
auxiliary proteins impinging on Notch signalling, we are 
likely to see rapid development towards the clinical use 
of these emerging agents in the next few years. Given the 
large number of disease settings in which aberrant Notch 
signalling is involved, there is a pressing need to develop 
safe and efficient Notch-based therapies.
1. Ellisen, L. W. et al. TAN-1, the human homolog of the 
Drosophila notch gene, is broken by chromosomal 
translocations in T lymphoblastic neoplasms. Cell 
66, 649–661 (1991).
This report describes the first characterization 
of a mammalian Notch gene and the first NOTCH1
translocations in T-ALL.
2. Joutel, A. et al. Notch3 mutations in CADASIL, 
a hereditary adult-onset condition causing stroke 
and dementia. Nature 383, 707–710 (1996).
This study identifies NOTCH3 as the gene that is 
mutated in the vascular cerebral stroke disorder 
CADASIL, which was the first finding of NOTCH
mutations in a hereditary disorder.
3. Oda, T. et al. Mutations in the human Jagged1 gene 
are responsible for Alagille syndrome. Nature Genet. 
16, 235–242 (1997).
4. McDaniell, R. et al. NOTCH2 mutations cause Alagille 
syndrome, a heterogeneous disorder of the notch 
signaling pathway. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79, 169–173 
(2006).
5. Puente, X. S. et al. Whole-genome sequencing 
identifies recurrent mutations in chronic lymphocytic 
leukaemia. Nature 475, 101–105 (2011).
6. Fabbri, G. et al. Analysis of the chronic lymphocytic 
leukemia coding genome: role of NOTCH1
mutational activation. J. Exp. Med. 208, 
1389–1401 (2011).
7. Sparrow, D. B., Guillén-Navarro, E., Fatkin, D. & 
Dunwoodie, S. L. Mutation of Hairy-and-Enhancerof-Split-7 in humans causes spondylocostal dysostosis. 
Hum. Mol. Genet. 17, 3761–3766 (2008).
8. Sparrow, D. B. et al. Mutation of the LUNATIC FRINGE 
gene in humans causes spondylocostal dysostosis 
with a severe vertebral phenotype. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 
78, 28–37 (2006).
9. Whittock, N. V. et al. Mutated MESP2 causes 
spondylocostal dysostosis in humans. Am. J. Hum. 
Genet. 74, 1249–1254 (2004).
10. Andersson, E. R., Sandberg, R. & Lendahl, U. 
Notch signaling: simplicity in design, versatility 
in function. Development 138, 3593–3612 
(2011).
11. Guruharsha, K. G., Kankel, M. W. & Artavanis-
Tsakonas, S. The Notch signalling system: recent 
insights into the complexity of a conserved pathway. 
Nature Rev. Genet. 13, 654–666 (2012).
12. Shao, H., Huang, Q. & Liu, Z.-J. Targeting Notch 
signaling for cancer therapeutic intervention. 
Adv. Pharmacol. 65, 191–234 (2012).
13. Groth, C. & Fortini, M. E. Therapeutic approaches to 
modulating Notch signaling: current challenges and 
future prospects. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 23, 465–472 
(2012).
14. Bray, S. J. Notch signalling: a simple pathway becomes 
complex. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 7, 678–689 
(2006).
15. Coleman, M. L. et al. Asparaginyl hydroxylation of 
the Notch ankyrin repeat domain by factor inhibiting 
hypoxia-inducible factor. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 
24027–24038 (2007).
16. Zheng, X. et al. Interaction with factor inhibiting HIF-1 
defines an additional mode of cross-coupling between 
the Notch and hypoxia signaling pathways. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 105, 3368–3373 (2008).
17. Espinosa, L., Ingles-Esteve, J., Aguilera, C. & Bigas, A. 
Phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase-3β downregulates
Notch activity, a link for Notch and Wnt 
pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 32227–32235 (2003).
18. King, B. et al. The ubiquitin ligase FBXW7 modulates 
leukemia-initiating cell activity by regulating MYC 
stability. Cell 153, 1552–1566 (2013).
19. Richards, G. S. & Degnan, B. M. The dawn of 
developmental signaling in the metazoa. Cold Spring 
Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 74, 81–90 (2009).
20. Ladi, E. et al. The divergent DSL ligand Dll3 does 
not activate Notch signaling but cell autonomously 
attenuates signaling induced by other DSL ligands. 
J. Cell Biol. 170, 983–992 (2005).
21. Geffers, I. et al. Divergent functions and distinct 
localization of the Notch ligands DLL1 and DLL3 
in vivo. J. Cell Biol. 178, 465–476 (2007).
22. Yamamoto, S. et al. A mutation in EGF repeat-8 of 
Notch discriminates between Serrate/Jagged and 
Delta family ligands. Science 338, 1229–1232 
(2012).
23. Andrawes, M. B. et al. Intrinsic selectivity of Notch 1 
for Delta-like 4 over Delta-like 1. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 
25477–25489 (2013).
24. Van de Walle, I. et al. Specific Notch receptor-ligand 
interactions control human TCR-αβ/γδ development 
by inducing differential Notch signal strength. 
J. Exp. Med. 210, 683–697 (2013).
25. Panin, V. M., Papayannopoulos, V., Wilson, R. & 
Irvine, K. D. Fringe modulates Notch-ligand 
interactions. Nature 387, 908–912 (1997).
26. Hicks, C. et al. Fringe differentially modulates Jagged1 
and Delta1 signalling through Notch1 and Notch2. 
Nature Cell Biol. 2, 515–520 (2000).
27. Rana, N. A. & Haltiwanger, R. S. Fringe benefits: 
functional and structural impacts of O-glycosylation 
on the extracellular domain of Notch receptors. 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 21, 583–589 (2011).
28. Jin, S. et al. Non-canonical Notch signaling activates 
IL-6/JAK/STAT signaling in breast tumor cells and is 
controlled by p53 and IKKα/IKKβ. Oncogene 32, 
4892–4902 (2012).
29. Shimizu, K. et al. Mouse Jagged1 physically interacts 
with Notch2 and other Notch receptors. Assessment 
by quantitative methods. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 
32961–32969 (1999).
30. Rebay, I. et al. Specific EGF repeats of Notch mediate 
interactions with Delta and Serrate: implications for Notch 
as a multifunctional receptor. Cell 67, 687–699 (1991).
31. Falk, R. et al. Generation of anti-Notch antibodies and 
their application in blocking Notch signalling in neural 
stem cells. Methods 58, 69–78 (2012).
32. Liu, S. K. et al. Delta-like ligand 4-Notch blockade and 
tumor radiation response. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 103, 
1–21 (2011).
33. Ohishi, K., Varnum-Finney, B., Serda, R. E., Anasetti, C. 
& Bernstein, I. D. The Notch ligand, Delta-1, inhibits the 
differentiation of monocytes into macrophages but 
permits their differentiation into dendritic cells. Blood 
98, 1402–1407 (2001).
34. Ohishi, K., Varnum-Finney, B. & Bernstein, I. D. 
Delta-1 enhances marrow and thymus repopulating 
ability of human CD34+CD38– cord blood cells. 
J. Clin. Invest. 110, 1165–1174 (2002).
REVIEWS
374 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-791813670)
35. Ohishi, K. et al. Monocytes express high amounts 
of Notch and undergo cytokine specific apoptosis 
following interaction with the Notch ligand, Delta-1. 
Blood 95, 2847–2854 (2000).
36. Hicks, C. et al. A secreted Delta1-Fc fusion protein 
functions both as an activator and inhibitor of Notch1 
signaling. J. Neurosci. Res. 68, 655–667 (2002).
37. Czajkowsky, D. M., Hu, J., Shao, Z. & Pleass, R. J. 
Fc-fusion proteins: new developments and future 
perspectives. EMBO Mol. Med. 4, 1015–1028 
(2012).
38. Gonçalves, R. M., Martins, M. C. L., Almeida-Porada, G. 
& Barbosa, M. A. Induction of notch signaling by 
immobilization of jagged-1 on self-assembled 
monolayers. Biomaterials 30, 6879–6887 (2009).
39. Toda, H., Yamamoto, M., Kohara, H. & Tabata, Y. 
Orientation-regulated immobilization of Jagged1 on 
glass substrates for ex vivo proliferation of a bone 
marrow cell population containing hematopoietic 
stem cells. Biomaterials 32, 6920–6928 (2011).
40. Varnum-Finney, B., Brashem-Stein, C. & 
Bernstein, I. D. Combined effects of Notch signaling 
and cytokines induce a multiple log increase in 
precursors with lymphoid and myeloid reconstituting 
ability. Blood 101, 1784–1789 (2003).
41. Conboy, I. M., Conboy, M. J., Smythe, G. M. & 
Rando, T. A. Notch-mediated restoration of 
regenerative potential to aged muscle. Science 
302, 1575–1577 (2003).
42. Small, D. et al. Soluble Jagged 1 represses the 
function of its transmembrane form to induce the 
formation of the Src-dependent chord-like phenotype. 
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 32022–32030 (2001).
43. Trifonova, R. et al. The non-transmembrane form of 
Delta1, but not of Jagged1, induces normal migratory 
behavior accompanied by fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 1-dependent transformation. J. Biol. Chem. 
279, 13285–13288 (2004).
44. Li, L. et al. The human homolog of rat Jagged1 
expressed by marrow stroma inhibits differentiation of 
32D cells through interaction with Notch1. Immunity 
8, 43–55 (1998).
45. Kannan, S. et al. Notch activation inhibits AML 
growth and survival: a potential therapeutic approach. 
J. Exp. Med. 210, 321–337 (2013).
46. Androutsellis-Theotokis, A. et al. Notch signalling 
regulates stem cell numbers in vitro and in vivo. 
Nature 442, 823–826 (2006).
47. Lu, J. et al. Endothelial cells promote the colorectal 
cancer stem cell phenotype through a soluble form 
of Jagged-1. Cancer Cell 23, 171–185 (2013).
48. Nehring, L. C., Miyamoto, A., Hein, P. W., 
Weinmaster, G. & Shipley, J. M. The extracellular 
matrix protein MAGP-2 interacts with Jagged1 
and induces its shedding from the cell surface. 
J. Biol. Chem. 280, 20349–20355 (2005).
49. Chillakuri, C. R. et al. Structural analysis uncovers 
lipid-binding properties of Notch ligands. Cell Rep. 
5, 861–867 (2013).
50. Cordle, J. et al. A conserved face of the Jagged/
Serrate DSL domain is involved in Notch transactivation
and cis-inhibition. Nature Struct. Mol. Biol. 
15, 849–857 (2008).
51. Logeat, F. et al. The Notch1 receptor is cleaved 
constitutively by a furin-like convertase. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 8108–8112 (1998).
52. Gordon, W. R. et al. Effects of S1 cleavage on the 
structure, surface export, and signaling activity of 
human Notch1 and Notch2. PLoS ONE 4, e6613 
(2009).
53. Bush, G. et al. Ligand-induced signaling in the 
absence of furin processing of Notch1. Dev. Biol. 
229, 494–502 (2001).
54. Kidd, S. & Lieber, T. Furin cleavage is not a requirement 
for Drosophila Notch function. Mech. Dev. 115, 41–51 
(2002).
55. Seidah, N. G. & Prat, A. The biology and therapeutic 
targeting of the proprotein convertases. Nature Rev. 
Drug Discov. 11, 367–383 (2012).
56. Fernandez-Valdivia, R. et al. Regulation of mammalian 
Notch signaling and embryonic development by the 
protein O-glucosyltransferase Rumi. Development 
138, 1925–1934 (2011).
57. Acar, M. et al. Rumi is a CAP10 domain 
glycosyltransferase that modifies Notch and is 
required for Notch signaling. Cell 132, 247–258 
(2008).
58. Shi, S. & Stanley, P. Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 is 
an essential component of Notch signaling pathways. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100, 5234–5239 
(2003).
59. Sethi, M. K. et al. Identification of glycosyltransferase
8 family members as xylosyltransferases 
acting on O-glucosylated Notch epidermal growth 
factor repeats. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 1582–1586 
(2010).
60. Goode, S. & Perrimon, N. Brainiac and Fringe are 
similar pioneer proteins that impart specificity to 
notch signaling during Drosophila development. 
Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 62, 177–184 
(1997).
61. Moloney, D. J. et al. Fringe is a glycosyltransferase 
that modifies Notch. Nature 406, 369–375 (2000).
62. Brückner, K., Perez, L., Clausen, H. & Cohen, S. 
Glycosyltransferase activity of Fringe modulates 
Notch–Delta interactions. Nature 406, 411–415 
(2000).
63. Wang, X. & Ha, T. Defining single molecular forces 
required to activate integrin and notch signaling. 
Science 340, 991–994 (2013).
64. Hansson, E. M. et al. Control of Notch-ligand 
endocytosis by ligand–receptor interaction. 
J. Cell Sci. 123, 2931–2942 (2010).
65. Nichols, J. T. et al. DSL ligand endocytosis physically 
dissociates Notch1 heterodimers before activating 
proteolysis can occur. J. Cell Biol. 176, 445–458 
(2007).
66. Meloty-Kapella, L. et al. Optical tweezers studies 
on Notch: single-molecule interaction strength is 
independent of ligand endocytosis. Dev. Cell 22, 
1313–1320 (2012).
67. Brou, C. et al. A novel proteolytic cleavage involved 
in Notch signaling: the role of the disintegrinmetalloprotease
TACE. Mol. Cell 5, 207–216 (2000).
68. Stephenson, N. L. & Avis, J. M. Direct observation 
of proteolytic cleavage at the S2 site upon forced 
unfolding of the Notch negative regulatory region. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 109, E2757–E2765 (2012).
69. Parks, A. L., Klueg, K. M., Stout, J. R. & 
Muskavitch, M. A. Ligand endocytosis drives receptor 
dissociation and activation in the Notch pathway. 
Development 127, 1373–1385 (2000).
70. Mumm, J. S. et al. A ligand-induced extracellular 
cleavage regulates γ-secretase-like proteolytic 
activation of Notch1. Mol. Cell 5, 197–206 (2000).
71. Van Tetering, G. & Vooijs, M. Proteolytic cleavage of 
Notch: “HIT and RUN’’. Curr. Mol. Med. 11, 255–269 
(2011).
72. Cousin, H., Abbruzzese, G., Kerdavid, E., Gaultier, A. & 
Alfandari, D. Translocation of the cytoplasmic domain 
of ADAM13 to the nucleus is essential for calpain8-a 
expression and cranial neural crest cell migration. 
Dev. Cell 20, 256–263 (2011).
73. Tousseyn, T. et al. ADAM10, the rate-limiting protease 
of regulated intramembrane proteolysis of Notch 
and other proteins, is processed by ADAMS-9, 
ADAMS-15, and the γ-secretase. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 
11738–11747 (2009).
74. Wu, Y. et al. Therapeutic antibody targeting of 
individual Notch receptors. Nature 464, 1052–1057 
(2010).
This paper reports on the generation and 
characterization of antibodies that are specific for 
the NRRs of NOTCH1 and NOTCH2, thus inhibiting 
the activation of the receptor and blocking 
Notch-driven tumour growth.
75. De Strooper, B. et al. A presenilin-1-dependent 
γ-secretase-like protease mediates release of Notch 
intracellular domain. Nature 398, 518–522 
(1999).
76. Struhl, G. & Greenwald, I. Presenilin is required for 
activity and nuclear access of Notch in Drosophila. 
Nature 398, 522–525 (1999).
References 75 and 76 provide the first link 
between Notch receptor processing and the 
γ-secretase complex, a finding that is of 
considerable importance for research into GSIs 
and Alzheimer’s disease.
77. Schroeter, E. H., Kisslinger, J. A. & Kopan, R. 
Notch-1 signalling requires ligand-induced proteolytic 
release of intracellular domain. Nature 393, 
382–386 (1998).
78. Gupta-Rossi, N. et al. Monoubiquitination and 
endocytosis direct γ-secretase cleavage of 
activated Notch receptor. J. Cell Biol. 166, 
73–83 (2004).
79. Sorensen, E. B. & Conner, S. γ-secretase-dependent 
cleavage initiates Notch signaling from the plasma 
membrane. Traffic 11, 1234–1245 (2010).
80. Tagami, S. et al. Regulation of Notch signaling by 
dynamic changes in the precision of S3 cleavage of 
Notch-1. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 165–176 (2008).
81. Vaccari, T., Lu, H., Kanwar, R., Fortini, M. E. & 
Bilder, D. Endosomal entry regulates Notch receptor 
activation in Drosophila melanogaster. J. Cell Biol. 
180, 755–762 (2008).
82. Okochi, M. et al. Presenilins mediate a dual 
intramembranous γ-secretase cleavage of Notch-1. 
EMBO J. 21, 5408–5416 (2002).
83. Okochi, M. et al. Secretion of the Notch-1 Aβ-like 
peptide during Notch signaling. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 
7890–7898 (2006).
84. Krejcí, A. & Bray, S. Notch activation stimulates 
transient and selective binding of Su(H)/CSL to 
target enhancers. Genes Dev. 21, 1322–1327 
(2007).
85. Castel, D. et al. Dynamic binding of RBPJ is 
determined by Notch signaling status. Genes Dev. 
27, 1059–1071 (2013).
86. Wilson, J. J. & Kovall, R. A. Crystal structure of the 
CSL-Notch-Mastermind ternary complex bound to 
DNA. Cell 124, 985–996 (2006).
87. Nam, Y., Sliz, P., Song, L., Aster, J. C. & Blacklow, S. C. 
Structural basis for cooperativity in recruitment of 
MAML coactivators to Notch transcription complexes. 
Cell 124, 973–983 (2006).
References 86 and 87 report on the crystal 
structure of the Notch transcriptional activation 
complex, including the ankyrin domain of Notch 1 
and CSL on DNA, together with a MAML1 
polypeptide. This shows that CSL and ankyrin form 
a groove for MAML binding, and this information 
is essential for constructing NICD–CSL-inhibiting 
peptides.
88. Weng, A. P. et al. Growth suppression of pre-T acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia cells by inhibition of Notch 
signaling. Mol. Cell. Biol. 23, 655–664 (2003).
89. Maillard, I. et al. Mastermind critically regulates 
Notch-mediated lymphoid cell fate decisions. Blood 
104, 1696–1702 (2004).
90. Maillard, I. et al. The requirement for Notch signaling 
at the β-selection checkpoint in vivo is absolute and 
independent of the pre–T cell receptor. J. Exp. Med. 
203, 2239–2245 (2006).
91. Maillard, I. et al. Canonical Notch signaling is 
dispensable for the maintenance of adult 
hematopoietic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 2, 
356–366 (2008).
92. Osanyingbemi-Obidi, J., Dobromilskaya, I., Illei, P. B., 
Hann, C. L. & Rudin, C. M. Notch signaling contributes 
to lung cancer clonogenic capacity in vitro but may be 
circumvented in tumorigenesis in vivo. Mol. Cancer 
Res. 9, 1746–1754 (2011).
93. Shen, H. et al. The Notch coactivator, MAML1, 
functions as a novel coactivator for MEF2C-mediated 
transcription and is required for normal myogenesis. 
Genes Dev. 20, 675–688 (2006).
94. Saint Just Ribeiro, M. & Wallberg, A. E. 
Transcriptional mechanisms by the coregulator 
MAML1. Curr. Protein Pept. Sci. 10, 570–576 
(2009).
95. McElhinny, A. S., Li, J.-L. & Wu, L. Mastermind-like 
transcriptional co-activators: emerging roles in 
regulating cross talk among multiple signaling 
pathways. Oncogene 27, 5138–5147 (2008).
96. Moellering, R. E. et al. Direct inhibition of the NOTCH 
transcription factor complex. Nature 462, 182–188 
(2009).
97. Yuan, Z., Friedmann, D. R., VanderWielen, B. D., 
Collins, K. J. & Kovall, R. A. Characterization of CSL 
(CBF-1, Su(H), Lag-1) mutants reveals differences 
in signaling mediated by Notch1 and Notch2. 
J. Biol. Chem. 287, 34904–34916 (2012).
98. Lubman, O. Y., Ilagan, M. X. G., Kopan, R. & 
Barrick, D. Quantitative dissection of the Notch:CSL 
interaction: insights into the Notch-mediated 
transcriptional switch. J. Mol. Biol. 365, 577–589 
(2007).
99. Johnson, J. E. & Macdonald, R. J. Notch-independent 
functions of CSL. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 97, 55–74 
(2011).
100. Foltz, D. R., Santiago, M. C., Berechid, B. E. & Nye, J. S. 
Glycogen synthase kinase-3β modulates Notch 
signaling and stability. Curr. Biol. 12, 1006–1011 
(2002).
101. Fryer, C. J., White, J. B. & Jones, K. A. Mastermind 
recruits CycC:CDK8 to phosphorylate the Notch ICD 
and coordinate activation with turnover. Mol. Cell 
16, 509–520 (2004).
102. Sjöqvist, M. et al. PKCζ regulates Notch receptor 
routing and activity in a Notch signaling-dependent 
manner. Cell Res. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
cr.2014.34 (2014). 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 375
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
103. Guarani, V. et al. Acetylation-dependent regulation of 
endothelial Notch signalling by the SIRT1 deacetylase. 
Nature 473, 234–238 (2011).
104. Le Bras, S., Loyer, N. & Le Borgne, R. The multiple 
facets of ubiquitination in the regulation of 
Notch signaling pathway. Traffic 12, 149–161 
(2011).
105. Hubbard, E. J. A., Wu, G., Kitajewski, J. & 
Greenwald, I. sel-10, a negative regulator of lin-12 
activity in Caenorhabditis elegans, encodes a 
member of the CDC4 family ofproteins. Genes Dev. 
11, 3182–3193 (1997).
106. Tsunematsu, R. et al. Mouse Fbw7/Sel-10/Cdc4 is 
required for Notch degradation during vascular 
development. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 9417–9423 
(2004).
107. Malyukova, A. et al. The tumor suppressor gene 
hCDC4 is frequently mutated in human T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia with functional consequences 
for Notch signaling. Cancer Res. 67, 5611–5616 
(2007).
108. O’Neil, J. et al. FBW7 mutations in leukemic cells 
mediate NOTCH pathway activation and resistance to 
γ-secretase inhibitors. J. Exp. Med. 204, 1813–1824 
(2007).
109. McGill, M. A. & McGlade, C. J. Mammalian Numb 
proteins promote Notch1 receptor ubiquitination and 
degradation of the Notch1 intracellular domain. 
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 23196–23203 (2003).
110. Qiu, L. et al. Recognition and ubiquitination of Notch 
by Itch, a hect-type E3 ubiquitin ligase. J. Biol. Chem. 
275, 35734–35737 (2000).
111. Pettersson, S. et al. Non-degradative ubiquitination 
of the Notch1 receptor by the E3 ligase MDM2 
activates the Notch signalling pathway. Biochem. J. 
450, 523–536 (2013).
112. Zhang, J., Liu, M., Su, Y., Du, J. & Zhu, A. J. 
A targeted in vivo RNAi screen reveals deubiquitinases 
as new regulators of Notch signaling. G3 2, 
1563–1575 (2012).
113. Muñoz-Descalzo, S., Tkocz, K., Balayo, T. & 
Arias, A. M. Modulation of the ligand-independent 
traffic of Notch by Axin and Apc contributes to the 
activation of Armadillo in Drosophila. Development 
138, 1501–1506 (2011).
114. Hayward, P., Balayo, T. & Martinez Arias, A. 
Notch synergizes with axin to regulate the activity 
of armadillo in Drosophila. Dev. Dyn. 235, 
2656–2666 (2006).
115. Hayward, P. et al. Notch modulates Wnt signalling by 
associating with Armadillo/β-catenin and regulating 
its transcriptional activity. Development 132, 
1819–1830 (2005).
116. Shimizu, T. et al. Stabilized β-catenin functions through 
TCF/LEF proteins and the Notch/RBP-Jκ complex to 
promote proliferation and suppress differentiation 
of neural precursor cells. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 
7427–7441 (2008).
117. Yamamizu, K. et al. Convergence of Notch and 
β-catenin signaling induces arterial fate in vascular 
progenitors. J. Cell Biol. 189, 325–338 (2010).
118. Axelrod, J. D., Matsuno, K., Artavanis-Tsakonas, S. 
& Perrimon, N. Interaction between Wingless and 
Notch signaling pathways mediated by dishevelled. 
Science 271, 1826–1832 (1996).
119. Muñoz-Descalzo, S. et al. Wingless modulates 
the ligand independent traffic of Notch through 
Dishevelled. Fly 4, 182–193 (2010).
120. Blokzijl, A. et al. Cross-talk between the Notch and 
TGF-β signaling pathways mediated by interaction 
of the Notch intracellular domain with Smad3. 
J. Cell Biol. 163, 723–728 (2003).
121. Dahlqvist, C. et al. Functional Notch signaling is 
required for BMP4-induced inhibition of myogenic 
differentiation. Development 130, 6089–6099 
(2003).
122. Itoh, F. Synergy and antagonism between Notch and 
BMP receptor signaling pathways in endothelial cells. 
EMBO J. 23, 541–551 (2004).
123. Gustafsson, M. V. et al. Hypoxia requires Notch 
signaling to maintain the undifferentiated cell state. 
Dev. Cell 9, 617–628 (2005).
This is the first report demonstrating crosstalk 
between Notch signalling and the cellular hypoxic 
response, which is important when considering 
therapeutic modulation of the cellular hypoxic 
response.
124. Roti, G. et al. Complementary genomic screens 
identify SERCA as a therapeutic target in NOTCH1
mutated cancer. Cancer Cell 23, 390–405 
(2013).
125. Ilagan, M. X. G. & Kopan, R. Selective blockade of 
transport via SERCA inhibition: the answer for 
oncogenic forms of Notch? Cancer Cell 23, 267–269 
(2013).
126. Andersen, P., Uosaki, H., Shenje, L. T. & Kwon, C. 
Non-canonical Notch signaling: emerging role and 
mechanism. Trends Cell Biol. 22, 257–265 (2012).
127. D’Souza, B., Meloty-Kapella, L. & Weinmaster, G. 
Canonical and non-canonical Notch ligands. Curr. Top. 
Dev. Biol. 92, 73–129 (2010).
128. Sandy, A. R., Jones, M. & Maillard, I. Notch signaling 
and development of the hematopoietic system. 
Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 727, 71–88 (2012).
129. Xu, K., Moghal, N. & Egan, S. E. Notch signaling in 
lung development and disease. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 
727, 89–98 (2012).
130. Barak, H., Surendran, K. & Boyle, S. C. The role of 
Notch signaling in kidney development and disease. 
Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 727, 99–113 (2012).
131. Kume, T. Ligand-dependent Notch signaling in vascular 
formation. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 727, 210–222 
(2012).
132. Murata, J., Ikeda, K. & Okano, H. Notch signaling and 
the developing inner ear. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 727, 
161–173 (2012).
133. Aubin-Houzelstein, G. Notch signaling and the 
developing hair follicle. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 727, 
142–160 (2012).
134. Mead, T. J. & Yutzey, K. E. Notch signaling and the 
developing skeleton. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 727, 
114–130 (2012).
135. Clements, W. K. et al. A somitic Wnt16/Notch pathway 
specifies haematopoietic stem cells. Nature 474, 
220–224 (2011).
136. Han, H. et al. Inducible gene knockout of transcription 
factor recombination signal binding protein-J reveals 
its essential role in T versus B lineage decision. 
Int. Immunol. 14, 637–645 (2002).
137. Tanigaki, K. et al. Notch-RBP-J signaling is involved 
in cell fate determination of marginal zone B cells. 
Nature Immunol. 3, 443–450 (2002).
138. Ciofani, M. & Zúñiga-Pflücker, J. C. Notch promotes 
survival of pre-T cells at the β-selection checkpoint by 
regulating cellular metabolism. Nature Immunol. 6, 
881–888 (2005).
139. Lobry, C. et al. Notch pathway activation targets 
AML-initiating cell homeostasis and differentiation. 
J. Exp. Med. 210, 301–319 (2013).
140. Schroeder, T. & Just, U. Notch signalling via RBP-J 
promotes myeloid differentiation. EMBO J. 19, 
2558–2568 (2000).
141. Bigas, A., Martin, D. I. & Milner, L. A. Notch1 and 
Notch2 inhibit myeloid differentiation in response to 
different cytokines. Mol. Cell. Biol. 18, 2324–2333 
(1998).
142. Oh, P. et al. In vivo mapping of notch pathway activity 
in normal and stress hematopoiesis. Cell Stem Cell 13, 
190–204 (2013).
143. Klinakis, A. et al. A novel tumour-suppressor function 
for the Notch pathway in myeloid leukaemia. Nature 
473, 230–233 (2011).
144. Li, Y.-P. et al. Human mesenchymal stem cells license 
adult CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor cells to 
differentiate into regulatory dendritic cells through 
activation of the Notch pathway. J. Immunol. 180, 
1598–1608 (2008).
145. Bigas, A., D’Altri, T. & Espinosa, L. The Notch pathway 
in hematopoietic stem cells. Curr. Top. Microbiol. 
Immunol. 360, 1–18 (2012).
146. Weng, A. P. et al. Activating mutations of NOTCH1 in 
human T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Science 
306, 269–271 (2004).
This study reports that over 50% of T-ALL cases 
contain NOTCH-activating mutations, as a result 
of a mutation in the PEST domain or in the 
heterodimerization domain, which lead to 
hyperactivation.
147. Thompson, B. J. et al. The SCFFBW7 ubiquitin ligase 
complex as a tumor suppressor in T cell leukemia. 
J. Exp. Med. 204, 1825–1835 (2007).
148. Henkel, T., Ling, P. D., Hayward, S. D. & 
Peterson, M. G. Mediation of Epstein–Barr virus 
EBNA2 transactivation by recombination 
signal-binding protein Jκ. Science 265, 92–95 
(1994).
149. Cotter, M., Callahan, J., Aster, J. & Robertson, E. 
Intracellular forms of human NOTCH1 functionally 
activate essential Epstein–Barr virus major latent 
promoters in the Burkitt’s lymphoma BJAB cell line 
but repress these promoters in Jurkat cells. J. Virol. 
74, 1486–1494 (2000).
150. Strobl, L. J. et al. Activated Notch1 modulates 
gene expression in B cells similarly to Epstein-Barr 
viral nuclear antigen 2. J. Virol. 74, 1727–1735 
(2000).
151. Callahan, J., Aster, J., Sklar, J., Kieff, E. & 
Robertson, E. S. Intracellular forms of human 
NOTCH1 interact at distinctly different levels with 
RBP-jkappa in human B and T cells. Leukemia 14, 
84–92 (2000).
152. Kridel, R. et al. Whole transcriptome sequencing 
reveals recurrent NOTCH1 mutations in mantle cell 
lymphoma. Blood 119, 1963–1971 (2012).
153. Dumortier, A. et al. Atopic dermatitis-like disease 
and associated lethal myeloproliferative disorder 
arise from loss of Notch signaling in the murine skin. 
PLoS ONE 5, e9258 (2010).
154. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. 
Genomic and epigenomic landscapes of adult de novo
acute myeloid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 
2059–2074 (2013).
155. Grieselhuber, N. R. et al. Notch signaling in acute 
promyelocytic leukemia. Leukemia 27, 1548–1557 
(2013).
156. Wang, Q., Zhao, N., Kennard, S. & Lilly, B. Notch2 
and Notch3 function together to regulate vascular 
smooth muscle development. PLoS ONE 7, e37365 
(2012).
157. Domenga, V. et al. Notch3 is required for arterial 
identity and maturation of vascular smooth muscle 
cells. Genes Dev. 18, 2730–2735 (2004).
158. Liu, H., Zhang, W., Kennard, S., Caldwell, R. B. & Lilly, B. 
Notch3 is critical for proper angiogenesis and mural cell 
investment. Circ. Res. 107, 860–870 (2010).
159. Oka, C. et al. Disruption of the mouse RBP-Jκ gene 
results in early embryonic death. Development 121, 
3291–3301 (1995).
160. Gale, N. W. et al. Haploinsufficiency of delta-like 4 
ligand results in embryonic lethality due to major 
defects in arterial and vascular development. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 101, 15949–15954 
(2004).
161. Xue, Y. et al. Embryonic lethality and vascular defects 
in mice lacking the Notch ligand Jagged1. Hum. Mol. 
Genet. 8, 723–730 (1999).
162. McCright, B. et al. Defects in development of the 
kidney, heart and eye vasculature in mice homozygous 
for a hypomorphic Notch2 mutation. Development 
128, 491–502 (2001).
163. Krebs, L. T. et al. Notch signaling is essential for 
vascular morphogenesis in mice. Genes Dev. 14, 
1343–1352 (2000).
164. Lawson, N. D., Vogel, A. M. & Weinstein, B. M. 
Sonic hedgehog and vascular endothelial growth 
factor act upstream of the Notch pathway during 
arterial endothelial differentiation. Dev. Cell 3, 
127–136 (2002).
165. Zhong, T. P., Childs, S., Leu, J. P. & Fishman, M. C. 
Gridlock signalling pathway fashions the first 
embryonic artery. Nature 414, 216–220 (2001).
166. Jakobsson, L. et al. Endothelial cells dynamically 
compete for the tip cell position during angiogenic 
sprouting. Nature Cell Biol. 12, 943–953 
(2010).
167. Liu, Z. et al. Notch1 loss of heterozygosity causes 
vascular tumors and lethal hemorrhage in mice. 
J. Clin. Invest. 121, 800–808 (2011).
168. Yan, M. et al. Chronic DLL4 blockade induces vascular 
neoplasms. Nature 463, E6–E7 (2010).
This paper demonstrates that long-term use of 
DLL4 antibodies and DLL4-antagonistic peptides 
induces endothelial cell activation and bile duct 
proliferation, as well as vascular tumours, 
in rats and monkeys. This suggests that although 
this therapy is more directly targeted than 
broad-spectrum Notch inhibition, it poses risks.
169. Mosquera, J.-M. et al. Novel MIR143-NOTCH 
fusions in benign and malignant glomus tumors. 
Genes. Chromosomes Cancer 52, 1075–1087 
(2013).
170. Joutel, A. et al. Strong clustering and stereotyped 
nature of Notch3 mutations in CADASIL patients. 
Lancet 350, 1511–1515 (1997).
171. Monet-Leprêtre, M. et al. Abnormal recruitment of 
extracellular matrix proteins by excess Notch3 ECD: 
a new pathomechanism in CADASIL. Brain 136, 
1830–1845 (2013).
172. Joutel, A. et al. Cerebrovascular dysfunction and 
microcirculation rarefaction precede white matter 
lesions in a mouse genetic model of cerebral ischemic 
small vessel disease. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 433–445 
(2010).
REVIEWS
376 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(8.0.0.2542.1667647340 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
173. Li, X. et al. Notch3 signaling promotes the 
development of pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Nature Med. 15, 1289–1297 (2009).
This study shows that Notch 3 is upregulated in 
human PAH in small pulmonary artery smooth 
muscle cells and that disease severity correlates 
with Notch 3 protein levels in the lung. In addition, 
Notch 3 activity is required for the development 
of PAH in a mouse model of this disease.
174. Yu, Y.-R. A., Mao, L., Piantadosi, C. A. & Gunn, M. D. 
CCR2 deficiency, dysregulation of Notch signaling, 
and spontaneous pulmonary arterial hypertension. 
Am. J. Respir. Cell. Mol. Biol. 48, 647–654 (2013).
175. De la Pompa, J. L. & Epstein, J. A. Coordinating tissue 
interactions: Notch signaling in cardiac development 
and disease. Dev. Cell 22, 244–254 (2012).
176. Timmerman, L. A. et al. Notch promotes epithelialmesenchymal
transition during cardiac development 
and oncogenic transformation. Genes Dev. 18, 
99–115 (2004).
177. Grego-Bessa, J. et al. Notch signaling is essential for 
ventricular chamber development. Dev. Cell 12, 
415–429 (2007).
178. High, F. A. et al. Murine Jagged1/Notch signaling in 
the second heart field orchestrates Fgf8 expression 
and tissue-tissue interactions during outflow tract 
development. J. Clin. Invest. 119, 1986–1996 
(2009).
179. Jain, R. et al. Cardiac neural crest orchestrates 
remodeling and functional maturation of mouse 
semilunar valves. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 422–430 
(2011).
180. Rutenberg, J. B. et al. Developmental patterning of 
the cardiac atrioventricular canal by Notch and Hairyrelated
transcription factors. Development 133, 
4381–4390 (2006).
181. Watanabe, Y. et al. Activation of Notch1 signaling 
in cardiogenic mesoderm induces abnormal heart 
morphogenesis in mouse. Development 133, 
1625–1634 (2006).
182. Luna-Zurita, L. et al. Integration of a Notch-dependent 
mesenchymal gene program and Bmp2-driven cell 
invasiveness regulates murine cardiac valve formation. 
J. Clin. Invest. 120, 3493–3507 (2010).
183. Rentschler, S. et al. Notch signaling regulates murine 
atrioventricular conduction and the formation of 
accessory pathways. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 525–533 
(2011).
184. Garg, V. et al. Mutations in NOTCH1 cause aortic valve 
disease. Nature 437, 270–274 (2005).
185. Mohamed, S. A. et al. Novel missense mutations 
(p. T596M and p. P1797H) in NOTCH1 in patients 
with bicuspid aortic valve. Biochem. Biophys. 
Res. Commun. 345, 1460–1465 (2006).
186. McKellar, S. H. et al. Novel NOTCH1 mutations in 
patients with bicuspid aortic valve disease and 
thoracic aortic aneurysms. J. Thorac. Cardiovasc. 
Surg. 134, 290–296 (2007).
187. Nigam, V. & Srivastava, D. Notch1 represses 
osteogenic pathways in aortic valve cells. J. Mol. 
Cell. Cardiol. 47, 828–834 (2009).
188. Nus, M. et al. Diet-induced aortic valve disease in 
mice haploinsufficient for the Notch pathway effector 
RBPJK/CSL. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 31, 
1580–1588 (2011).
189. Isidor, B. et al. Truncating mutations in the last exon 
of NOTCH2 cause a rare skeletal disorder with 
osteoporosis. Nature Genet. 43, 306–308 (2011).
190. Simpson, M. A. et al. Mutations in NOTCH2 cause 
Hajdu–Cheney syndrome, a disorder of severe and 
progressive bone loss. Nature Genet. 43, 303–305 
(2011).
References 189 and 190 identify nonsense 
and frameshift mutations in NOTCH2 in patients 
with Hajdu–Cheney syndrome.
191. Lowell, S., Jones, P., Le Roux, I., Dunne, J. & 
Watt, F. M. Stimulation of human epidermal 
differentiation by Delta–Notch signalling at the 
boundaries of stem-cell clusters. Curr. Biol. 10, 
491–500 (2000).
192. Thelu, J., Rossio, P., Favier, B. & Thélu, J. Notch 
signalling is linked to epidermal cell differentiation 
level in basal cell carcinoma, psoriasis and wound 
healing. BMC Dermatol. 2, 7 (2002).
193. Rangarajan, A. et al. Notch signaling is a direct 
determinant of keratinocyte growth arrest and entry 
into differentiation. EMBO J. 20, 3427–3436 (2001).
194. Mammucari, C. et al. Integration of Notch 1 and 
calcineurin/NFAT signaling pathways in keratinocyte 
growth and differentiation control. Dev. Cell 8, 
665–676 (2005).
195. Blanpain, C., Lowry, W. E., Pasolli, H. A. & Fuchs, E. 
Canonical notch signaling functions as a commitment 
switch in the epidermal lineage. Genes Dev. 20, 
3022–3035 (2006).
196. Nicolas, M. et al. Notch1 functions as a tumor 
suppressor in mouse skin. Nature Genet. 33, 416–421 
(2003).
This report provides the first genetic evidence 
of a role for Notch as a tumour suppressor gene.
197. Demehri, S. et al. Notch-deficient skin induces a lethal 
systemic B-lymphoproliferative disorder by secreting 
TSLP, a sentinel for epidermal integrity. PLoS Biol. 6, 
e123 (2008).
198. Di Piazza, M., Nowell, C. S., Koch, U., Durham, A.-D. 
& Radtke, F. Loss of cutaneous TSLP-dependent 
immune responses skews the balance of inflammation 
from tumor protective to tumor promoting. Cancer Cell 
22, 479–493 (2012).
199. Demehri, S. et al. Elevated epidermal thymic 
stromal lymphopoietin levels establish an antitumor 
environment in the skin. Cancer Cell 22, 494–505 
(2012).
200. Pickering, C. R. et al. Integrative genomic 
characterization of oral squamous cell carcinoma 
identifies frequent somatic drivers. Cancer Discov. 
3, 770–781 (2013).
201. Jithesh, P. V. et al. The epigenetic landscape of oral 
squamous cell carcinoma. Br. J. Cancer 108, 370–379 
(2013).
202. Yoshida, R. et al. The pathological significance of 
Notch1 in oral squamous cell carcinoma. Lab. Invest. 
93, 1068–1081 (2013).
203. Pourquié, O. Vertebrate segmentation: from cyclic gene 
networks to scoliosis. Cell 145, 650–663 (2011).
204. Dequéant, M.-L. et al. A complex oscillating network 
of signaling genes underlies the mouse segmentation 
clock. Science 314, 1595–1598 (2006).
205. Dias, A. S., de Almeida, I., Belmonte, J. M., 
Glazier, J. A. & Stern, C. D. Somites without a clock. 
Science 343, 791–795 (2014).
206. Bulman, M. P. et al. Mutations in the human Delta 
homologue, DLL3, cause axial skeletal defects in 
spondylocostal dysostosis. Nature Genet. 24, 
438–441 (2000).
207. Cornier, A. S. et al. Mutations in the MESP2 gene 
cause spondylothoracic dysostosis/Jarcho-Levin 
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82, 1334–1341 
(2008).
208. Sparrow, D. B. et al. A mechanism for geneenvironment
interaction in the etiology of congenital 
scoliosis. Cell 149, 295–306 (2012).
This report describes a link between an 
environmental cue (hypoxia) and genetic mutations 
in the Notch signalling system for disease aetiology.
209. Lewis, J. Rules for the production of sensory cells. 
Ciba Found. Symp. 160, 25–39; discussion 40–53 
(1991).
210. Kiernan, A. E., Cordes, R., Kopan, R., Gossler, A. & 
Gridley, T. The Notch ligands DLL1 and JAG2 act 
synergistically to regulate hair cell development in the 
mammalian inner ear. Development 132, 4353–4362 
(2005).
211. Haddon, C., Jiang, Y. J., Smithers, L. & Lewis, J. 
Delta-Notch signalling and the patterning of sensory 
cell differentiation in the zebrafish ear: evidence 
from the mind bomb mutant. Development 125, 
4637–4644 (1998).
212. Haddon, C. et al. Hair cells without supporting cells: 
further studies in the ear of the zebrafish mind bomb 
mutant. J. Neurocytol. 28, 837–850 (1999).
213. Tateya, T., Imayoshi, I., Tateya, I., Ito, J. & 
Kageyama, R. Cooperative functions of Hes/Hey genes 
in auditory hair cell and supporting cell development. 
Dev. Biol. 352, 329–340 (2011).
214. Kiernan, A. E. et al. The Notch ligand Jagged1 is 
required for inner ear sensory development. Proc. Natl 
Acad. Sci. USA 98, 3873–3878 (2001).
215. Tsai, H. et al. The mouse slalom mutant demonstrates 
a role for Jagged1 in neuroepithelial patterning in 
the organ of Corti. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 507–512 
(2001).
216. Vrijens, K. et al. Ozzy, a Jag1 vestibular mouse 
mutant, displays characteristics of Alagille syndrome. 
Neurobiol. Dis. 24, 28–40 (2006).
217. McCright, B., Lozier, J. & Gridley, T. A mouse model 
of Alagille syndrome: Notch2 as a genetic modifier 
of Jag1 haploinsufficiency. Development 129, 
1075–1082 (2002).
218. Yanger, K. et al. Robust cellular reprogramming occurs 
spontaneously during liver regeneration. Genes Dev. 
27, 719–724 (2013).
219. Pajvani, U. B. et al. Inhibition of Notch uncouples 
Akt activation from hepatic lipid accumulation by 
decreasing mTorc1 stability. Nature Med. 19, 
1054–1060 (2013).
220. Zender, S. et al. A critical role for Notch signaling 
in the formation of cholangiocellular carcinomas. 
Cancer Cell 23, 784–795 (2013).
221. Villanueva, A. et al. Notch signaling is activated in 
human hepatocellular carcinoma and induces tumor 
formation in mice. Gastroenterology 143, 
1660–1669.e7 (2012).
This paper shows that NICD produces 
hepatocellular carcinoma in mice and reveals 
a Notch expression signature in patients 
with hepatocellular carcinoma.
222. Raouf, A. et al. Transcriptome analysis of the normal 
human mammary cell commitment and differentiation 
process. Cell Stem Cell 3, 109–118 (2008).
223. Bouras, T. et al. Notch signaling regulates mammary 
stem cell function and luminal cell-fate commitment. 
Cell Stem Cell 3, 429–441 (2008).
224. Pece, S. et al. Loss of negative regulation by 
Numb over Notch is relevant to human breast 
carcinogenesis. J. Cell Biol. 167, 215–221 (2004).
225. Stylianou, S., Clarke, R. B. & Brennan, K. 
Aberrant activation of Notch signaling in human 
breast cancer. Cancer Res. 66, 1517–1525 (2006).
226. Robinson, D. R. et al. Functionally recurrent 
rearrangements of the MAST kinase and Notch 
gene families in breast cancer. Nature Med. 17, 
1646–1651 (2011).
227. Qiu, M. et al. Specific inhibition of Notch1 signaling 
enhances the antitumor efficacy of chemotherapy in 
triple negative breast cancer through reduction of 
cancer stem cells. Cancer Lett. 328, 261–270 
(2013).
228. Gallahan, D. et al. Expression of a truncated Int3
gene in developing secretory mammary epithelium 
specifically retards lobular differentiation resulting in 
tumorigenesis. Cancer Res. 56, 1775–1785 (1996).
229. Robbins, J., Blondel, B. J., Gallahan, D. & Callahan, R. 
Mouse mammary tumor gene int-3: a member of the 
notch gene family transforms mammary epithelial 
cells. J. Virol. 66, 2594–2599 (1992).
230. Landor, S. K.-J. et al. Hypo- and hyperactivated Notch 
signaling induce a glycolytic switch through distinct 
mechanisms. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 
18814–18819 (2011).
231. Šale, S., Lafkas, D. & Artavanis-Tsakonas, S. 
Notch2 genetic fate mapping reveals two previously 
unrecognized mammary epithelial lineages. 
Nature Cell Biol. 15, 451–460 (2013).
232. Parr, C., Watkins, G. & Jiang, W. G. The possible 
correlation of Notch-1 and Notch-2 with clinical 
outcome and tumour clinicopathological parameters 
in human breast cancer. Int. J. Mol. Med. 14, 
779–786 (2004).
233. O’Neill, C. F. et al. Notch2 signaling induces apoptosis 
and inhibits human MDA-MB-231 xenograft growth. 
Am. J. Pathol. 171, 1023–1036 (2007).
234. Stephens, P. J. et al. Whole exome sequencing of 
adenoid cystic carcinoma. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 
2965–2968 (2013).
235. Deangelo, D. J. et al. A phase I clinical trial of the 
notch inhibitor MK-0752 in patients with T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL) and other 
leukemias. J. Clin. Oncol. Abstr. 24, 6585 (2006).
236. Ridgway, J. et al. Inhibition of Dll4 signalling inhibits 
tumour growth by deregulating angiogenesis. Nature 
444, 1083–1087 (2006).
This paper, along with reference 241, demonstrates 
that specific inhibition of DLL4 signalling alters 
tumour neovascularization such that tumour growth 
is inhibited in animal models.
237. Li, J.-L. et al. Delta-like 4 Notch ligand regulates 
tumor angiogenesis, improves tumor vascular 
function, and promotes tumor growth in vivo. 
Cancer Res. 67, 11244–11253 (2007).
238. Kuramoto, T. et al. Dll4-Fc, an inhibitor of Dll4-Notch 
signaling, suppresses liver metastasis of small cell 
lung cancer cells through the downregulation of the 
NF-κB activity. Mol. Cancer Ther. 11, 2578–2587 
(2012).
239. Jenkins, D. W. et al. MEDI0639: a novel therapeutic 
antibody targeting Dll4 modulates endothelial cell 
function and angiogenesis in vivo. Mol. Cancer Ther. 
11, 1650–1660 (2012).
240. Scehnet, J. S. et al. Inhibition of Dll4-mediated 
signaling induces proliferation of immature vessels 
and results in poor tissue perfusion. Blood 109, 
4753–4760 (2007).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY VOLUME 13 | MAY 2014 | 377
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(8.0.0.2542,1241400370 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
[Link]
http://clinicaltrials.gov/
[Link]
http://www.genome.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?hsa04330
[Link]
https://www.oncomine.org/resource/login.html
[Link]
http://www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials
[Link]
http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v13/n5/full/nrd4252.html#supplementary-information
241. Noguera-Troise, I. et al. Blockade of Dll4 inhibits 
tumour growth by promoting non-productive 
angiogenesis. Nature 444, 1032–1037 (2006).
This paper, along with reference 236,
demonstrates that specific inhibition of DLL4 
signalling alters tumour neovascularization such 
that tumour growth is inhibited in animal models.
242. Zhao, X.-C. et al. Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis and 
tumor growth by the DSL domain of human Deltalike
1 targeted to vascular endothelial cells. Neoplasia 
15, 815–825 (2013).
243. Li, K. et al. Modulation of Notch signaling by 
antibodies specific for the extracellular negative 
regulatory region of NOTCH3. J. Biol. Chem. 
283, 8046–8054 (2008).
244. Tolcher, Anthony, W. et al. A first-in-human phase I 
study to evaluate the fully human monoclonal 
antibody OMP-59R5 (anti-Notch2/3) administered 
intravenously to patients with advanced solid tumors. 
J. Clin. Oncol. Abstr. 30, 3025 (2012). 
245. Davis, S. L. et al. Abstract B48: a first-in-human 
Phase I study of the novel cancer stem cell (CSC) 
targeting antibody OMP-52M51 (anti-Notch1) 
administered intravenously to patients with certain 
advanced solid tumors. Mol. Cancer Ther. 12, B48 
(2013). 
246. Doody, R. S. et al. A phase 3 trial of semagacestat for 
treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 
369, 341–350 (2013).
This study reports on the effects of a GSI 
(semagacestat) in a Phase III clinical trial for 
Alzheimer’s disease. The trial was terminated 
before completion, as patients showed off-target 
effects such as increased incidence of skin cancer 
and reduced numbers of lymphocytes — effects 
that are possibly due to perturbed Notch 
signalling.
247. Tolcher, A. W. et al. Phase I study of RO4929097, 
a gamma secretase inhibitor of Notch signaling, 
in patients with refractory metastatic or locally 
advanced solid tumors. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 
2348–2353 (2012).
248. Rosen, L. B. et al. The gamma secretase inhibitor 
MK-0752 acutely and significantly reduces CSF 
Abeta40 concentrations in humans. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2, S79 (2006).
249. Krop, I. et al. Phase I pharmacologic and 
pharmacodynamic study of the gamma secretase 
(Notch) inhibitor MK-0752 in adult patients 
with advanced solid tumors. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 
2307–2313 (2012).
250. Kolb, E. A. et al. Initial testing (stage 1) by the 
pediatric preclinical testing program of RO4929097, 
a γ-secretase inhibitor targeting notch signaling. 
Pediatr. Blood Cancer 58, 815–818 (2012).
251. Luistro, L. et al. Preclinical profile of a potent 
γ-secretase inhibitor targeting Notch signaling with 
in vivo efficacy and pharmacodynamic properties. 
Cancer Res. 69, 7672–7680 (2009).
252. Strosberg, J. R. et al. A phase II study of RO4929097 
in metastatic colorectal cancer. Eur. J. Cancer 48, 
997–1003 (2012).
253. Wang, Z. et al. Targeting Notch signaling pathway 
to overcome drug resistance for cancer therapy. 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1806, 258–267 (2010).
254. Yu, S.-D., Liu, F.-Y. & Wang, Q.-R. Notch inhibitor: 
a promising carcinoma radiosensitizer. Asian Pac. 
J. Cancer Prev. 13, 5345–5351 (2012).
255. Timme, C. R., Gruidl, M. & Yeatman, T. J. Gammasecretase
inhibition attenuates oxaliplatin-induced 
apoptosis through increased Mcl-1 and/or Bcl-xL in 
human colon cancer cells. Apoptosis 18, 1163–1174 
(2013).
256. Meng, R. D. et al. γ-secretase inhibitors abrogate 
oxaliplatin-induced activation of the Notch-1 signaling 
pathway in colon cancer cells resulting in enhanced 
chemosensitivity. Cancer Res. 69, 573–582 
(2009).
257. Liu, S., Breit, S., Danckwardt, S., Muckenthaler, M. U. 
& Kulozik, A. E. Downregulation of Notch signaling by 
γ-secretase inhibition can abrogate chemotherapyinduced
apoptosis in T-ALL cell lines. Ann. Hematol. 
88, 613–621 (2009).
258. Sahebjam, S. et al. A phase I study of the combination 
of RO4929097 and cediranib in patients with 
advanced solid tumours (PJC-004/NCI 8503). 
Br. J. Cancer 109, 943–949 (2013).
259. Diaz-Padilla, I. et al. A phase Ib combination study 
of RO4929097, a gamma-secretase inhibitor, and 
temsirolimus in patients with advanced solid tumors. 
Invest. New Drugs 31, 1182–1191 (2013).
260. Richter, S. et al. A phase I study of the oral gamma 
secretase inhibitor R04929097 in combination with 
gemcitabine in patients with advanced solid tumors 
(PHL-078/CTEP 8575). Invest. New Drugs 32, 
243–249 (2014).
261. Mizutari, K. et al. Notch inhibition induces cochlear 
hair cell regeneration and recovery of hearing after 
acoustic trauma. Neuron 77, 58–69 (2013).
This study describes the effects of using a GSI in 
a mouse model of acoustic trauma to improve 
hair cell regrowth and induce partial recovery of 
hearing.
262. Slowik, A. D. & Bermingham-McDonogh, O. 
Hair cell generation by Notch inhibition in the adult 
mammalian cristae. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 14, 
813–828 (2013).
263. Jin, S. et al. Notch signaling regulates platelet-derived 
growth factor receptor-β expression in vascular 
smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res. 102, 1483–1491 
(2008).
264. Eickelberg, O. & Morty, R. E. Transforming growth 
factor β/bone morphogenic protein signaling in 
pulmonary arterial hypertension: remodeling 
revisited. Trends Cardiovasc. Med. 17, 263–269 
(2007).
265. O’Callaghan, D. S. et al. Treatment of pulmonary 
arterial hypertension with targeted therapies. 
Nature Rev. Cardiol. 8, 526–538 (2011).
266. Tran, I. T. et al. Blockade of individual Notch ligands 
and receptors controls graft-versus-host disease. 
J. Clin. Invest. 123, 1590–1604 (2013).
This report demonstrates that blocking DLL1 and 
DLL4 reduces GVHD without having adverse side 
effects in mouse models. A transient blockade 
was shown to be sufficient for durable protection.
267. Chen, Y. et al. Inhibition of Notch signaling by a 
γ-secretase inhibitor attenuates hepatic fibrosis 
in rats. PLoS ONE 7, e46512 (2012).
268. Siemers, E. R. et al. Effects of a γ-secretase inhibitor 
in a randomized study of patients with Alzheimer 
disease. Neurology 66, 602–604 (2006).
269. Fleisher, A. S. et al. Phase 2 safety trial targeting 
amyloid β production with a γ-secretase inhibitor in 
Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol. 65, 1031–1038 
(2008).
270. Pandya, K. et al. Targeting both Notch and ErbB-2 
signalling pathways is required for prevention of 
ErbB-2-positive breast tumour recurrence. 
Br. J. Cancer 105, 796–806 (2011).
271. Farnie, G., Willan, P. M., Clarke, R. B. & Bundred, N. J. 
Combined inhibition of ErbB1/2 and Notch receptors 
effectively targets breast ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) stem/progenitor cell activity regardless of 
ErbB2 status. PLoS ONE 8, e56840 (2013).
272. Ma, Y. et al. Inhibition of the Wnt-β-catenin and Notch 
signaling pathways sensitizes osteosarcoma cells to 
chemotherapy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 431, 
274–279 (2013).
273. Jin, R. et al. Combination therapy using Notch and Akt 
inhibitors is effective for suppressing invasion but not 
proliferation in glioma cells. Neurosci. Lett. 534, 
316–321 (2013).
274. Shepherd, C. et al. PI3K/mTOR inhibition upregulates 
NOTCH–MYC signalling leading to an impaired 
cytotoxic response. Leukemia 27, 650–660 
(2013).
275. Yao, J. et al. Combination treatment of PD98059 and 
DAPT in gastric cancer through induction of apoptosis 
and downregulation of WNT/β-catenin. Cancer Biol. 
Ther. 14, 833–839 (2013).
276. Slowing, I. I., Trewyn, B. G., Giri, S. & Lin, V. S. Y. 
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles for drug delivery 
and biosensing applications. Adv. Funct. Mater. 17, 
1225–1236 (2007).
277. Mamaeva, V. et al. Mesoporous silica nanoparticles as 
drug delivery systems for targeted inhibition of Notch 
signaling in cancer. Mol. Ther. J. Am. Soc. Gene Ther. 
19, 1538–1546 (2011).
278. Beckstead, B. L. et al. Methods to promote Notch 
signaling at the biomaterial interface and evaluation 
in a rafted organ culture model. J. Biomed. Mater. 
Res. Part A 91, 436–446 (2009).
279. Kovall, R. A. & Blacklow, S. C. Mechanistic insights 
into Notch receptor signaling from structural and 
biochemical studies. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 92, 31–71 
(2010).
280. Hock, B. et al. PDZ-domain-mediated interaction of 
the Eph-related receptor tyrosine kinase EphB3 and 
the ras-binding protein AF6 depends on the kinase 
activity of the receptor. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 95, 
9779–9784 (1998).
281. LaVoie, M. J. & Selkoe, D. J. The Notch ligands, Jagged 
and Delta, are sequentially processed by α-secretase 
and presenilin/γ-secretase and release signaling 
fragments. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 34427–34437 (2003).
282. Higaki, J., Quon, D., Zhong, Z. & Cordell, B. 
Inhibition of β-amyloid formation identifies proteolytic 
precursors and subcellular site of catabolism. Neuron 
14, 651–659 (1995).
283. Barthet, G., Georgakopoulos, A. & Robakis, N. K. 
Cellular mechanisms of γ-secretase substrate 
selection, processing and toxicity. Prog. Neurobiol. 
98, 166–175 (2012).
284. Wolfe, M. S. γ-secretase as a target for Alzheimer’s 
disease. Adv. Pharmacol. 64, 127–153 (2012).
285. Louvi, A. & Artavanis-Tsakonas, S. Notch and disease: 
a growing field. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 23, 473–480 
(2012).
286. Willander, K. et al. NOTCH1 mutations influence 
survival in chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients. 
BMC Cancer 13, 274 (2013).
287. Zong, Y. & Stanger, B. Z. Molecular mechanisms of 
bile duct development. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 
43, 257–264 (2011).
288. Massi, D. & Panelos, J. Notch signaling and the 
developing skin epidermis. Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 
727, 131–141 (2012).
289. Martignetti, J. A. et al. Mutations in PDGFRB cause 
autosomal-dominant infantile myofibromatosis. 
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92, 1001–1007 (2013).
290. Lee, J. Mutations in PDGFRB and NOTCH3 are the 
first genetic causes identified for autosomal dominant 
infantile myofibromatosis. Clin. Genet. 84, 340–341 
(2013).
291. Michailidis, C. et al. Notch2, Notch4 gene 
polymorphisms in psoriasis vulgaris. Eur. J. Dermatol. 
23, 146–153 (2013).
292. Sun, W. et al. Activation of the NOTCH pathway in 
head and neck cancer. Cancer Res. 74, 1091–1104 
(2013).
293. Wang, N. J. et al. Loss-of-function mutations in 
Notch receptors in cutaneous and lung squamous 
cell carcinoma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 108, 
17761–17766 (2011).
294. Agrawal, N. et al. Exome sequencing of head and neck 
squamous cell carcinoma reveals inactivating mutations 
in NOTCH1. Science 333, 1154–1157 (2011).
295. Stransky, N. et al. The mutational landscape of head 
and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Science 333, 
1157–1160 (2011).
296. Dunwoodie, S. L. The role of Notch in patterning the 
human vertebral column. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 19, 
329–337 (2009).
297. Regan, J. & Long, F. Notch signaling and bone 
remodeling. Curr. Osteoporos. Rep. 11, 126–129 
(2013).
298. Fouillade, C., Monet-Leprêtre, M., Baron-Menguy, C. 
& Joutel, A. Notch signalling in smooth muscle cells 
during development and disease. Cardiovasc. Res. 
95, 138–146 (2012).
299. Benedito, R. & Hellström, M. Notch as a hub for 
signaling in angiogenesis. Exp. Cell Res. 319, 
1281–1288 (2013).
Acknowledgements
E.R.A. holds a junior research grant from the Swedish Research 
Council. Work in U.L.’s laboratory is funded by the Swedish 
Research Council (DBRM, StratRegen and project grant), the 
Swedish Cancer Society, Knut och Alice Wallenbergs Stiftelse 
and Karolinska Institutet (the Breast Cancer Theme Center 
(BRECT) and a Distinguished Professor Award). 
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests. 
FURTHER INFORMATION
ClinicalTrials.gov website: http://clinicaltrials.gov/
GENE-E: http://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/software/
GENE-E/KEGG Notch signalling pathway:
http://www.genome.jp/kegg-bin/show_pathway?hsa04330
InterProScan 4 (EMBL-EBI): www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/pfa/iprscan
Oncomine: https://www.oncomine.org/resource/login.html
The Cancer Genome Atlas: https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga
The Cancer Genome Atlas Data Portal: 
https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga
US National Cancer Institute (clinical trials database):
http://www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
See online article: S1 (table)
ALL LINKS ARE ACTIVE IN THE ONLINE PDF
REVIEWS
378 | MAY 2014 | VOLUME 13 www.nature.com/reviews/drugdisc
© 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
