ORIGINALRESEARCH
INTERVENTIONAL
Thrombosis Heralding Aneurysmal Rupture: An Exploration of
Potential Mechanisms in a Novel Giant Swine Aneurysm Model
J.Raymond,T.E.Darsaut,M.Kotowski,A.Makoyeva,G.Gevry,F.Berthelet,andI.Salazkin
EBM
2
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The relationship between aneurysm dimensions, flow, thrombosis, and rupture remains poorly understood.Weattemptedtoclarifythisrelationshipbyexploringvariousswineaneurysmmodels.
MATERIALSANDMETHODS: Bilateralcarotidaneurysmswereconstructedaccordingto3protocolsin24animals:smallaneurysmswith
widenecks(group1;n6animals);smallaneurysmswithsmallnecks(group2;n4animals),andgiantaneurysmswithlargenecks(group3;
n14animals).Group3included3subgroups,relatedtotestingthemodelinvariousexperimentalconditions:Theneckwasclippedin3
animals;venouspoucheslackedanendothelialliningin4animals;and7werecontrolanimals.Animalswerefolloweduntilrupture,orfor
1–4weeks.Angiographywasperformedpostoperativelyandbeforeeuthanasia.Westudiedlesionpathology,payingattentiontothrombosis
,recanalization,wallcomposition,andperianeurysmalhemorrhage.
RESULTS: Groupsdifferedsignificantlyinaneurysmdimensionsandaspectratio(P.002).Rupturesoccurredmorefrequentlyinanimals
with untreated giant aneurysms (7/7) than in animals with small wide-neck (0/6) or small-neck (2/4) aneurysms (P.002). Ruptures
occurredonlyinanimalswiththrombosedaneurysms.Lesionslackinganendothelialliningand5of6clippedvenouspouchesthrombosed
but did not rupture. One giant lesion ruptured despite complete clipping. The wall was deficient in -actin and was infiltrated with
inflammatorycellsanderythrocytesinallthrombosedcases,rupturedornot.Ruptureswereassociatedwithrecanalizingchannelsin9of
10cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Thrombosis,inflammation,andrecanalizationmayprecipitateaneurysmalrupturesinaswinemodel
ABBREVIATIONS: ARaspectratio;HPShematoxylinphloxinesaffron
Flow diverters are endovascular stentlike devices with the capacity
for curative reconstruction of large and giant intracranial
aneurysms.1 Hemorrhagic complications occurring after
flow diversion of unruptured aneurysms have been reported, but
the incidence of this dreadful complication remains indeterminate.
An urgent field notice was made public in March 2010, reporting
8 deaths from hemorrhages 5–150 days after flow diversion.2 The mechanism of post-flow-diversion rupture remains
elusive; aneurysm thrombosis, followed by mural inflammation
, leading to autolysis and rupture,3or “destabilization” of the
aneurysm wall4 has been described. Ruptures are also known to
have occurred following treatment of giant aneurysms by parent
vessel occlusion.5,6 Some investigators have proposed that thrombosis
may herald ruptures in untreated aneurysms.7,8 Thrombusprecipitating
rupture has also been implicated in abdominal aortic
aneurysms.9-12However, because thrombosis followed by organization
and neointimal closure of the neck is required for successful
occlusion of aneurysms by endovascular embolization,11,13-18 there
must be additional factors to account for thrombosis leading to ruptureratherthanocclusion.Suchdiscriminatingfactorshavenotbeen
explored experimentally, to our knowledge.
Some porcine venous pouch carotid aneurysms have a propensity
for early rupture, within 3–5 days of surgical construction,
when incompletely occluded with coils.19 In this work, we explored
different variants of a porcine model to systematically
study the potential contribution of anatomic factors, including
fundus and neck size, residual blood flow, thrombosis, and recanalization
, to the events leading to aneurysm wall breakdown. We
ReceivedDecember14,2011;acceptedafterrevisionMay16,2012.
FromtheDepartmentofRadiology(J.R.),InterventionalNeuroradiologyResearch
Laboratory(T.E.D.,M.K.,A.M.,G.G.,I.S.),andDepartmentofPathology(F.B.),Centre
Hospitalierdel’Universite ´deMontre ´al,Notre-DameHospital,Montreal,Quebec,
Canada;andDivisionofNeurosurgery(T.E.D.),DepartmentofSurgery,University
ofAlbertaHospital,MackenzieHealthSciencesCentre,Edmonton,Alberta,
Canada.
PleaseaddresscorrespondencetoJeanRaymond,MD,CHUM–Notre-DameHospital
,InterventionalNeuroradiology,1560SherbrookeEast,PavilionSimard,Room
Z12909,Montreal,Quebec,CanadaH2L4M1;e-mail:jean.raymond@umontreal.ca
EBM
2 Evidence-BasedMedicineLevel2.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A3407
346 Raymond Feb2013 www.ajnr.org
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
then tested the final model in 2 experimental conditions to eradicate
blood flow by clipping and to produce venous pouches that
lacked an endothelial lining. The present work suggests that
thrombosis, more frequent in large aneurysms with a high fundus-neck
or aspect ratio, can lead to mural degradation, but additional
conditions are required for rupture to occur: namely residual
blood flow or recanalization. Preserved blood flow seems
necessary for blood to dissect between the thrombus and the aneurysmwall
,infiltratethedegeneratedwall,andruptureintoperianeurysmal
tissues. This model may prove useful to test strategies
to decrease posttreatment hemorrhagic complications or even
medical treatments for unruptured aneurysms.20-22
MATERIALS AND METHODS
SurgicalAneurysmCreation
Protocols for animal experimentation were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care Committee in accordance with guidelines
of the Canadian Council on Animal Care. Multiple protocol revisions
and committee consultations were necessary to arrive at the
final model. All procedures were performed in 20- to 25-kg Yorkshire
pigs under general anesthesia. Through a midline vertical
cervical incision, the left external jugular vein was harvested,
turned inside-out to remove potential valvular obstructions, then
reverted, and placed in heparinized saline. The pretracheal fascia
was divided to obtain access to both carotid arteries. The left common
carotid artery was mobilized, temporary clips were applied,
and a 5- to 7-mm arteriotomy was performed on the anterolateral
wall. A 10- to 12-mm venous segment was then sutured end-toside
to the arteriotomy, by using a continuous 7.0 Prolene suture
(Ethicon, Cincinnati, Ohio). The end of the venous segment was
closed with a permanent clip to form a cylindric aneurysm fundus
, the height of which varied. The same procedure was repeated
on the right common carotid artery to create symmetric bilateral
aneurysms.
AneurysmSubgroups
A variety of types of aneurysms were created during an exploratory
phase, reported in the present article, to find the model that
most consistently led to predictable aneurysmal ruptures, while
attempting to minimize animal distress and the number of experiments.
This variety led to disparities in the number of animals
and the length of the follow-up periods between groups described
here. The rationale was to explore surgical ways to produce aneurysms
with widely different aspect ratios, presumably with different
propensities to thrombose and rupture, by varying either the
size of the sac or the size of the neck of the aneurysms. “Small
aneurysms” were constructed with an end-to-side (vein-toartery
) anastomosis, while “giant aneurysms”
were made by using a longer venous
segment and a side-to-side anastomosis.
In a first group of 6 animals, 12 small wideneck
(5–7 mm) aneurysms were constructed
(Table). Animals were followed for
2, 3, and 4 weeks (n2 each), but no rupture
occurred. In a second group of 4 animals
, 8 aneurysms were constructed in a
similar fashion, but the arteriotomy was
smaller, between 4 and 6 mm (group 2, small aneurysms with
small necks). This group was followed for 2 weeks or until rupture
occurred. In a third group of 14 animals, we adopted the final
model: giant (25–50 mm) aneurysms were created with a much
longer venous segment, a side-to-side anastomosis, and a 6- to
7-mm arteriotomy (group 3, giant aneurysms with wide necks;
n14; Fig 1).
OtherExperimentalConditions
To explore mechanisms involved in ruptures and to provide
pathologic specimens of thrombosed venous pouches that would
not rupture, we submitted the final model to 2 other conditions:
1) To study effects of blood flow on the incidence of ruptures and
on the pathologic findings, we permanently clipped the neck after
surgery in 3 animals (6 lesions); and 2) to promote thrombosis
and prevent early recanalization of the clot, we constructed giant
pouches lacking an endothelial lining by leaving the vein segment
inside-out, as previously described (n  4 animals; 8 lesions;
Fig 2).23,24
Angiography,Euthanasia,andPathology
Selective conventional angiography was performed immediately
following surgery with 5F catheters via a percutaneous femoral
approach. Aneurysm dimensions were measured by using the
catheter caliber to correct for magnification. Pigs recovered from
surgery and were fed a normal diet. Postoperatively, animals were
observed for possible pain, distress, or airway compromise from a
neck hematoma. For pigs that did not experience fatal hemorrhage
, angiography was performed before euthanasia.
Autopsy was performed within 1 day of a fatal hemorrhage
(n 5) or after elective euthanasia by barbiturate overdose at 7
days for group 3 animals (n 11) or later for group 1 or 2 preliminary
animals at 2 (n4),3(n2), or 4 weeks (n2). Large
cervical hematomas, when present, were explored to identify the
side and site of aneurysm rupture. Carotid aneurysm constructs
were removed en bloc and immersed in formalin for 1 week. Lesions
were measured and photographed; carotid arteries were first
opened longitudinally; then, aneurysms or venous pouches were
opened along the midsagittal plane. Multiple microscopic photographs
of the content and wall were taken by using a computerized
image analysis system (Vision 2.0; Clemex Technologies,
Longueuil, Canada). All specimens were then sectioned; embedded
in paraffin; and stained with HPS, Movat pentachrome,
and immunohistochemical markers for smooth-muscle cell -
actin and Factor VIII. Pathology slides were examined by 2 experienced
observers (I.S. and J.R.), aware of treatment allocation,
Characteristics of the various groups of aneurysmsa
No.
LongAxis
(mm)
ShortAxis
(mm)
Neck
(mm) AspectRatio
Group
1 12 11.32.6 6.72.1 5.80.6 2.10.6
2 8 16.94.0 8.11.3 4.81.1 3.61.0
3 28 26.110.9 9.41.4 5.81.0 4.61.8
Pvalue .000 .01 .84 .001
aDataaremeans.
AJNRAmJNeuroradiol34:346–53 Feb2013 www.ajnr.org 347
( 8.0.0.2542.1005671086 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
correlating presacrifice angiography with photography and gross
pathologic findings (Figs 1–3).
Statistics
Continuous variables were compared by using ANOVA, while
categoric variables were analyzed by using 2 tests for multiple
comparisons, with a P value of .05 as significant. Rupture rates
were compared by using animals, not aneurysm numbers.
RESULTS
GroupCharacteristics
Aneurysm characteristics of the various groups are summarized
in the Table. The mean long-axis aneurysm dimension (P.000)
and mean aspect ratio (P .002) among the 3 groups were significantly
different. Mean neck size was not significantly different
among the 3 groups (P.84).
AneurysmRuptures
Ruptures were significantly more frequent in animals with untreated
giant wide-neck aneurysms (group 3) than in the 2 other
groups (P.002).Aneurysm ruptures occurred in 0/6 of the group
1 animals (small aneurysms with wide necks) within 4 weeks of follow-up.
Two of 4 group 2 animals (small aneurysms with small
necks) had fatal ruptures within 2 weeks of follow-up. All aneurysms
of untreated group 3 animals (giant aneurysms with wide necks)
ruptured, 3/7 fatally and 4/7 with large but nonlethal cervical hematomas
, which were documented postmortem on day 7.
None of the giant aneurysms lacking an endothelial lining ruptured
(4 animals) (P.002 compared with untreated giant aneurysms
), while 1 clipped lesion ruptured (1 of 6 in 3 animals),
causing a nonlethal cervical hematoma that appeared on day 5
and increased in size on day 7, before angiography and
euthanasia.
All fatal ruptures occurred on day 4 (n 5); it was difficult
to determine the exact timing of the nonlethal hematomas
(n 5). All hemorrhages were identified by day 7, but in 2
animals, multiple sublethal ruptures were suspected before
sacrifice on day 7. It was often difficult to identify the side of
the rupture, with hematoma transgressing tissue planes disrupted
by surgery.
AngiographicResults
All group 1, 2, and untreated group 3 aneurysms were patent after
surgery, but clipped aneurysms (6/6) and de-endothelialized venous
pouches (7/8) were shown to be occluded on the angiograms
obtained immediately after aneurysm creation. Clipped aneurysms
were never shown to be patent by angiography. Blood flow
FIG1. Untreatedrupturedgiantaneurysm.Angiography(A),sagittalsections(B),andmicroscopicsections(CandD)ofacontrolgiantaneurysm
7daysafterconstructionandrupture.Notethethrombosedcaudalthird(T),theflowingcephaladthird(P),andthepartiallythrombosedmiddle
thirdofthefundus.Whilethereisneointimalhypertrophyofthewallofthecephaladthird(C),thereisthrombosiswithrecanalizationofthe
caudalsectionandhemorrhagictransformationofthewall(asterisk,BandD).Todemonstratepatencyoftheaneurysm,onemustcatheterize
theaneurysmandinjectcontrastdirectlyintoitslumen.Noterecanalizationbetweentheclotandwall(arrowsinAandD).Movatpentachrome,
originalmagnification20.Nindicatesaneurysmneck.
348 Raymond Feb2013 www.ajnr.org
(8.0.0.2542,1237555369 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
in the giant aneurysms was slow, and selective carotid injections of
contrast material barely penetrated the aneurysms; intra-aneurysmal
catheterization was necessary to adequately demonstrate patency.
Small wide-neck aneurysms remained patent at 2 weeks, became
partially occluded at 3 weeks, and were completely occluded by 4
weeks. Small aneurysms with narrow necks were fully occluded at 2
weeks in the 2 animals whose aneurysms did not rupture.
Giant aneurysms were partially thrombosed in all untreated
animals at 7 days (Figs 1 and 2). The caudal portion of the venous
pouches was usually more completely thrombosed than the cephalad
portion (Fig 1A). At day 7, the site of sublethal rupture was
thought to be detected by angiography in 2 cases (Fig 2A). Sacs
lacking an endothelial lining were thrombosed immediately postoperatively
(7/8), but a small wide-neck saccular remnant was
present by day 7 in all cases (Fig 2D). The 6 lesions that were
clipped were confirmed to be completely occluded immediately
postoperatively and at 7 days (including the lesion that ruptured).
It was not possible to perform antemortem angiography in the
animals with fatal aneurysm ruptures.
PathologicResults
Group 1: Small Aneurysms with Wide Necks (n6 animals). None
of these aneurysms had ruptured; aneurysms that remained
patent at 2 and 3 weeks had substantially thickened hypertrophied
walls infiltrated with myofibroblasts and collagen and
thick neointima lining the aneurysm lumen. Aneurysms that were
occluded at 4 weeks had complete neointimal closure of the neck,
with organized thrombus filling the aneurysm lumen (not shown).
Group 2: Small Aneurysms with Small Necks (n4 animals). Two
animals were euthanized at 2 weeks; all 4 aneurysms were completely
occluded, with full neointimal closure of the neck. The
aneurysm was filled with thrombus in various stages of organization
in both cases. The 2 other animals had fatal ruptures on day 4.
In 1 case, the rupture clearly occurred on the side with a nearly
completely thrombosed aneurysm, while the contralateral aneurysm
remained patent. A recanalizing crescent, lined with endothelial
cells, could be followed up to the rupture site (Fig 4).
In the other animal, a definite site of hemorrhage could not be
identified. Both aneurysms were partially thrombosed and recanalized.Blood had diffusely infiltrated perianeurysmal tissues on
both sides.
Group 3: Large or Giant Aneurysms with Wide Necks (n 14
animals) (Control Group). All animals with untreated large and
giant aneurysms (n7) had hemorrhages; 3 proved fatal. It was
unclear which aneurysm had ruptured at autopsy in 4 of 7 cases;
FIG2. Rupturedandunrupturedgroup3aneurysms.Angiography(AandD),sagittalsection(BandE),andmicroscopicsections(CandF)7days
aftersurgery.ThearrowsinAandBshowtherupturesiteinacontrolpartiallythrombosedaneurysm(Nindicatesaneurysmneck).Theasterisks
inDandEshowtherecurrentaneurysminathrombosedlesionlackinganendotheliallining.Noterecanalizationbetweentheclotandthewall
of the control aneurysm, absent in the aneurysm lacking an endothelial lining, and the presence of blood on both sides of the attenuated
aneurysmwallmediainbothcases(asterisks,CandF).CandF,Movatpentachrome,originalmagnification20.
AJNRAmJNeuroradiol34:346–53 Feb2013 www.ajnr.org 349
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.2075867443)
all soft tissues were infiltrated with blood. In 2 cases, we identified
rupture sites on both left- and right-sided aneurysms; in 1 aneurysm
, we found 2 distinct aneurysm rupture sites. Ten of 14
aneurysms of this group were completely or nearly completely
filled with thrombus. At microscopy, thrombus was adherent
to the aneurysm wall; the wall was no longer recognizable as a
boundary between intra- and extra-aneurysmal blood (Figs2C
and 3B). In many areas, smooth-muscle cells and elastic fibers
were absent, with a profusion of inflammatory cells infiltrating
the wall, along with hemorrhagic transformation of the media,
adventitia, and perianeurysmal tissues (Fig 2C). Hemorrhagic
wall transformation was always adjacent to the thrombosed
portion of the aneurysm. Recanalizing crescents and fissures
were clearly seen between the thrombus and the degenerated
wall (Fig 3) in 9 of 10 thrombosed aneurysms (Fig 4). They
were lined with endothelial cells in 7 cases.
Group 3: Large or Giant Aneurysms with Wide Necks (n 14
animals) (Treated Groups [n7 animals]). Lesions without endothelium
(n 8) or that were clipped (n 6) were completely
thrombosed (Fig 2E). Recanalizing crescents were absent (6 of 7
cases). Walls remained infiltrated with inflammatory and red
blood cells and contained few smooth-muscle cells and elastic
fibers. In some places, the wall was nearly
absent, as in the control (ruptured) giant
aneurysms (Fig 2F). No lumen could be
found in the clipped lesion that ruptured.
The sac nonetheless had recanalizing
channels between the wall and the
thrombus (Fig 5). Numerous engorged
vasa vasorum were found in the wall and
perilesional tissues, but this observation was
reproducibly found in all aneurysms studied
at 7 days, ruptured or not. In de-endothelialized
venous pouches, the thrombus was covered
with early neointimal tissue, including
endothelial cells, delineating a neoaneurysm
of 5–10 mm.
DISCUSSION
The main findings of this work are the
following: 1) Ruptures occur more frequently
when the aneurysm is large or
giant and the neck size is small relative to
the pouch (ie, large aspect ratios);
2) thrombosis, partial or complete, is
consistently found in ruptured aneurysms
; 3) thrombosis is associated with
inflammation and hemorrhagic wall
transformation, with partial-to-complete
disappearance of elastic fibers and
smooth-muscle cells, whether aneurysms
rupture or not; 4) ruptures are most often
associated with residual blood flow or with
evidence suggesting that flow is re-established
between the thrombus and the degenerated
wall; 5) the endothelial lining of the
aneurysm seems to play an important role,
because rupture was prevented in 8 of 8 thrombosed giant lesions
lacking endothelium; and 6) clipping of giant lesions prevented rupture
in most but not all cases (5/6).
AspectRatioandGiantAneurysmModel
Venous pouch carotid experimental swine aneurysms have frequently
been used to evaluate the efficacy of neurovascular
devices.11,19,25 They are not currently considered appropriate
for this purpose because of their propensity for thrombosis and
complete closure of aneurysmal necks with thick neointima
formation in all animals at 1 month, no matter what material is
used. Reports of experimental aneurysms in other species (eg,
canines and rabbits) have demonstrated a much greater incidence
of long-term patency and a lower incidence of spontaneous
hemorrhage (essentially 0) than were observed in our
study. These may thus be more reliable models for testing of
devices.26,27 The importance of producing a neck-sac ratio to
generate aneurysms that will remain patent was emphasized in
German and Black’s original publication.28More recently, this
ratio has been proposed as a predictive factor for rupture of
human aneurysms.7,8 Multiple versions of this concept have
been described, including an aneurysm volume/neck area ra-
FIG 3. Aneurysmwall.Microscopicsectionofthewalloftheaneurysms,4(AandD)and7(B
andC) days after surgery. Note normal wall (A), thickened, attenuated wall in a thrombosed
aneurysm with hemorrhagic infiltration of the adventitia (BandC), with (C) or without (B)
recanalization. Note extrusion of endoaneurysmal clot (C) through complete rupture of the
wall (arrow,D). HPS (AandD) and Movat pentachrome (BandC), original magnification20
(AandD),50(BandC).
350 Raymond Feb2013 www.ajnr.org
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
tio.29 Low-flow conditions in experimental aneurysms have
been found by using sonography when the aspect ratio is above
1:6, a measurement that correlates with ruptured as opposed to
unruptured human aneurysms.7,8
The relationship between aspect ratio and spontaneous rupture
has not been mentioned in the literature in swine models, but our
hypothesis is compatible with findings in previous works. According
to Byrne et al,19ruptures occurred in 4 of 4 control animals and in 3
of 10 coiled aneurysms when aneurysms were 15 mm with 4-mm
necks (corresponding AR of 3.0–3.75). Murayama et al30 reported
constructing 12-mm aneurysms with 7-mm necks (AR, 1.7) with
rupture in 3 of 23 (13%) of the coiled aneurysms. Lee et al11studied
deliberate immediate aneurysm thrombosis and did not mention
ruptures in 8-mm aneurysms with 2.5-mm necks (AR, 3.2), but “if
the aneurysm was considered to be incompletely thrombosed” at
operation, “an additional suture or temporary clip was placed on the
aneurysm neck for 20 minutes.” Furthermore, recanalization occurred
in 4 animals that were excluded from further analyses.11
The giant aneurysm model described here led to constant, occasionally
incomplete thrombosis, with clinical or subclinical ruptures
in all cases. This model could find 3 applications: 1) to study hemorrhagic
complications after thrombosis (such as following flow diversion3); 2) to explore mechanisms heralding rupture of unruptured
aneurysms; and 3) to test medical treatments for unruptured aneurysms
, such as acetylsalicylic acid, anti-inflammatory agents, or matrix
metalloproteinase inhibitors.20-22,31,32
HemorrhagicComplicationsofFlowDiversion
Other than thrombus, the 4 features common to aneurysms that
ruptured following flow diversion, as described by Kulscár et al,3
are the following: 1) large or giant size, 2) symptomatic lesions,
3) saccular morphology with AR1.6 (mean AR, 3.10.9), and
4) inertia-driven aneurysmal inflow.Because thrombus eventually
occurs in cases of successful endovascular treatment without ruptures
, the presence of thrombus alone cannot be a discriminating
factor. Alternative explanations, such as failure to produce complete
stasis,perhapscombinedwithredirectionofflowtoaweakerportion
of the aneurysm wall or with increased aneurysmal pressures, could
be evoked as possible mechanisms. While some have used pretreatment
computational fluid dynamics studies to analyze potential
causes of posttreatment ruptures,33-35hoping to predict future complications
via “virtual” elevation of intra-aneurysmal pressure, this
hypothesis remains controversial.36
This novel swine aneurysm model reproduced 2 possibly essential
characteristics of ruptured aneurysms observed in clinical
series: large size and aspect ratio. None of these animals were
treated with flow diverters, and none had inertia-driven inflows.
ThrombosisFollowedbyRuptures
If stasis caused by a flow diverter can cause thrombosis followed
by either favorable evolution or rupture, what discriminates
these divergent outcomes? Our findings suggest that
thrombosis is accompanied by degeneration of the aneurysm
wall, as found in other experimental or human aortic aneurysms.9-12Inflammation of the venous wall was present in unruptured
and in ruptured cases. In our model, the distinguishing
factor was the presence of recanalization between the
thrombus and the necrosing wall. Recanalization and recirculation
into an aneurysm with a degenerated wall seem to cause
rupture in this model. We then produced thrombosed venous
pouches that would presumably lead to a degenerated wall but
that would not rupture. Recanalization was prevented by surgical
clipping (n  5 of 6 lesions) or by creating venous
pouches without an endothelium (n  8). A vasa vasorum
theory has been advanced to explain how ruptures can still
occur in completely occluded aneurysms.37It would be imprudent
to draw conclusions from the single case we encountered.
Endothelial denudation can prevent recanalization after coil embolization
of arteries and aneurysms.23 A similar recanalization
mechanism could explain how restoring flow between the clot and
the degenerated wall could precipitate rupture despite partial thrombosis
(Figs 3 and 4). The presence of small recurring wide-neck aneurysms
in all cases of denuded giant aneurysms shows that the absence
of ruptures was not caused by technical failure of aneurysm
construction. Recanalization and blood flow between the thrombus
and the degenerated aneurysm wall, present in the untreated giant
aneurysmsthatrupturedbutabsentindenudedgiantaneurysmsthat
thrombosed but did not rupture, may be the key features indicating
why thrombosis may sometimes lead to rupture and sometimes to
healingoftheaneurysm.Itisunclearwhethercoilingtheaneurysmin
addition to flow diversion can prevent hemorrhages,3but complete
coiling, as opposed to incomplete coiling, can prevent ruptures of
porcine aneurysms.19 We chose to clip rather than coil to occlude
venous pouches in the present work for many reasons:
1) An enormous amount of coils would have been necessary to
completely occlude many giant aneurysms; 2) resulting coil
masses would have made detailed pathologic examination of
FIG 4. Recanalization and rupture. Recanalized endothelialized
crescents can be found in thrombosed aneurysms as early as 4
days after aneurysm construction and rupture.A, W indicates venous
wall; R, recanalization. HPS, original magnification50 (A).
Original magnification100 (B).
AJNRAmJNeuroradiol34:346–53 Feb2013 www.ajnr.org 351
( 8.0.0.2542.998580153 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
early specimens difficult if not impossible; and 3) coil
embolization may not fully occlude aneurysms, as previously
reported.25 Other potential therapeutic avenues include
endothelial denudation by using cryo- or radio-frequency ablation
of the endothelial lining.38-39
Limitations
There are multiple limitations to this work, some being intrinsic
to the design of the experiments. Once it was decided to
compare pathologic findings on day 7, it became impossible to
learn whether unruptured aneurysms would have ruptured
later. For example, denuded aneurysms could have ruptured
later had they been observed for longer periods. Furthermore,
fatal rupture of an aneurysm on 1 side prevented the evaluation
of the natural history of the second aneurysm. Although the
timing of porcine aneurysm hemorrhage was predictable, it
still varied by 12–24 hours. Many ruptures occurred when animals
were not under immediate observation.
Ethical concerns regarding the
circumstances surrounding animal
deaths led to interruption of this exploratory
research before all planned experiments
could be completed. This led to
disparities in group size and length of
follow-up periods. This fact alone may
limit the use of this model.
The present study introduces a new
model that would require standardization
and validation. Aneurysms are surgical constructions
from vein pouches, not “natural
aneurysms,” and swine biology differs significantly
from human biology. The evolution
and pathologic results after creation of the
various models are affected by multiple and
complex factors, including surgical trauma,
translocation of venous tissue into an arterial
environment, remodelling, variable flows,
partial thrombosis, and experimental artifacts
; and it is impossible to disentangle confoundingfromtruecausalfactorsandevents.
Remodellingmayhaveoccurredbetweenaneurysm
construction and aneurysm rupture.
This may have resulted in a change in the size
and/or the geometry of the aneurysms. Reversing
a venous graft, suturing venous
pouches to carotid arteries, and clipping the
baseoftheresultinglesionsimmediatelyafter
construction are hardly representative of
clinical human aneurysms. Nevertheless,
there are few if any other ways of studying
ruptures in laboratory animals, and the present
model and its variants could provide
clues relevant to understanding rupture
of human aneurysms with or without
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS
Thrombosis is consistently associated with
degeneration of the aneurysmal wall, but residual flows or recanalization
may be required for clinical ruptures to occur.
Disclosures: Jean Raymond—UNRELATED:Grants/Grants Pending: Canadian Institutes
of Health Research*, Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec*, Heart and
Stroke Foundation of Canada academic grant.* Tim E. Darsaut—UNRELATED:
Grants/Grants Pending: project grant for Society of Interventional Radiology*
Foundation/1 year/$25,000, ended June 2011.* Guylaine Gevry—UNRELATED:Employment:CentreHospitalierdel’Uuniversite ´deMontre ´al(CHUM)ResearchCentre,
Comments:employeeofthelaboratory,paidfromacademicgrant.*Moneypaidto
theinstitution.
REFERENCES
1. Nelson PK, Lylyk P, Szikora I, et al.ThePipelineembolizationdevice
for the intracranial treatment of aneurysms trial.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:34–40
2. Balt Extrusion. Urgent Field Safety Notice: Intracranial stent ‘SILK.’
Clarifications of the indications. Letter to the intention of Hospital
Chief Executives, Medical Directors and Directors of Radiology.
FIG5. Bleedingdespiteclipping.Angiography(A),sagittalsection(B),andmicroscopicpathology(C
andD)ofgiantaneurysmsconstructedandclipped7daysbefore.Noteseveredisplacementofthe
right carotid artery by hematoma (A), but the aneurysm is completely clipped. Recanalization
between the clot and the aneurysm wall can be seen (BandC). The attenuated wall (W) with
intraluminal thrombosis (T) and perianeurysmal blood (B) is shown (C).D, Microscopic sections
immune-stainedwith-actinshowinfiltrationoftheclotwithmyofibroblastsandtheformationof
endothelializedvascularspaces(asterisk)betweentheclotandthewall(W).
352 Raymond Feb2013 www.ajnr.org
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Available at: http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/groups/dts-bi/documents/
fieldsafetynotice/con076110.pdf; 2010. Accessed September 1, 2010.
3. Kulcsa ´r Z, Houdart E, Bonafe A, et al. Intra-aneurysmal thrombosis
as a possible cause of delayed aneurysm rupture after flowdiversion
treatment.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:20–25
4. Hampton T, Walsh D, Tolias C, et al. Mural destabilization after
aneurysm treatment with a flow-diverting device: a report of two
cases.J Neurointerv Surg2011;3:167–71
5. Kerber CW, Hecht ST, Knox K, et al.Flow dynamics in a fatal aneurysm
of the basilar artery.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol1996;17:1417–21
6. Vincent F, Weill A, Roy D, et al.Carotid ophthalmic aneurysm rupture
after parent vessel occlusion. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2005;26:
1372–74
7. Ujiie H, Sato K, Onda H, et al.Clinical analysis of incidentally discovered
unruptured aneurysms.Stroke1993;24:1850–56
8. Ujiie H, Tachibana H, Hiramatsu O, et al. Effects of size and shape
(aspect ratio) on the hemodynamics of saccular aneurysms: a possible
index for surgical treatment of intracranial aneurysms.Neurosurgery1999;45:119–29, discussion 129–30
9. Coutard M, Touat Z, Houard X, et al.Thrombus versus wall biological
activities in experimental aortic aneurysms.J Vasc Res2010;47:
355–66
10. Fontaine V, Jacob MP, Houard X, et al. Involvement of the mural
thrombus as a site of protease release and activation in human aortic
aneurysms.Am J Pathol2002;161:1701–10
11. Lee D, Yuki I, Murayama Y, et al.Thrombus organization and healing
in the swine experimental aneurysm model. Part I. A histological
and molecular analysis.J Neurosurg2007;107:94–108
12. Touat Z, Ollivier V, Dai J, et al.Renewal of mural thrombus releases
plasmamarkersandisinvolvedinaorticabdominalaneurysmevolution.Am J Pathol2006;168:1022–30
13. Bouzeghrane F, Darsaut T, Salazkin I, et al. Matrix metalloproteinase-9
may play a role in recanalization and recurrence after therapeutic
embolization of aneurysms or arteries.J Vasc Interv Radiol
2007;18:1271–79
14. Darsaut T, Bouzeghrane F, Salazkin I, et al. The effects of stenting
and endothelial denudation on aneurysm and branch occlusion in
experimental aneurysm models.J Vasc Surg2007;45:1228–35
15. Darsaut T, Salazkin I, Ogoudikpe C, et al. Effects of stenting the
parent artery on aneurysm filling and gene expression of various
potential factors involved in healing of experimental aneurysms.
Interv Neuroradiol2006;12:289–302
16. Darsaut TE, Bing F, Salazkin I, et al.Flow diverters can occlude aneurysmsandpreservearterialbranches
:anewexperimentalmodel.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2012;33:2004–09
17. Darsaut TE, Bing F, Salazkin I, et al. Testing flow diverters in giant
fusiform aneurysms: a new experimental model can show leaks responsible
for failures.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:2175–79
18. RaymondJ,DarsautT,SalazkinI,etal.Mechanismsofocclusionand
recanalization in canine carotid bifurcation aneurysms embolized
with platinum coils: an alternative concept.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2008;29:745–52
19. Byrne JV, Hubbard N, Morris JH. Endovascular coil occlusion of
experimentalaneurysms:partialtreatmentdoesnotpreventsubsequent
rupture.Neurol Res1994;16:425–27
20. Hasan DM, Mahaney KB, Brown RD Jr, et al.Aspirin as a promising
agentfordecreasingincidenceofcerebralaneurysmrupture.Stroke
2011;42:3156–62
21. Aoki T, Kataoka H, Ishibashi R, et al. Simvastatin suppresses the
progression of experimentally induced cerebral aneurysms in rats.
Stroke2008;39:1276–85
22. Tada Y, Kitazato KT, Yagi K, et al. Statins promote the growth of
experimentally induced cerebral aneurysms in estrogen-deficient
rats.Stroke2011;42:2286–93
23. Raymond J, Guilbert F, Metcalfe A, et al. Role of the endothelial
lining in recurrences after coil embolization: prevention of recanalization
by endothelial denudation.Stroke2004;35:1471–75
24. Raymond J, Sauvageau E, Salazkin I, et al. Role of the endothelial
lining in persistence of residual lesions and growth of recurrences
after endovascular treatment of experimental aneurysms. Stroke
2002;33:850–55
25. Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Suzuki Y, et al.Development of the biologically
active Guglielmi detachable coil for the treatment of cerebral
aneurysms. Part II. An experimental study in a swine aneurysm
model.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol1999;20:1992–99
26. Bouzeghrane F, Naggara O, Kallmes DF, et al. In vivo experimental
intracranial aneurysm models: a systematic review. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol2010;31:418–23
27. Turk AS, Aagaard-Kienitz B, Niemann D, et al. Natural history of
the canine vein pouch aneurysm model. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2007;28:531–32
28. German WJ, Black SP. Experimental production of carotid aneurysms.N Engl J Med1954;250:104–06
29. Ryu CW, Kwon OK, Koh JS, et al.Analysis of aneurysm rupture in
relationtothegeometricindices:aspectratio,volume,andvolumeto-neck
ratio.Neuroradiology2011;53:883–89
30. Murayama Y, Tateshima S, Gonzalez NR, et al. Matrix and bioabsorbable
polymeric coils accelerate healing of intracranial
aneurysms: long-term experimental study.Stroke2003;34:2031–37
31. Kanematsu Y, Kanematsu M, Kurihara C, et al.Critical roles of macrophagesintheformationofintracranialaneurysm.Stroke2011;42:
173–78
32. Kadirvel R, Dai D, Ding YH, et al. Endovascular treatment of
aneurysms: healing mechanisms in a swine model are associated
with increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases, vascular
cell adhesion molecule-1, and vascular endothelial growth factor,
and decreased expression of tissue inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2007;28:849–56
33. Cebral JR, Castro MA, Burgess JE, et al.Characterization of cerebral
aneurysms for assessing risk of rupture by using patient-specific
computational hemodynamics models. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2005;26:2550–59
34. Cebral JR, Mut F, Raschi M, et al.Aneurysm rupture following treatment
with flow-diverting stents: computational hemodynamics
analysis of treatment.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:27–33
35. Cebral JR, Mut F, Weir J, et al. Quantitative characterization of
the hemodynamic environment in ruptured and unruptured brain
aneurysms.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:145–51
36. Fiorella D, Sadasivan C, Woo HH, et al.Regarding “Aneurysm rupturefollowingtreatmentwithflow-divertingstents
:computational
hemodynamics analysis of treatment.” AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2011;32:E95–97, author reply E98–100
37. Dehdashti AR, Thines L, Willinsky RA, et al. Symptomatic enlargement
of an occluded giant carotido-ophthalmic aneurysm after endovascular
treatment: the vasa vasorum theory. Acta Neurochir
(Wien) 2009;151:1153–58
38. Raymond J, Metcalfe A, Salazkin I, et al.Endoluminal cryotherapy to
prevent recanalization after endovascular occlusion with platinum
coils.J Vasc Interv Radiol2006;17:1499–504
39. Raymond J, Savard P, Salazkin I, et al. Radiofrequency endothelial
ablation prevents recanalization after endovascular coil occlusion:
in vitro and in vivo assessment.J Vasc Interv Radiol2010;21:101–77
AJNRAmJNeuroradiol34:346–53 Feb2013 www.ajnr.org 353
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-2068776510)
