Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311
DOI 10.1007/s12975-013-0298-6

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Effects of Androgens on Early Post-ischemic
Neurogenesis in Mice
Wenri Zhang & Jian Cheng & Kamila Vagnerova & Yulia Ivashkova &
Jennifer Young & Anda Cornea & Marjorie R. Grafe & Stephanie J. Murphy &
Patricia D. Hurn & Ansgar M. Brambrink

Received: 17 July 2013 / Revised: 11 October 2013 / Accepted: 16 October 2013 / Published online: 11 November 2013
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract Although androgens are reported to affect stroke
outcomes by altering ischemic tissue damage, their effect
on post-injury repair is unknown. Since neurogenesis has
recently been recognized as contributing to stroke outcomes,
we investigated the role of androgens on stroke-induced
neurogenesis. Adult male mice were subjected to transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and neurogenesis
was examined 1 week later by quantifying BrdU/doublecortinpositive and BrdU/NeuN-positive neurons in brain germinal
regions as well as the injured striatum. To elucidate the
role of endogenous androgens, post-MCAO neurogenesis
was examined in gonadally intact males, intact males
implanted with the androgen receptor antagonist flutamide,
and surgically castrated males. Surgical castration or

pharmacologic androgen receptor blockade had no effects on
post-ischemic neurogenesis, except that continuous androgen
receptor blockade unexpectedly suppressed maturation
of newborn neurons (BrdU/NeuN-positive cells) in the dentate
gyrus. Post-MCAO neurogenesis was also examined in
surgically castrated mice treated with continuous release
implants containing testosterone or dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). Testosterone and DHT robustly inhibited postischemic neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus, and the more
potent androgen DHT virtually abolished the presence of
immature newborn neurons (BrdU/doublecortin-positive cells)
in the injured striatum. Our data suggest that endogenous
androgens do not alter post-stroke neurogenesis quantitatively,
but the presence of supra-physiological androgen stimulation

Wenri Zhang and Jian Cheng contributed equally to this work.
W. Zhang : J. Cheng : K. Vagnerova : Y. Ivashkova : J. Young :
M. R. Grafe : S. J. Murphy : P. D. Hurn : A. M. Brambrink (*)
Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Oregon
Health and Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road,
UHN-2, Portland, OR 97239, USA
e-mail: brambrin@ohsu.edu
A. Cornea
Department of Imaging and Morphology Core, Oregon National
Primate Research Center, Beaverton, OR 97005, USA
M. R. Grafe
Department of Pathology, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA
S. J. Murphy
Department of Behavioral Neuroscience, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA
A. M. Brambrink
Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, OR 97239, USA

A. M. Brambrink
Department of Neurological Surgery, Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA

Present Address:
J. Cheng
Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123,
China

Present Address:
Y. Ivashkova
Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Harborview
Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA

Present Address:
P. D. Hurn
Office of Health Affairs, The University of Texas System, Austin,
TX 78701, USA

302

profoundly suppresses early neurogenesis in germinal brain
areas and reduces cellular repair in injured tissue after cerebral
ischemia. These results advance the understanding of the role
that androgens play in stroke outcomes.
Keywords Androgens . Testosterone . Dihydrotestosterone .
Androgen receptor . Neurogenesis . Cerebral ischemia

Introduction
Recovery after stroke in humans and animals reflects both brain
tissue lost to ischemic death processes and tissue repair achieved
by synaptic and cellular regeneration. Recent work focusing on
the regenerative capacity of ischemic brain emphasizes a
conceptual paradigm shift from solely neuroprotection to
mechanisms of post-injury neurogenesis and repair [1].
Accumulating evidence suggests that focal cerebral ischemia
in adult rodents induces neuronal stem cell proliferation
following brain ischemia, specifically in the brain germinal areas
of the subventricular zone (SVZ) and the subgranular zone
(SGZ) of the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) [2]. While many
of these newly generated neurons undergo apoptosis, those that
survive may have altered morphology and poor functional
integration in adult brain. However, other investigators have
shown that newly regenerated neurons migrate into surrounding
areas of focal lesions (e.g., striatum ipsilateral to focal stroke),
where they integrate into neuronal circuitry [3, 4] and improve
functional recovery [5, 6].
The roles of gender and sex steroids are well acknowledged
in stroke outcome in both animals and humans. Largely, these
effects have been attributed to alteration of acute tissue damage
[7–10]. For example, estrogen improves stroke outcomes by
actively decreasing infarction and cell death following cerebral
ischemia [11, 12]. Recent experimental stroke studies also
clearly show that androgens have a great impact on tissue
damage [13]. For example, castration reduces damage from
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), while restoration of
testosterone or 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT) in castrated
rodents prior to brain ischemia affects infarct damage
depending on dose, with neuroprotection at physiological
levels and exacerbation at supra-physiological levels [14–16].
Interestingly, both effects are reversed by the androgen
receptor antagonist flutamide [15]. Androgens administered
after ischemic [17] or hypoxic–ischemic [18] brain injury leads
to improved functional recovery and reduces neuronal
apoptosis, respectively, while androgen treatment following
intracerebral hemorrhage-induced brain injury had a
deleterious effect on functional recovery [19]. Lastly, some
molecular cell death pathways triggered by cerebral ischemia
have been shown to be sex steroid-dependent [20, 21].
In contrast to extensive studies on the effects of sex
steroids on tissue damage, sex steroid actions on post-injury

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

neurogenesis remain largely unknown. While emerging
evidence suggests that estrogen enhances post-stroke
neurogenesis and thus contributes to favorable outcomes
enjoyed by females following cerebral ischemia [22], little is
known about the effects of androgens on neurogenesis
following cerebral ischemia. Thus, the present study was aimed
at determining the effects of endogenous and exogenous
androgens on neuronal repair in an established mouse model
of stroke. We show here that androgens exert dose-dependent
effects on post-ischemic neurogenesis.

Experimental Procedures
All animal experiments were performed in accordance with
National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines for the care and
use of animals in research and were approved by Animal Care
and Use Committee of the Oregon Health and Science
University, Portland, OR. Animals were randomly assigned
to the treatment groups. The investigators were blinded to
treatment group during data collection and analysis. All mice
were maintained on a 12/12 h light–dark cycles and permitted
ad libitum access to food and water.
Experimental Groups
Experiments were carried out on young adult male C57BL/6
mice (Charles River Laboratories, Hollister, CA) weighing 20
to 26 g. The following experimental groups underwent 60 min
MCAO and were analyzed for neurogenesis at 7 days postMCAO (Fig. 1): gonadally intact males (n =10); gonadally
intact males+5 mg flutamide (n =15); castrated males
(n =20); castrated males+5 mg testosterone (n =10); and
castrated males+5 mg DHT (n =5). Three animals for each
of these experimental conditions were randomized to receive
sham operation (all surgery identical to MCAO, except no
filament insertion) and recovered for 1 week after surgery
(n =15).

Fig. 1 Schematic overview of the time line and experimental design for
castration, hormone or drug administrations, ischemia, and assessment of
neurogenesis. BrdU 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-monophosphate, DHT
dihydrotestosterone DHT

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

Androgen Hormone Manipulations
Under halothane anesthesia, male mice were castrated 1 week
prior to MCAO. At the time of castration, separate groups of
castrated mice were implanted subcutaneously with 21-day
release pellets containing 5 mg of testosterone or 5 mg of DHT
(Innovative Research of America, Sarasota, FL). Serum
androgen levels following experimental stroke in gonadally
intact males, castrates, and castrates treated with the 5 mg of
testosterone implant dose used in this study have been
previously characterized by our group [15]. Testosterone is
the major circulating androgen in males and is metabolized to
DHT, a more potent androgen receptor agonist. However,
unlike testosterone, DHT cannot be metabolized into estradiol
and therefore exclusively acts on the androgen receptor. Thus,
to determine the effects of the potency of androgens on poststroke neurogenesis, both testosterone and DHT, at equimolar
doses, were used in this study. A group of gonadally intact
male mice were also implanted subcutaneously with 21-day
release pellets containing 5 mg of flutamide (Innovative
Research of America) 1 week before MCAO. We have
previously confirmed the antagonist properties of flutamide
at equimolar or higher doses as concurrently administered
androgen doses in ischemic male brain [15, 23].
Transient MCAO
Surgery was performed aseptically by a single individual who
was not blinded to treatment group. Transient MCAO was
induced via the intraluminal MCAO technique for 60 min, as
previously described [23]. Briefly, mice were anesthetized
with halothane (1.5–2 % in oxygen-enriched air by face
mask). Rectal temperatures in anesthetized mice were
monitored and maintained at 36.0±0.5 °C throughout MCAO
surgery and during induction of reperfusion. Anesthetized
mice were warmed as needed using warming pads and a
heating lamp. Laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF; Moor
Instruments, model MBF3D, Oxford, England) was used to
monitor cortical perfusion and verify vascular occlusion and
reperfusion by affixing a laser Doppler probe to the skull. A
silicone-coated 6–0 nylon monofilament was inserted into the
right internal carotid artery via the external carotid artery, until
LDF signal dropped to 30 % of baseline or less. In sham
MCAO mice, the filament was not inserted to achieve MCAO.
After securing the filament in place, the surgical site was
closed, and the animal was awakened. Neurological deficit
scores were determined at the end of occlusion to confirm
ischemia and to assess equivalence of ischemic injury rather
than to determine specific functional outcomes according to
the following graded scoring system: 0=no deficit, 1=failure
to extend forelimb and torso turning to the ipsilateral side
when held by tail, 2=circling to the affected side, 3=inability
to bear weight on the affected side, and 4=no spontaneous

303

motor activity or barrel rolling. After 60 min of MCAO, mice
were re-anesthetized, laser Doppler probe re-positioned over
the same site on the skull, and the occluding filament was
withdrawn to allow for reperfusion. Animals were then
reawakened and allowed to recover for 1 week. Mice
subjected to MCAO were excluded from further evaluation
if cortical perfusion remained above 30 % of baseline after
initiation of MCAO or if no neurologic deficit was noted. The
duration of MCAO (60 min) was tailored to produce a
moderate infarct that did not extend into the germinal regions.
Animal and Tissue Preparation for Neurogenesis Evaluations
During the 1 week recovery period following MCAO or sham
MCAO, animals received intraperitoneal injections (50 mg/kg)
of the thymidine analog 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine-5′monophosphate (BrdU; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) twice
daily for 6 days in order to label dividing cells in vivo. BrdU
incorporated into newly synthesized DNA can be detected by
immunostaining, thus allowing labeling of all proliferating cells
and the investigation of cell birth rate as well as of maturation,
migration pattern, and survival rate of newborn cells. At 7 days
after MCAO, each animal was deeply anesthetized with
halothane and transcardially perfused with saline followed by
4 % paraformaldehyde. The brains were subsequently collected
and post-fixed in a 4 % paraformaldehyde solution (Sigma
Aldrich) overnight at 4 °C, followed by a 30 min immersion
in 10 % and 30 % sucrose solutions, respectively, then frozen in
OCT embedding medium (Tissue-Tek; Sakura Finetek USA,
Torrance, CA) at −80 °C. Cerebellum and brain stem were
excluded. Using a cryostat (Leica Microsystems, Wetziar,
Germany) at −25 °C, the frozen brain block was sectioned into
40 μm coronal sections for immunohistochemical assessment
of neurogenesis (BrdU, Doublecortin, and NeuN fluorescent
staining). The 40-μm sections were stored at 4 °C in 0.2 %
sodium azide/0.1 M phosphate buffer.
Assessment of Neurogenesis
Free-floating 40-μm sections were pretreated with 50 %
formamide (Sigma Aldrich) at 65 °C for 2 h followed by
2 M HCl for 30 min at 37 °C. After extensive washing,
sections were blocked in 0.1 M phosphate buffer containing
0.3 % Triton-X100, 0.1 % BSA (Sigma Aldrich) and 5 %
normal donkey or goat serum (Jackson Immuno-Research
Laboratories, West Grove, PA) for 30 min. Sections were then
incubated with primary antibodies against BrdU (Accurate
Chemical, Westbury, NY), doublecortin (DCX; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) or NeuN (EMD Millipore,
Billerica, MA) overnight at 4 °C. For fluorescent detection,
sections were washed thoroughly using 0.1 M phosphate
buffer followed by application of species-specific Texas
Red-linked (Jackson Immuno-Research Laboratories) or

304

biotinylated secondary antibodies. The latter was further
developed using strepavidin-linked Cy-2 dyes (GE Healthcare
Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA). Sections were mounted
onto gelatin-coated slides and dried in the dark at room
temperature. Nuclear staining was performed using Hoechst
33342 stain (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), and sections
were coverslipped in PermaFluor (Thermo Fischer Scientific,
Waltham, MA). Negative control sections from each animal
received identical preparations for immunohistochemical
staining, except that primary and/or the secondary antibodies
were omitted. Photo documentation of fluorescent images was
obtained using an upright fluorescent microscope (Leica
Microsystem) mounted with a Hamamatsu ORCA-ER digital
camera (Hamamatsu Electronics, Morimoto, Japan), and a
Leica TCS SP confocal system (Leica Microsystem).
For quantification, newly proliferating cells in the DG and
SVZ were systematically analyzed in a blinded fashion based
on the evaluation of two brain slices per region and animal
(DG: 1.34 to 2.54 mm prior to Bregma; SVZ: 1.18 posterior to
0.14 prior to mm Bregma; first slices randomly selected). All
cells that were positive for BrdU (BrdU+; newborn cells),
BrdU and DCX (BrdU+/DCX+; newborn immature neurons),
and BrdU and NeuN (BrdU+/NeuN+; newborn matured
neurons) were counted in five areas of the brain: dentate gyrus
(SGZ; granular cell layer [GCL]; 0.06 mm2; Fig. 2a, red box),

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

dorsolateral SVZ (0.06 mm2, Fig. 2b, red box), lateral
ventricle wall (ventromedial aspect of SVZ 0.03 mm2;
Fig. 2b, yellow box), and the migratory paths of progenitor
cells from the SVZ into the striatum (0.03 mm2, Fig. 2b, green
box). The two cryostat sections, 40 μm thick and 160 (for
SVZ) or 200 μm apart, labeled for BrdU and DCX or NeuN
were imaged with a Leica TCS SP confocal microscope (Leica
Microsystems) using a 25× NA 0.75 PlanFluotar objective.
All nuclei were labeled with Hoechst (Molecular Probes).
Each fluorophore was imaged separately, in a sequential
mode, to prevent erroneous co-localization due to channel
cross talk. Within each section, 20 planes of z stack of images,
1 μm apart, were acquired, allowing for sufficient guard space
to prevent cutting artifacts from interfering with cell counting.
The volume imaged was projected into one plane (maximum
projection), and labeled cells contained within it were
counted. The number of newborn cells was expressed per unit
volume of processed/analyzed tissue, i.e., cells/mm3 =cells
counted/(analyzed area in mm2 × number of planes ×
0.001 mm). We observed no systematic variations in section
thickness across treatments. Because all sham MCAO mice
regardless of androgen hormone manipulation showed
minimal proliferation, with no evidence of brain injury or
any other abnormality, all sham MCAO experimental groups
were pooled for comparisons to other MCAO experimental
groups.
Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with post hoc Student–Newman–Keuls multiple
range test or Dunn's method for multiple groups as indicated.
The criterion for statistical significance was set at P <0.05. All
values are reported as mean ± SEM.

Results
Mortality and Exclusions
Overall mortality among MCAO experimental groups was 20
mice out of a total of 60 mice (33 %). No deaths occurred in
any of the sham MCAO experimental groups. Overall,
number of mice excluded from MCAO experimental groups
due to intra-ischemic LDF greater than 30 % pre-ischemic
baseline was 2 mice out of a total of 60 mice (3 %).
Fig. 2 Representative mouse brain slices collected 1 week after middle
cerebral artery occlusion illustrate the precise location of the counting
windows (Panels a, b; Nissl-stain). Neurogenesis was quantified in
dentate gyrus (DG; Bregma −2.54 to −1.34; a, red boxes), subventricular
zone (SVZ; Bregma −0.14 to +1.18; b ; delta region= red boxes ;
ventricular lining=yellow boxes), and the migratory paths from SVZ into
the striatum (b, green boxes) of both hemispheres

Moderate Ischemic Insults Induced Robust Neurogenesis
after Transient MCAO In Male Mice
We first examined whether our model of mild ischemic insult
would stimulate the formation of new neurons in gonadally

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

305

intact male mice. One week after MCAO, neurogenesis was
increased in DG (Fig. 3a–c) and the ventricular lining of the
SVZ (Fig. 3d–f) within the ipsilateral hemisphere, as
demonstrated by the elevated number of newborn neurons in
these two regions. In contrast, evidence for accelerated
neurogenesis was not found in the same regions of the
contralateral hemisphere or in sham MCAO animals (not
shown). The majority of newborn cells were immature neurons
(BrdU+/DCX+; yellow, Fig. 3b, e; h, arrows). In DG, many of
the new neurons expressed dendrites (DCX+; stained with
green fluorophore; similar as the cell bodies), which reached
into and in some cases beyond, the granular cell layer (Fig. 3j–
k). Some newborn cells in both germinal brain areas
expressed the marker of mature neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+;
yellow; Fig. 3m, p; arrowheads). The dorsolateral SVZ

(delta-region; Fig. 3g–i) in sham MCAO mice was populated
with large numbers of newborn neurons of similar round
morphology as in the ventricular lining of SVZ (Fig. 3d–f).
However, this region showed only a minimal increase in the
number of newborn cells following MCAO, and therefore was
not subjected to further quantitative analysis for betweengroup comparisons.
Newborn neurons were also observed in the injured
striatum 1 week after MCAO, which reflects effective
migration of newborn neurons from the brain germinal
regions to this area (Fig. 4a–f). The striatum ipsilateral to the
damaged side showed three times as many newborn immature
neurons (BrdU+/DCX+; Fig. 4b; double-labeled cells in
yellow; arrowheads) compared to the contralateral striatum,
and about ten times more than observed in shams. Similarly, at

Fig. 3 Moderate ischemic insult induced robust neurogenesis in male
mice that was similar in distribution and morphology between gondally
intact male, castrated, and castrated + testosterone experimental groups.
Representative micrographs show many immature newborn neurons in
ipsilateral germinal region of the dentate gyrus (DG) and subventricular
zone (SVZ) of mice 1 week after transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO). Panels a–c depict the DG, panels d–f depict the
ventricular lining, and panels g–i depict the dorsolateral aspect (delta
region) of SVZ. Doublecortin (DCX) immunolabeling: green (panels a,
d, g); BrdU-immunolabeling: red (panels c, f, i); and overlay of DCX
and BrdU immunolabeling: yellow (panels b, e, h, inlays confirm BrdU/
DCX-colabeling of individual cells at higher magnification). Panels j–k
show representative images of triple-labeling (BrdU, DCX and Hoechst
[blue]-staining) cells: asterisks depict immature neurons apparently older
than 1 week (BrdU–/DCX+/Hoechst+); arrows depict immature neurons
that have proliferated during the observation period (BrdU+/DCX+/
Hoechst+); and # depicts cells that proliferated during the observation

period (BrdU+) but are negative for DCX. Panel k also illustrates that
several newborn immature neurons have grown dendrites (thin DCXpositive strings; asterisk), which stretch into the granular cell layer
(GCL), while dendrites of older immature neurons even reached beyond
the GCL. Some BrdU-positive cells were positive for the mature neuronal
marker NeuN 1wk after MCAO. Panels l –q show representative
micrographs 1 week following MCAO of the ipsilateral DG (l–n) and
SVZ (o–q) from a castrated mouse implanted with testosterone (C + T).
Newborn cells light up in green (BrdU+; l, o), mature neurons in red
(NeuN+; n, q). The merged images (panels m, p) reveal double-labeled
cells (yellow profiles, identified by white arrowheads) that represent
newly proliferated neurons which express the mature cell marker NeuN.
In contrast to the DG (panel m), the ventricular lining of SVZ (panel p)
contains only few BrdU+/NeuN+ cells (yellow profiles, identified
by white arrowheads), and no such cells were found in dorsolateral
SVZ (not shown). Scale bars: 10 μm (inlays in b , e , h , m , p ),
50 μm (c , e , i , n , q )

306

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

Effects of Supra-Physiological Androgen Levels
on Post-Ischemic Neurogenesis

Fig. 4 Moderate ischemic insult increased migration of immature
newborn neurons into the damaged striatum 1 week after middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) in male mice. Representative micrographs
show immature newborn neuronal cells in the damaged striatum 1 week
after MCAO. Panels a–c depict newborn immature neurons [panel a:
Doublecortin (DCX+) staining (green); panel c: BrdU+ staining (red);
panel b: overlay of DCX+/BrdU+ double staining (yellow) indicated by
white arrows]. Panels d–f identify newborn matured neurons [panel D:
NeuN+ staining (red); panel f: BrdU+ staining (green); panel e: overlay
of NeuN+/BrdU+ double staining (yellow) indicated by white arrows].
Inlays confirm co-labeling at high magnification. Scale bars: 10 μm
(inlays in e), 50 μm (f)

1 week after MCAO, more BrdU+/NeuN+ cells were detected
in the ipsilateral (Fig. 4e, double-labeled cells in yellow;
arrowheads) versus contralateral striatum (not shown).

Effects of Endogenous Androgens on Post-Ischemic
Neurogenesis
To examine whether endogenous androgens affect post-stroke
neurogenesis in males, we compared post-stroke neurogenesis
1 week after MCAO in gonadally intact males to castrated mice
or gonadally intact males treated with the androgen receptor
antagonist flutamide. Reducing or blocking endogenous
androgens either by surgical castration or with the androgen
receptor antagonist flutamide, respectively, largely did not alter
post-ischemic neurogenesis in brain germinal regions. One
week after MCAO, the number of immature neurons (BrdU+/
DCX+ cells) was comparable among the three experimental
groups in DG, ventral lining of SVZ and the injured striatum
(Fig. 5a–c of the ipsilateral hemisphere). The number of
matured newborn neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+ cells) in these
regions was also not different between intact and surgically
castrated male mice (Fig. 5d–f). However, flutamide-treated
intact males displayed significantly less BrdU+/NeuN+ cells
in the ipsilateral DG compare to mice in the other two groups
(Fig. 5d).

To examine the effects of supra-physiological levels of DHT
and testosterone on post-stroke neurogenesis, we evaluated the
number of newborn neurons 1 week after MCAO in castrated
mice treated with or without androgens (testosterone or DHT).
Castrated mice implanted with testosterone (C + T) displayed
significantly less newborn immature neurons (BrdU+/DCX+
cells) in the ipsilateral DG than castrated mice 1 week
after MCAO (33,153±7,466 vs. 55,279±13058 cells/mm3;
P <0.05; Fig. 6a). However, the number of mature newborn
neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+ cells) in the same area was not
different between the two groups (Fig. 6d). DHT more robustly
suppressed post-stroke neurogenesis in the DG in our model.
Post-stroke neurogenesis was virtually abolished in the DHTreplaced castrated mice (C + DHT) 1 week after the ischemic
insult: DHT-replaced castrates had less than 15 % of the
newborn immature neurons (7670±4614 cells/mm3) observed
in ipsilateral DG of castrated mice, equivalent to that observed
in sham animals (no MCAO, 8533±1914/mm3). Unlike supraphysiologic testosterone, DHT replacement significantly
decreased the number of NeuN+ newborn neurons in
ipsilateral DG to a level similar to shams (Fig. 6d). In contrast,
in the ventricular lining of SVZ, neither testosterone nor DHT
impacted post-stroke neurogenesis. Cell counts of newborn
immature neurons (BrdU+/DCX+) and newborn NeuNpositive neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+) were not different among
the three treatment groups (C + V, C + T and C + DHT;
Fig. 6b, e). Compared to castrated mice, testosterone and
DHT replacement did not alter the number of newborn cells
in the contralateral germinal brain areas (data not shown).
The appearance of newborn neurons in the ipsilateral
striatum by 1 week post-MCAO likely reflects successful
migration of cells from the germinal regions. This occurred
to a similar extent in both castrates and those that received
supra-physiologic testosterone (Fig. 6c, f). In sharp contrast,
equimolar substitution of DHT virtually abolished any poststroke presence of young newborn neurons in the damaged
striatum (Fig. 6c). DHT-replaced castrates demonstrated very
few immature newborn neurons (BrdU+/DCX+) in the
ipsilateral striatum, and the numbers were similar to those in
the contralateral hemisphere. To exclude the possibility that
this finding was merely a reflection of a reduced number of
immature neurons born in ventrolateral SVZ, we normalized
the number of striatal immature newborn neurons to total
immature newborn neurons in ipsilateral ventrolateral SVZ
and striatum. We found that 3±2 % of immature newborn
neurons were located in the striatum of DHT-treated castrates
as compared to 45±5 % in untreated castrates and 53±10 % in
testosterone substituted castrates (P <0.05), suggesting that
DHT selectively inhibited migration of immature newborn
neurons into the injured striatum or their survival in the area.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

307

Fig. 5 Endogenous androgens did not alter early post-ischemic
neurogenesis. One week after MCAO, the numbers of newly generated
immature neuronal cells (BrdU+/doublecortin [DCX]+ cells) in dentate
gyrus (DG), subventricular zone (SVZ) or damaged striatum were not
significantly different between surgically castrated mice (C , n =9),
gonadally intact mice (Int , n =7) and flutamide-treated intact mice

(Int + Flut, n =9). Similarly, the number of matured newborn neurons
(BrdU+/NeuN+ cells) was comparable in these regions among the
three experimental groups, except that flutamide-treated intact males
(Int + Flut) had significantly reduced number of BrdU+/NeuN+ cells in
ipsilateral DG compare to intact males (Int) and castrated males (C). Data
are mean ± SEM. *P <0.05

The number of matured newborn neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+) in
ipsilateral striatum was small in all groups at 7 days postMCAO, but it was not affected by DHT (Fig. 6f).

We have previously shown that androgens can have a
profound impact on infarction and behavioral outcomes in mice
after MCAO [15, 23]. In this study using the same injury model,
we show that significant reduction of endogenous androgens by
surgical castration did not affect early neurogenesis in the brain
germinal regions (DG and SVZ) or in the injured striatum.
Furthermore, blocking endogenous androgen receptor signaling
by flutamide largely did not alter post-MCAO neurogenesis.
However, flutamide unexpectedly suppressed maturation of
newborn neurons after MCAO. It is unlikely that these
suppressive effects of flutamide can be attributed to the blockade
of endogenous androgen receptor, since reduced androgen
receptor binding induced by surgical castration did not suppress
maturation of newborn neurons following MCAO. Thus, we
can only speculate that these inhibitory effects may be due to
other previously described attributes of flutamide. In addition to
being used clinically as an androgen receptor antagonist,
flutamide has also been shown to have properties as a partial
androgen receptor agonist [33] as well as an estrogen receptor
antagonist [34]. Both of these characteristics of flutamide
could account for the suppressive effects of flutamide on
maturation of newly regenerated neurons in DG either
independently or in concert. As further supporting arguments,
we point toward our observation that supra-physiologic
androgen receptor stimulation suppresses post-stroke
neurogenesis, and the recent demonstration that circulating as
well as locally synthesized estrogen enhances post-ischemic
neurogenesis [22]. Regardless of the mechanisms underlying
flutamide's suppressive effects on maturation of newborn
neurons, our results suggest that endogenous androgens are
not a critical player in post-stroke neurogenesis.

Discussion
Focal cerebral ischemia triggers a burst of neurogenesis in
germinal areas of the adult mammal brain [1, 24–26] that has
long been speculated to impact long-term functional neuronal
recovery after stroke. Both male and female sex steroids alter
neurogenesis under physiological conditions [27–32]. In brain
ischemia, estrogen has been shown to enhance neurogenesis in
mice and thereby contributes to the favorable effects of estrogen
on post-stroke recovery [22]. This study is the first to investigate
the role of androgens on neurogenesis following brain ischemia
and presents three important findings. First, physiological
androgen stimulation does not affect ischemia-stimulated
neurogenesis in the regions explored within this study. Neither
removal of endogenous androgens by surgical castration nor
blocking androgen receptors in gonadally intact males with
flutamide altered the number of newborn neurons 1 week after
cerebral ischemia. Second, flutamide, a commonly employed
androgen receptor antagonist in clinical settings, suppressed
post-ischemic maturation of newborn neurons in one germinal
region, the SGZ of DG, likely via an androgen receptor
independent mechanism. Third, supra-physiological levels of
androgens profoundly suppressed post-ischemic neurogenesis
in all germinal regions of the ipsilateral hemisphere and reduced
the number of newborn neurons in the injured striatum.

308

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

Fig. 6 Androgens at supra-physiological levels alter post-ischemic
neurogenesis. One week after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO),
testosterone-implanted (C + T, n =9) and DHT-implanted (C + DHT, n =4)
castrated male mice had significantly fewer immature newborn neuronal
cells (BrdU+/doublecortin [DCX]+; panel a) in ipsilateral DG compared
to untreated castrates (C, n =9). Unlike testosterone, the more potent
androgen DHT at supra-physiological also greatly reduced the number of
matured neurons (BrdU+/NeuN+ cells) in the ipsilateral DG compared to
castrated mice with (C + T) or without (C) testosterone supplementation
(Panel d). No difference in neurogenesis was noted in the ventricular lining

of SVZ between groups seven days after ischemia (panels b, e). In
testosterone-implanted (C + T) and castrated (C) mice, respectable
numbers of immature and matured newborn neurons (BrdU+/DCX+ and
BrdU+/NeuN+ cells, respectively; panels c, f) were detected in the
ipsilateral striatum 1 week after MCAO. In contrast, supra-physiological
DHT implantation almost completely abolished the presence of immature
newborn neurons (BrdU+/DCX+ cells) in the damaged striatum 1 week
after the injury, while at the same time not affecting the numbers of matured
newborn neuronal cells (BrdU+/NeuN+; panel f). Data are mean ± SEM.
*P <0.05

One potential challenge in interpreting results from
experiments using gonadally intact male mice is that
depending on time of evaluation and presence or absence of
environmental stressors, endogenous androgen levels in mice
can be quite variable, with reported values falling within a
wide range [35–37]. Therefore, it is quite possible that
endogenous androgens exert dose-dependent effects on poststroke neurogenesis as they do on post-stroke tissue damage
[13, 15]. It is also worth noting that endogenous androgens
have been reported to decline during the acute phase of both
clinical and experimental stroke [15, 38].
In contrast, exogenously administered androgens at supraphysiological levels profoundly suppressed early neurogenesis
in the ischemic brain. Compared to surgical castration (very
low circulating androgen levels), supplementation of either
testosterone or DHT at supra-physiological levels suppressed
neurogenesis in the brain germinal region DG, as demonstrated
by significantly reduced numbers of immature (BrdU+/DCX+)
and matured (BrdU+/NeuN+) newborn neurons. Consistent
with our expectation, we observed that the more potent
androgen DHT was more effective in suppressing postischemic neurogenesis than testosterone at the same dose.
Conversely, in SVZ, another major germinal region in the
adult brain, neither testosterone nor DHT, even at supraphysiological levels, altered post-ischemic neurogenesis,
implying androgen effects on post-ischemic neurogenesis are
region-dependent. However, the mechanism by which
androgens at supra-physiological levels suppress postischemic neurogenesis remains unclear.

We also observed that supra-physiological DHT virtually
abolished the presence of immature newborn neurons
(BrdU+/DCX+) in the injured striatum. This effect was
limited to DHT and not observed with the less potent androgen
testosterone. Newly proliferating neurons can migrate into,
and mature in, striatal areas distant from the germinal regions
after MCAO, presumably serving as regenerated neurons to
populate penumbral areas. Supra-physiological DHT almost
completely abolished the presence of immature neurons
(BrdU+/DCX+) in the striatal region of interest, without
altering the number of BrdU+/NeuN+ cells. Since DHT had
no influence on the number of immature newborn neurons
(BrdU+/DCX+) in the adjacent germinal brain area (SVZ), we
normalized immature newborn neuron yield in the striatum to
the total local pool (ventromedial aspect of SVZ+ ipsilateral
striatum) and confirmed that the relative number of immature
newborn neurons in the injured striatum was very low. In
contrast, testosterone had no effect at all on these processes.
Thus, DHT appeared to specifically suppress immature
neuron migration from, or possibly survival outside of the
SVZ or SGZ.
Our finding that supraphysiological androgen levels
suppressed post-ischemic neurogenesis in mouse DG in part
extends previously published results from Brannvall et al. [39]
who reported suppression of physiologic neurogenesis in DG
of healthy male and female rats that were treated with the
testosterone analogue 19-nortestosterone for five days.
Testosterone has also been shown to inhibit the proliferation
(G0/G1 arrest) of immortalized cell lines at pharmacological

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311

doses [40]. Moreover, androgens can impair growth of
embryonic stem cells and embryo development in mammals,
while anti-androgens are able to reverse this effect [41, 42].
All of these observations suggest that androgens suppress
stem cell proliferation in general as well as suppressing
neurogenesis after ischemic brain injury. However, we did
not observe any effects of androgens on neurogenesis in the
contralateral, non-ischemic DG, suggesting that testosterone
and DHT only alter neurogenesis in ischemic brain tissue and
that these androgen effects are context-specific. The difference
between our results in non-ischemic tissue and those of
Brannvall et al. [39] in healthy animals may be explained by
differences between the compounds tested, particularities of
the applied experimental models, or species differences.
Indeed, our findings are in line with previous reports that
hippocampal neurogenesis in healthy adult C57BL/6 mice
show no gender differences and that the production of new
SGZ cells in female mice is not influenced by estrous cycle or
after ovariectomy, suggesting distinct regulation of adult
neurogenesis in mice vs. other rodents [43].
Interestingly, androgens have also been reported to enhance
rather than suppress neurogenesis under physiological
conditions in song birds [27, 44, 45]. In healthy rodent brain,
endogenous and exogenous testosterone has been shown to
improve survival of newborn neurons in germinal brain areas
[46, 47]. Reasons for the inconsistency in androgen effects on
neurogenesis between our study and others clearly need further
investigation, and these differences need to be taken into
consideration when designing studies that address adult
neurogenesis. Potential factors include, but are not limited to,
profoundly different mechanisms (seasonal physiological
changes vs. post-ischemic changes), different species (birds
vs. mice vs. other rodents), and different observation periods
(much longer in the avian and some rodent studies).
The present study has some limitations with regard to
outcome evaluations. Current guidelines in stroke research
recommend evaluating functional as well as histological
outcomes [48]. In this study, we used a neurological deficit
scoring system to evaluate each animal. While this scoring
system was sensitive enough to confirm ischemia and
consequent ischemic injury in each animal, it was not sensitive
enough for evaluating changes in functional outcomes due to
experimental manipulations or treatments. In order to
determine whether or not the effects of androgens on early
post-ischemic neurogenesis are associated with functional
recovery, future follow-up studies will need to use more
sophisticated and sensitive behavioral measures to evaluate
functional outcomes at different time points following
ischemic insult.
In conclusion, our findings suggested that endogenous
androgens at physiologic levels are not important players
during early post-ischemic neurogenesis. However, androgens
at supra-physiological levels robustly suppressed post-ischemic

309

neurogenesis both in the brain germinal region DG and injured
striatum likely via androgen receptor signaling. Finally, we only
examined the effects of androgens at physiologic and supraphysiologic levels on early post-stroke neurogenesis at 1 week
after MCAO. Thus, it remains to be determined whether
androgens at physiologic and supra-physiologic levels affect
post-stroke neurogenesis in the long term, have an effect on
neuronal repair as well as neurogenesis, or alter the response of
other cell types following brain ischemia. These results advance
our understanding about the role of androgens in stroke
outcomes, and they have relevance assessing androgen
replacement therapies and androgen receptor blockade using
flutamide in males during post-stroke recovery. Furthermore,
the results have potential public health implication as they
underscore the perils of recreational androgen supplementation
in adults who are at risk for ischemic stroke.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by NIH grant NS49210,
OHSU Medical Research Foundation Seed Grant, and the Anesthesia
Research Foundation. The authors express their sincere thanks to
Dr. Jialing Liu from the Department of Neurological Surgery, University
of California in San Francisco, CA, who guided us during the
implementation and early analysis of immunohistochemistry and
image analysis.
Conflict of Interest Wenri Zhang declares that he has no conflict of
interest. Jian Cheng declares that he has no conflict of interest. Kamila
Vagnerova declares that she has no conflict of interest. Yulia Ivashkova
declares that she has no conflict of interest. Jennifer Young declares that
she has no conflict of interest. Anda Cornea declares that he has no
conflict of interest. Marjorie R. Grafe declares that she has no conflict
of interest. Stephanie J. Murphy declares that she has no conflict of
interest. Patricia D. Hurn declares that she has no conflict of interest.
Ansgar M Brambrink declares that he has no conflict of interest. All
institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of laboratory
animals were followed. This article does not contain any studies with
human subjects.

References
1. Wiltrout C, Lang B, Yan Y, Dempsey RJ, Vemuganti R. Repairing
brain after stroke: a review on post-ischemic neurogenesis.
Neurochem Int. 2007;50:1028–41.
2. Kernie SG, Parent JM. Forebrain neurogenesis after focal ischemic
and traumatic brain injury. Neurobiol Dis. 2010;37:267–75.
3. Nakatomi H, Kuriu T, Okabe S, Yamamoto S, Hatano O, Kawahara
N, et al. Regeneration of hippocampal pyramidal neurons after
ischemic brain injury by recruitment of endogenous neural
progenitors. Cell. 2002;110:429–41.
4. Arvidsson A, Collin T, Kirik D, Kokaia Z, Lindvall O. Neuronal
replacement from endogenous precursors in the adult brain after
stroke. Nat Med. 2002;8:963–70.
5. Komitova M, Mattsson B, Johansson BB, Eriksson PS. Enriched
environment increases neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation and
neurogenesis in the subventricular zone of stroke-lesioned adult rats.
Stroke. 2005;36:1278–82.
6. Bendel O, Bueters T, von Euler M, Ove OS, Sandin J, von Euler G.
Reappearance of hippocampal CA1 neurons after ischemia is

310
associated with recovery of learning and memory. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2005;25:1586–95.
7. Alkayed NJ, Murphy SJ, Traystman RJ, Hurn PD, Miller VM.
Neuroprotective effects of female gonadal steroids in reproductively
senescent female rats. Stroke. 2000;31:161–8.
8. Li X, Blizzard KK, Zeng Z, DeVries AC, Hurn PD, McCullough LD.
Chronic behavioral testing after focal ischemia in the mouse:
functional recovery and the effects of gender. Exp Neurol.
2004;187:94–104.
9. Hurn PD, Vannucci SJ, Hagberg H. Adult or perinatal brain injury:
does sex matter? Stroke. 2005;36:193–5.
10. Krause DN, Duckles SP, Pelligrino DA. Influence of sex steroid
hormones on cerebrovascular function. J Appl Physiol. 2006;101:
1252–61.
11. Vagnerova K, Koerner IP, Hurn PD. Gender and the injured brain.
Anesth Analg. 2008;107:201–14.
12. Herson PS, Koerner IP, Hurn PD. Sex, sex steroids, and brain injury.
Semin Reprod Med. 2009;27:229–39.
13. Cheng J, Hurn PD. Sex shapes experimental ischemic brain injury.
Steroids. 2010;75:754–9.
14. Cheng J, Alkayed NJ, Hurn PD. Deleterious effects of
dihydrotestosterone on cerebral ischemic injury. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2007;27:1553–62.
15. Uchida M, Palmateer JM, Herson PS, DeVries CA, Cheng J, Hurn
PD. Dose-dependent effects of androgens on outcome after focal
cerebral ischemia in adult male mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2009;29:1454–62.
16. Cheng J, Uchida M, Zhang W, Grafe MR, Herson PS, Hurn PD. Role
of salt induced kinase 1 in androgen mediated neuroprotection against
cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011;31:339–50.
17. Pan Y, Zhang H, Acharya AB, Patrick PH, Oliver D, Morley JE.
Effect of testosterone on functional recovery in a castrate male rat
stroke model. Brain Res. 2005;1043:195–204.
18. Li ZK, Feng JX, Zhao CY, Ke H, Shen L. Protection of androgen
against hypoxic–ischemic brain damage in neonatal rats and possible
mechanisms. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006;8:441–6.
19. Chen Z, Xi G, Mao Y, Keep RF, Hua Y. Effects of progesterone and
testosterone on ICH-induced brain injury in rats. Acta Neurochir
Suppl. 2011;111:289–93.
20. McCullough LD, Zeng Z, Blizzard KK, Debchoudhury I, Hurn PD.
Ischemic nitric oxide and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 in
cerebral ischemia: male toxicity, female protection. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2005;25:502–12.
21. Liu M, Hurn PD, Roselli CE, Alkayed NJ. Role of P450 aromatase in
sex-specific astrocytic cell death. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2007;27:135–41.
22. Li J, Siegel M, Yuan M, Zeng Z, Finnucan L, Persky R, et al.
Estrogen enhances neurogenesis and behavioral recovery after
stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011;31:413–25.
23. Zhu W, Wang L, Zhang L, Palmateer JM, Libal NL, Hurn PD, et al.
Isoflurane preconditioning neuroprotection in experimental focal stroke
is androgen-dependent in male mice. Neuroscience. 2010;169:758–69.
24. Craft TK, Glasper ER, McCullough L, Zhang N, Sugo N, Otsuka T,
et al. Social interaction improves experimental stroke outcome.
Stroke. 2005;36:2006–11.
25. Nygren J, Wieloch T, Pesic J, Brundin P, Deierborg T. Enriched
environment attenuates cell genesis in subventricular zone after focal
ischemia in mice and decreases migration of newborn cells to the
striatum. Stroke. 2006;37:2824–9.
26. Luo CX, Jiang J, Zhou QG, Zhu XJ, Wang W, Zhang ZJ, et al.
Voluntary exercise-induced neurogenesis in the postischemic dentate
gyrus is associated with spatial memory recovery from stroke. J
Neurosci Res. 2007;85:1637–46.
27. Galea LA, McEwen BS. Sex and seasonal differences in the rate of
cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of adult wild meadow voles.
Neuroscience. 1999;89:955–64.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311
28. Shingo T, Gregg C, Enwere E, Fujikawa H, Hassam R, Geary C, et al.
Pregnancy-stimulated neurogenesis in the adult female forebrain
mediated by prolactin. Science. 2003;299:117–20.
29. Galea LA, Spritzer MD, Barker JM, Pawluski JL. Gonadal hormone
modulation of hippocampal neurogenesis in the adult. Hippocampus.
2006;16:225–32.
30. London SE, Schlinger BA. Steroidogenic enzymes along the
ventricular proliferative zone in the developing songbird brain. J
Comp Neurol. 2007;502:507–21.
31. Spritzer MD, Galea LA. Testosterone and dihydrotestosterone, but
not estradiol, enhance survival of new hippocampal neurons in adult
male rats. Dev Neurobiol. 2007;67:1321–33.
32. Galea LA. Gonadal hormone modulation of neurogenesis in the
dentate gyrus of adult male and female rodents. Brain Res Rev.
2008;57:332–41.
33. Nguyen TV, Yao M, Pike CJ. Flutamide and cyproterone acetate exert
agonist effects: induction of androgen receptor-dependent
neuroprotection. Endocrinology. 2007;148:2936–43.
34. Shimizu T, Yu HP, Hsieh YC, Choudhry MA, Suzuki T, Bland
KI, et al. Flutamide attenuates pro-inflammatory cytokine
production and hepatic injury following trauma-hemorrhage
via estrogen receptor-related pathway. Ann Surg. 2007;245:
297–304.
35. Overpeck JG, Colson SH, Hohmann JR, Applestine MS, Reilly JF.
Concentrations of circulating steroids in normal prepubertal and adult
male and female humans, chimpanzees, rhesus monkeys, rats, mice,
and hamsters: a literature survey. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1978;4:
785–803.
36. Quimby FW. The mouse. In: Loeb WF, Quimby FW, editors. The
clinical chemistry of laboratory animals. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Taylor
& Francis; 1999. p. 3–32.
37. vom Saal FS, Finch CE, Nelson JF. Natural history and mechanisms
of reproductive aging in humans, laboratory rodents, and other
selected vertebrates. In: Knobil E, Neill JD, Greenwald GS,
Markert CL, Pfaff DW, editors. The physiology of reproduction,
vol. 2. 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press; 1994. p. 1213–314.
38. Dash RJ, Sethi BK, Nalini K, Singh S. Circulating testosterone in
pure motor stroke. Funct Neurol. 1991;6:29–34.
39. Brannvall K, Bogdanovic N, Korhonen L, Lindholm D. 19Nortestosterone influences neural stem cell proliferation and
neurogenesis in the rat brain. Eur J Neurosci. 2005;21:871–8.
40. Aboudkhil S, Henry L, Zaid A, Bureau JP. Effect of testosterone on
growth of P388 leukemia cell line in vivo and in vitro. Distribution of
peripheral blood T lymphocytes and cell cycle progression.
Neoplasma. 2005;52:260–6.
41. Yun YW, Yuen BH, Moon YS. Effects of an antiandrogen, flutamide,
on oocyte quality and embryo development in rats superovulated
with pregnant mare's serum gonadotropin. Biol Reprod. 1988;39:
279–86.
42. Chang CY, Hsuuw YD, Huang FJ, Shyr CR, Chang SY, Huang CK,
et al. Androgenic and antiandrogenic effects and expression of
androgen receptor in mouse embryonic stem cells. Fertil Steril.
2006;85 Suppl 1:1195–203.
43. Lagace DC, Fischer SJ, Eisch AJ. Gender and endogenous levels of
estradiol do not influence adult hippocampal neurogenesis in mice.
Hippocampus. 2007;17:175–80.
44. Varez-Buylla A, Kirn JR. Birth, migration, incorporation, and death
of vocal control neurons in adult songbirds. J Neurobiol. 1997;33:
585–601.
45. Kim DH, Lilliehook C, Roides B, Chen Z, Chang M, Mobashery S,
et al. Testosterone-induced matrix metalloproteinase activation is a
checkpoint for neuronal addition to the adult songbird brain. J
Neurosci. 2008;28:208–16.
46. Fowler CD, Freeman ME, Wang Z. Newly proliferated cells in the
adult male amygdala are affected by gonadal steroid hormones. J
Neurobiol. 2003;57:257–69.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:301–311
47. Ormerod BK, Galea LA. Reproductive status influences the survival
of new cells in the dentate gyrus of adult male meadow voles.
Neurosci Lett. 2003;346:25–8.

311
48. Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, Hurn PD, Kent TA, Savitz SI,
et al. STAIR Group. Update of the stroke therapy academic industry
roundtable preclinical recommendations. Stroke. 2009;40:2244–50.

