Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 338–346
© 2015 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/15

OPEN

www.jcbfm.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor attenuates delayed
tPA-induced hemorrhagic transformation in ischemic stroke
rats by enhancing angiogenesis and vasculogenesis
Ike C dela Peña1, Arum Yoo1, Naoki Tajiri1,2, Sandra A Acosta1, Xunming Ji3, Yuji Kaneko1 and Cesar V Borlongan1
Treatment with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) beyond the therapeutic time window (44.5 hours post stroke) may produce
hemorrhagic transformation (HT). Strategies that could extend the narrow time window of tPA will beneﬁt a signiﬁcant number of
stroke patients. Male Sprague–Dawley rats underwent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) and given vehicle, tPA (10 mg/kg),
or tPA and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF, 300 μg/kg), at 6 hours after MCAo. Twenty-four hours post treatment,
G-CSF+tPA-treated stroke rats displayed 25% improvement in neurological functions and 38.9% reduction of hemorrhage, with
Western blots showing 1.9- and 1.2-fold increments in Ang-2 expression in the ischemic cortex and striatum, respectively, and
3-fold increase in phosphorylated endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression in the ipsilateral cortex relative to tPA-treated rats.
Immunohistochemistry also showed 2- and 2.8-fold increase in von-Willebrand expression, 3.2- and 2.2-fold increased CD34+
expression, and 4- and 13-fold upregulation of VEGFR-2 expression in the ischemic cortex and striatum, respectively, in G-CSF+tPAtreated stroke rats relative to tPA-treated subjects. Altogether, these ﬁndings indicate that G-CSF attenuated delayed tPA-induced
HT likely via the enhancement of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis. The use of G-CSF to protect the vasculature may improve the
clinical outcome of tPA even outside the currently indicated therapeutic window for ischemic stroke.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 338–346; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.208; published online 26 November 2014
Keywords: angiogenesis; EPCs; G-CSF; hemorrhagic transformation; tPA; vasculogenesis

INTRODUCTION
Acute cerebral ischemia is a major cause of mortality and disability
worldwide.1 The only FDA-approved treatment for this condition is
thrombolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)2,3
which is effective when given within 4.5 hours of ischemic onset,
but beyond this therapeutic window could produce deleterious
side effects in the ischemic brain, notably, hemorrhagic transformation (HT).4 The HT that ensues after delayed tPA treatment is
likely owing to tPA’s effect on the ‘neurovascular unit,’ characterized by a breakdown of the blood brain barrier (BBB), a restrictive
and protective barrier between blood and the neuronal parenchyma composed mainly of brain endothelial cells.5 Therefore,
preventing endothelial cell injury may lead to protection from BBB
breakdown, afford better neuroprotection, and ultimately, protect
against HT owing to delayed tPA reperfusion therapy post
ischemia.
The granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), an essential
member of the hematopoietic growth factor family, controls the
survival, proliferation, and differentiation of hematopoietic stem
cells/ hematopoietic progenitor cells.6 Aside from its effects on the
hematopoietic system, G-CSF has important roles in the CNS.
For instance, G-CSF has been shown to exert neuroprotection
in vitro as well as in animal models of stroke in different species.7,8
Multi-pronged neuroprotective actions of G-CSF, which have been
implicated in the drug’s robust reduction of cerebral infarcts,
1

include suppressed glutamate-induced neurotoxicity,9 blockade of
the apoptotic cell death,10 attenuated edema formation and
interleukin-1 beta expression,11 and engagement of the cerebral
G-CSF receptor.12 Furthermore, G-CSF has been shown to activate
endothelial cell proliferation and migration in vitro, as well as to
protect endothelial cells.13 It also stimulated endogenous neurogenesis and vascularization, and exerted angiogenic
activity in the corneal angiogenesis assay.14,15 Moreover, G-CSF
has been reported to mobilize CD34+ bone marrow stem cells into
the peripheral blood, which contain endothelial progenitor cells
(EPCs).16 That the beneﬁcial effects of G-CSF in stroke involve
enhanced angiogenesis and vasculogenesis, which are reparative
mechanisms responsible for the development of blood vessels
and improvement in tissue microperfusion around the ischemic
boundary zone, implicate the putative activation of endothelial
cells or mobilization of bone marrow-derived EPCs as G-CSF’s
primary mechanism of action.13,17
In this study, we investigated the efﬁcacy of G-CSF to reduce HT
after delayed tPA treatment in ischemic stroke rats. We
hypothesized that a combination therapy of G-CSF and tPA after
the therapeutic time window will reduce HT, in view of the
beneﬁcial effects of G-CSF in preclinical models of ischemia,7,8
protective effects of G-CSF on endothelial cells, and reparative
or regenerative activities of G-CSF-mobilized EPCs.13,15–17 Furthermore, because enhancement of angiogenesis and vasculogenesis

Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida, USA;
School of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida, USA and 3Department of Neurosurgery, Xuanwu
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. Correspondence: Professor CV Borlongan, Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of Neurosurgery and
Brain Repair, University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.
E-mail: cborlong@health.usf.edu
Received 26 August 2014; revised 15 October 2014; accepted 27 October 2014; published online 26 November 2014
2

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

339
has been shown to promote neurological functional improvement
after stroke,17,18 we hypothesized that G-CSF will not only protect
against delayed tPA-induced HT but also improve neurological
deﬁcits post stroke by virtue of its angiogenic and vasculogenic
effects. Accordingly, we advance the notion that enhanced
angiogenic and vasculogenic activities of G-CSF may be attributed
to ampliﬁed activation of endothelial cells, or via G-CSF-mobilized
EPCs, in view of ﬁndings from the above studies.7,11,13,15–17
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Male adult Sprague–Dawley rats (~9–10 weeks old; Harlan Sprague
Dawley, Indianapolis, IN, USA), weighing 200 –250 g at the beginning of
experiments were used for this study. All experiments have been
performed according to the Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals, the Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals, and other approved guidelines of the University of
South Florida System Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(protocol #4181). Rats were housed in pairs in an AAALAC-approved
Research Animal Facility with a temperature- and humidity-controlled
room maintained on 12-h light/dark cycles, with free access to food and
water. All surgical procedures were conducted under aseptic conditions
and every effort was made to minimize animal suffering and reduce the
number of animals used in the study. All experiments stipulated in this
manuscript are in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines.

Stroke Surgery
Stroke surgery was performed using the middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAo) technique as described in our previous studies.18 Animals were
anesthetized with a mixture of 1% to 2% isoﬂurane in NO/oxygen (69%/
30%) via a face mask, and body temperature was maintained at 37 °
C ± 0.3 °C during the surgical procedures. A midline skin incision was made
in the neck with subsequent exploration of the left common carotid artery,
the external carotid artery, and internal carotid artery. Thereafter, a 4-0
monoﬁlament nylon suture (27.0 mm–28.0 mm) was advanced from the
common carotid artery bifurcation until it blocked the origin of the MCA.
Animals were allowed to recover from anesthesia during MCAo. Hours after
MCAo, animals were re-anesthetized and reperfused by withdrawal of the
nylon thread. We have standardized the MCAo model, with stroke animals
showing ⩾ 80% reduction in regional cerebral blood ﬂow during the
occlusion period as determined by laser Doppler (Perimed, Ardmore, PA,
USA). We also found no signiﬁcant differences in physiological parameters,
including PaO2, PaCO2, and plasma pH measurements, in our stroke
animals indicating similar degree of stroke insults. Rats that reached the
80% cerebral blood ﬂow reduction during occlusion were used for further
studies. Sham animals were also included in this study. Rats were
anesthetized and an incision was made in the neck to expose and isolate
the common carotid and internal arteries. Thereafter, incisions were closed
and animals were allowed to recover from anesthesia.

akinesia which measures the ability of the animal to replace the forelimb
after it is displaced laterally by 2 to 3 cm, graded from 0 (immediate
replacement) to 3 (replacement after several seconds or no replacement);
(2) beam walking ability, graded 0 for a rat that readily traversed a 2.4-cm
wide, 80-cm long beam to 3 for a rat unable to stay on the beam for
10 seconds; and (3) paw grasp which measures the ability of the rat to hold
onto a 2-mm-diameter steel rod, graded 0 for a rat with normal forepaw
grasping behavior to 3 for a rat unable to grasp with the forepaws. The
scores from this battery of three neurological tests were pooled to obtain
the mean neurological score for each treatment group. A ⩾ 2.5 mean
neurological score is used as a criterion for stroke-induced neurological
impairment.19 All behavioral tests were conducted by a single trained rater
blinded to all experimental conditions.

Triphenyltetrazolium Chloride Staining
Seven coronal brain sections (2 mm thick) were stained with 2% 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride (Sigma Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA), and ﬁxed
with 4% paraformaldehyde to determine size of infarct. Infarct size, which
is devoid of red staining, was determined on the digital images using
ImageJ software (open source ImageJ software available at http://rsb.info.
nih.gov/ij/). An observer blinded to experimental group assignments
calculated the ratio of infarct with that of the whole brain.

Hemoglobin Assay
Hemorrhagic transformation was quantiﬁed using the spectrophotometric
assay of brain hemoglobin content reported in a previous study.23 After
triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining and scanning, the hemispheric brain
tissues were homogenized with phosphate buffered saline and centrifuged
for 30 minutes (13,000 g). Thereafter, 200 μL of reagent (QuantiChrom
Hemoglobin Assay Kit, Bioassay systems, Hayward, CA, USA) was added to
50 μL of supernatant. Fifteen minutes later, optical density was measured
at 400 nM with a spectrophotometer.

Western Blot
Western blotting was performed with angiogenesis markers angiopoietin-1
(1:1000; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and Ang-2 (1:1000; Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA), endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) (1:1000;
Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA) and phosphorylated-eNOS (Cell Signaling;
1:1000) as described previously.24 The anti-β-actin antibody (1:10,000;
Sigma) was used as control. Homogenates of the entire ischemic as well as
contralateral (non-ischemic) hemispheres were obtained. Equal amounts of
protein (80 μg) for each group were assayed and proteins were separated
by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membrane. Membranes were blocked with 5% (w/v)
bovine serum albumin in Tris-Buffered Saline with Tween 20 for 1 hour.
After immunoblotting with speciﬁc antibodies, membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated IgG (1:1000; GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA,
USA), and labeled proteins were detected using the electrochemiluminescence (ECL) Plus kit (Thermo Scientiﬁc, West Palm Beach, FL, USA). The
band intensities obtained by western blot analysis were determined using
the ImageJ program. All samples were analyzed at least in triplicates.

Experimental Groups and in vivo Drug Treatment
Histology and Immunohistochemistry

Rats underwent sham surgery or MCAo and were assigned randomly to
one of the treatments (n = 8–10 animals per group) with either vehicle (5%
dextrose), tPA (a generous gift from Genentech, San Francisco, CA, USA) or
combined G-CSF (Amgen, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA)+tPA administered
immediately before reperfusion, i.e., 6 hours after MCAo.19,20 Tissue
plasminogen activator was given at 10 mg/kg dose based on previous
studies,20,21 while G-CSF was administered at 300 μg/kg dose, a dosage
which reduced neuroinﬂammation and ameliorated traumatic brain injury
(TBI)-induced impairments as reported in our previous study.22 All drugs
were given via the intravenous route, i.e., via the jugular vein. Twenty-four
hours after drug treatment, and after behavioral tests (see below), rats
were killed and brains were harvested for subsequent analyses. A power
analysis determined the starting sample size to be at least six animals per
group to reject the null hypothesis at Po0.05 with a power of 0.80.

Rats were anesthetized and then perfused transcardially with 4%
paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline. Brains were removed,
post ﬁxed in the same ﬁxative for 24 hours followed by 30% sucrose in
phosphate buffered saline for 1 week. Frozen sections were then sliced
into 40-μm sections in a cryostat and stored at − 20 °C. Slide-mounted
sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with vasculogenesis marker vonWillebrand factor 19 (von-Willebrand (vWF); 1:100; Abcam); or with EPC
markers CD34+ (15 μg/mL; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and
vascular endothelial growth receptor-2 (VEGFR-2)16,25,26 (1:100, Cell
Signaling) in phosphate buffered saline. After washing and incubation in
corresponding secondary antibodies, sections were washed and incubated
for 30 minutes with Hoechst at 37 °C. After washing, slides were coverslipped using Fluoromount mounting medium (Sigma Aldrich).

Modiﬁed Neurological Testing

Statistical Analysis

Animals were observed for changes in neurological functions using a
modiﬁed neurological examination described in our previous studies.18
Neurological score for each rat was obtained using three tests: (1) forelimb

All data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. Results were analyzed statistically
using one-way analysis of variance and subsequent post-hoc Bonferroni’s
tests, or unpaired t-tests when comparing means of two groups. Statistical

© 2015 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

340

Figure 1. Effects of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) on delayed tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)-induced hemorrhage, cerebral
infarction, and neurological deﬁcits in MCAo rats. (A) Quantitative analysis of cerebral hemorrhage volume with spectrophotometric assay
revealed incidence of hemorrhage (shown as increased levels of hemoglobin levels in the brain) in rats subjected to delayed tPA treatment.
G-CSF treatment caused a 38% reduction of delayed tPA-induced hemorrhage (n = 5–6 animals per group). (B) Quantitative analysis of infarct
volume in vehicle- (n = 9), tPA- (n = 7) and G-CSF+tPA- (n = 8) treated groups. (C) Photographs are representative coronal brain sections stained
with triphenyltetrazolium chloride 24 hours after MCAo, showing infarct area (white) and intact areas (red). G-CSF had no effect on infarct
volume. (D) Effects of G-CSF on delayed tPA-induced neurological deﬁcits in MCAo rats. Twenty-four hours after drug treatment (Tx), rats
injected with G-CSF displayed improvement of delayed tPA-induced neurological deﬁcits (25% and 24.8%, relative to control and tPA-treated
stroke rats, respectively). (n = 8–10 animals per group), *P o0.05, **P o0.01; NS, not signiﬁcant. Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m.

signiﬁcance was set at Po0.05. All statistical analyses were conducted
using GraphPad Prism 5 (San Diego, CA, USA).

RESULTS
G-CSF Reduced Delayed tPA-Induced Hemorrhage and
Neurological Deﬁcits after MCAo in Rats
We examined whether combination treatment of G-CSF+tPA at a
delayed time point (i.e., 6 hours post MCAo) inﬂuenced severity
and incidence of cerebral hemorrhage in ischemic stroke rats.
Quantitative analysis of cerebral hemorrhage volume using
spectrophotometric hemoglobin assays, which measured the
amount of hemoglobin in the brain, showed incidence of HT in
tPA-treated stroke rats (compared with sham; t (9) = 2.21; Po 0.05),
which was not observed in vehicle-treated rats (compared with
tPA-treated rats; t (10) = 2.33; P o0.05; Figure 1A). Moreover, treatment with G-CSF reduced delayed tPA-induced hemorrhage in
MCAo rats (t (10) = 2.83; P o0.01; Figure 1A). However,
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

combination treatment of G-CSF+ tPA did not improve the infarct
volumes after delayed tPA therapy (Figures 1B and 1C), albeit
coinciding with the reported lack of effects of other neuroprotective agents (e.g., fasudil and cilostazol)20,21 in the same stroke
model. After MCAo, rats displayed signiﬁcant neurological deﬁcits
as evidenced by neurological scores ⩾ 2.5. Twenty-four hours after
MCAo, rats given vehicle as well as those administered with tPA
still showed neurological deﬁcits. However, neurological scores
varied signiﬁcantly among groups (F (2,26) = 9.93; P o 0.001) and
subjects injected with G-CSF+tPA displayed improvement of
stroke- (and also probably delayed tPA-) induced neurological
impairments (pairwise comparisons between groups; P o 0.01;
Figure 1D).
Enhanced Ang-2, peNOS Expression in Ischemic Hemisphere of
MCAO Rats Treated with G-CSF+ tPA
At 24 hours after drug administration (i.e., after MCAo induction),
western blot analyses were conducted to measure expression
© 2015 ISCBFM

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

341

Figure 2. Western blotting for angiopoetins (Ang-1 and Ang-2), endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and phosphorylated-eNOS. As shown
in representative bands, treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor+tissue plasminogen activator (G-CSF+tPA) upregulated Ang-2
(marker of angiogenesis) expression in the ischemic hemisphere. Quantitative analyses showed 1.9- and 1.2-fold increment in Ang-2
expression in the ischemic cortex and striatum, respectively, in G-CSF+tPA-treated rats relative to subjects treated with tPA only. Ang-1
expression in both ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres was similar in all groups. Relative to tPA-treated rats, G-CSF+tPA-treated stroke
rats also showed threefold increase in peNOS expression in the ischemic cortex, but not striatum, in cerebral hemisphere ipsilateral to MCAo.
Total eNOS expression in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres was similar in all treatment groups although there was a trend of
increased eNOS expression in the cortex of G-CSF+tPA-treated versus tPA-treated rats. *P o0.05, **P o0.01, ***Po0.001 n = 5–6. Data are
expressed as mean ± s.e.m. relative to sham group and normalized to β-actin.

levels of angiopoietins (Ang-1 and Ang-2), angiogenesis markers,
as well as eNOS and peNOS, putative marker of EPCs,26–29 in
cerebral hemispheres ipsilateral and contralateral to MCAo.
Expression of these proteins were compared against their
expression proﬁles in the brains of sham rats and normalized to
β-actin. Figure 2 shows that Ang-2, but not Ang-1 expression was
upregulated in the ischemic hemisphere (including cortex and
striatum) of stroke rats given G-CSF+tPA. Speciﬁcally, Ang-2
expression was higher in the ipsilateral hemisphere of G-CSF+tPAtreated rats compared with those given tPA alone (cortex:
t (10) = 7.73; P o0.001; striatum: t (10) = 4.76; P o 0.001), or with
vehicle (cortex: t (10) = 5.24; P o0.001; striatum: t (10) = 9.81;
P o0.01). G-CSF+tPA therapy also increased peNOS expression in
cortex (t (8) = 6.58; P o0.01 versus tPA-treated group; t (8) = 2.37;
© 2015 ISCBFM

P o0.05 versus vehicle-treated group), but not in the striatum of
the cerebral hemisphere ipsilateral to MCAo (Figure 2). Total eNOS
expression in the ischemic cortex and striatum was similar in all
treatment groups although there was a trend of increased eNOS
expression in the cortex of G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with
subjects given tPA only.
Parallel in vitro antibody neutralizing experiments and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR studies were conducted to
determine whether G-CSF directly modulates angiogenesis (see
Supplementary File). Our studies showed that the VEGF and
angiogenesis inhibitor sunitinib reduced G-CSF-induced upregulation of angiogenesis marker genes (VEGFR-2, VE-cadherin, and
vWF), and dose-dependently blocked G-CSF-induced upregulation
of VEGF expression in cultured endothelial cell line, indicating
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

342

Figure 3. Immunohistochemical analyses of von-Willebrand (vWF), CD34+ and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGRF)-2 expression levels
in the ischemic cortex. Representative merged images showing co-localization of vWF, CD34+, or VEGFR-2 with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI; blue ﬁlter, nuclear staining). Analyses of ﬂuorescence intensities showed 2-fold increase in the expression of vascular marker vWF,
as well as 3.2- and 4-fold increment in endothelial progenitor cell markers CD34+ and VEGFR-2, respectively, in the ischemic cortex of
G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with subjects administered with tPA only (at 6 hours post MCAO). **Po0.01, n = 5–6. Data are expressed
as mean ± s.e.m. Horizontal bar indicates 100 μM.

direct inﬂuence of G-CSF on angiogenesis rather than coincidental
occurrence of angiogenesis independent of G-CSF treatment.

side of all rats (stroke and sham) did not vary signiﬁcantly (data not
shown).

Enhanced vWF Expression in MCAo Rats Treated with G-CSF+tPA
The expression of vWF is a distinctive marker for vasculogenesis as
reported in previous studies.18,27 Using immunoﬂuorescence, we
measured expression levels of vWF in the ischemic hemisphere
(cortex and striatum) in all subjects at 24 hours after drug
administration. Levels of vWF expression were also compared
against its expression proﬁle in the brains of sham rats. Quantiﬁcation of vWF ﬂuorescent intensities showed higher vWF expression
in ipsilateral cortex (t (10) = 3.12; Po0.01) and striatum (t (10) = 3.30;
Po0.01) of G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with subjects
administered with tPA (Figure 4). vWF levels in the contralateral

Enhanced CD34+ and VEGFR-2 Expression in MCAo Rats Treated
with G-CSF+tPA
EPCs are a heterogeneous group of cells that can be characterized
by the expression of surface markers, such as CD34+ and
VEGFR-216,25–28. We measured expression levels of these markers
in the ischemic hemisphere (cortex and striatum) in all subjects at
24 hours after drug administration. CD34+ and VEGFR-2 expressions
were also compared against their expression proﬁles in the brains
of sham rats. Quantiﬁcation of ﬂuorescent intensities showed
higher CD34+ in ipsilateral cortex (t (8) = 3.25; Po0.01; Figure 3)
and striatum (t (8) = 2.08; Po0.05; Figure 4) of G-CSF+tPA-treated

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

© 2015 ISCBFM

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

343

Figure 4. Immunohistochemical analyses of von-Willebrand (vWF), CD34+ and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGRF)-2 expression levels
in the ischemic striatum. Representative merged images showing co-localization of vWF, CD34+, or VEGFR-2 with 4′,6-diamidino-2phenylindole (DAPI; blue ﬁlter, nuclear staining). Analysis of ﬂuorescence intensities showed 2.8-fold increase in the expression of vascular
marker vWF, as well as 2.2- and 13-fold increment in endothelial progenitor cell markers CD34+ and VEGFR-2, respectively, in the ischemic
cortex of G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with subjects administered with tPA only (at 6 hours post MCAo). *P o0.05, **Po0.01, n = 5–6.
Data are expressed as mean ± s.e.m. Horizontal bar indicates 100 μM.

rats compared with subjects administered with tPA alone (Figure 4).
The same holds true for VEGFR-2 expression in the ipsilateral cortex
(t (8) = 3.19; Po0.01; Figure 3) and striatum (t (8) = 3.73; Po0.01;
Figure 4) of G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with rats administered with tPA only. Expression levels of these surface markers in
the contralateral side of all rats (stroke and sham) did not vary
signiﬁcantly (data not shown).
DISCUSSION
The main ﬁnding of this study was that treatment with G-CSF
prevented HT associated with delayed (6 hours post MCAo) tPA
therapy as evidenced by reduced hemoglobin content in the
brains of G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with rats administered
© 2015 ISCBFM

with tPA only. Concomitant with the reduction in HT, increased
levels of angiogenesis marker Ang-2, vasculogenesis marker vWF,
phosphorylated-eNOS, as well as EPC markers CD34+ and VEGFR-2
were observed in the ischemic hemispheres of G-CSF+tPA-treated
stroke rats compared with those given tPA alone. Moreover, G-CSF
+tPA-treated subjects relative to rats given tPA only, showed
improvement in neurological outcomes at 24 hours post-drug
treatment. Together, these ﬁndings support our hypothesis that
G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT and consequently
improves neurological improvement post stroke via angiogenic
and vasculogenic activities of G-CSF and/or proliferative or
regenerative actions of G-CSF-recruited EPCs.
Reperfusion by thrombolysis, achieved via treatment with tPA, is
the only available therapeutic strategy for stroke, a procedure
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

344
which in itself can also be detrimental and induce hemorrhage
and reperfusion injury.2–5 Therefore, equally important as discovering new drugs for acute ischemic stroke is ﬁnding
interventions that will reduce detrimental effects associated with
delayed tPA treatment and/or extend the thrombolytic efﬁcacy of
tPA. Indeed, identifying these types of drugs will beneﬁt a
signiﬁcant number of stroke patients who may have missed the
opportunity for tPA treatment. In this study, we found that G-CSF
given in tandem with tPA at a delayed time point (i.e., 6 hours post
MCAo) signiﬁcantly reduced the risk of HT and improved poststroke neurological deﬁcits. These results not only imply brain
tissue protection afforded by G-CSF in stroke rats in the context of
delayed tPA-induced HT, but also suggest that treatment with
G-CSF may augment the efﬁcacy and extend the therapeutic time
window of tPA therapy for stroke. Of note, a recent study reported
potentiation of hemorrhage when G-CSF was combined with tPA
in experimental stroke.30 Nevertheless, comparing the results of
the current study to those of the previous report is somewhat
difﬁcult given the differences in experimental procedures (e.g.,
time point of administering tPA), the manner by which tPA was
administered, species of animals, and dosages of G-CSF used.
Moreover, while our primary goal was to investigate whether
G-CSF can attenuate delayed tPA-induced HT, the previous study30
evaluated whether G-CSF can be combined with tPA to enhance
thrombolysis.
Disruption of the BBB accompanies stroke31,32 and is further
exacerbated following delayed administration of tPA.5 Given that
BBB disruption is one of the mechanisms responsible for the
development of HT after delayed tPA therapy, counteracting BBB
breakdown may be an important step to prevent unwanted side
effects (notably HT) associated with delayed treatment of tPA.
Considering that the BBB is composed mainly of endothelial
cells,5,31 enhancing endothelial cell survival or proliferation coupled
with facilitating their migration toward the site of BBB damage and
their differentiation into mature endothelial cells has been
considered as a rational strategy to prevent BBB breakdown post
stroke and/or following delayed tPA therapy.5,31 It has been
suggested that exploiting this approach may not only result in
better neuroprotection but also reduction of HT during tPAinduced reperfusion post ischemia.5,31 In vitro studies have
documented the ability of G-CSF to enhance endothelial cell
proliferation, migration, and survival.13 In this study, we found
attenuation of delayed tPA-induced HT in rats administered with
G-CSF, indicating that the drug (G-CSF) might have exerted its
effect via enhancement of endothelial cell survival or through
activation of endothelial cells. Indeed, these ﬁndings lend support
to the assumed beneﬁcial effects of endothelial cell preservation to
protect the BBB, and consequently to prevent HT after delayed tPA
therapy. Nevertheless, further studies are required to determine
whether G-CSF enhances endothelial cell survival or proliferation in
the setting of tPA-induced HT, and also to discover the underlying
mechanism(s) of action. Additional studies are warranted to reveal
the functionality (i.e., attenuation of BBB breakdown) of G-CSFactivated endothelial cells to establish that G-CSF preserves the
integrity of the BBB when given in conjunction with tPA after the
therapeutic time window, thereby reducing HT.
Angiogenesis, deﬁned as the outgrowth of new vessels from
pre-existing vasculature, is a complex process involving endothelial cell activation, disruption of vascular basement membranes,
migration and proliferation of endothelial cells, and the subsequent formation and maturation of blood vessels.26–29 Meanwhile,
vasculogenesis involves the formation of a primitive vessel
network by stem and progenitor cells, such as EPCs.27,28 Previous
studies showed ability of G-CSF to induce endothelial cells to
express activation/differentiation programs including proliferation
and migration, related to angiogenesis.13 In line with this, we
observed increased expression of angiogenesis marker Ang-2, but
not Ang-1 expression in the ischemic hemisphere of G-CSF+tPAJournal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

treated rats, coinciding with the reported differential inﬂuence of
G-CSF on the expression patterns of these angiopoietins in the
brain of stroke rats.17 Although both Ang-1 and Ang-2 have been
shown to participate in regulating ischemia-induced angiogenesis
in rat brains, Ang-2 reportedly facilitated rapid increase in capillary
diameter, the remodeling of the basal lamina, and growth of new
blood vessels.17,33 Along with increased angiogenesis, we also
observed enhanced vasculogenesis, as evidenced by increased
expression of vasculogenesis marker vWF in the ischemic hemisphere in G-CSF+tPA-treated rats, in accordance with the reported
neovascularization (i.e., enhanced vWF expression) within infarcted
regions of brain in G-CSF-treated stroke animals.11 Altogether, the
above ﬁndings substantiate enhancement of endothelial cell
activation, proliferation, or survival exerted by G-CSF, thereby
preserving the BBB and abrogating HT after delayed tPA treatment.
Moreover, increased angiogenesis and vasculogenesis in the
ischemic hemisphere may underlie improvement of neurological
functions in G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with those given
vehicle or tPA alone, in view of functional recovery post stroke
mediated by enhancement of neovascularization or blood vessel
formation especially in brain regions associated with motor and
neurological functions.11,17,18 Of note, improving neurological
deﬁcits post stroke is an important consideration for potential
stroke treatments, and therefore, should also be exerted by drugs
that could attenuate delayed tPA-induced HT.34 The VEGF signaling
pathway has a key role in physiological angiogenesis.35 Blockade of
the VEGF pathway reportedly abrogated G-CSF-induced angiogenesis,36 and our in vitro data using the antibody neutralizing
paradigm coupled with quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
analyses (see Supplementary File) showed that sunitinib, inhibitor
of VEGF and angiogenesis, reduced G-CSF-induced upregulation of
angiogenesis marker genes (VEGFR-2, VE-cadherin, and vWF),
providing evidence for direct modulation of angiogenesis by
G-CSF with a mechanism of action potentially involving the VEGF
pathway.
EPCs have been showed to migrate and be a home to affected
tissue following injury (e.g., ischemic stroke) via cytokine
gradients, where they act in a paracrine manner, leading to
endothelial cell proliferation and stabilization or through transformation into endothelial cells.11,25,26 In rat models of cerebral
ischemia, transplantation of EPCs improved functional outcomes37
and promoted tissue regeneration owing to increased
angiogenesis25 or vasculogenesis.18 Moreover, in clinical studies,
circulating levels of EPCs has been assumed to reﬂect the
temporal proﬁle of recovery from 7 to 14 days after stroke
onset.38,39 Previous studies have shown the capacity of G-CSF to
stimulate the release of EPCs from the bone marrow to local sites
of ischemia and vascular damage.40 Furthermore, in experimental
stroke studies, G-CSF-recruited EPCs have been shown to localize
to the injured brain area and subsequently differentiate into
endothelial cells to increase vessel formation, indicating that bone
marrow-derived EPCs can contribute to brain tissue repair via
homing to the ischemic brain. Identifying expression of surface
markers CD34+ and VEGFR-2 has been routinely used to
characterize and distinguish various types of EPCs.16,25,26 Moreover, mobilization of EPCs from the bone marrow has been
described to be dependent upon the production of NO, which is
synthesized by eNOS.26,28 Our data showed increased phosphorylation of eNOS in the ischemic cortex of rats administered with
G-CSF+tPA compared with those given vehicle and tPA only,
indicating promotion and proliferation of endothelial cells and
probably, recruitment of EPCs. Immunohistochemistry also
showed enhanced expression of CD34+ and VEGFR-2 in the
ischemic hemisphere of G-CSF+tPA-treated rats compared with
those rats given tPA only, supporting further G-CSF induced
recruitment of EPCs and subsequently localization of these cells in
the ischemic brain. Correlating increases in EPC markers with
enhanced angiogenesis or vasculogenesis in ischemic sites, the
© 2015 ISCBFM

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

345
functional recovery post stroke, and importantly, reduction of HT
in G-CSF-treated animals, may be attributed to the proliferative or
reparative effects of G-CSF mobilized EPCs, in addition to direct
effects of G-CSF on endogenous endothelial cells. Speciﬁcally,
attenuation of delayed tPA-induced HT can be attributed to the
postulated effects of recruited EPCs to reconstitute the BBB after
ischemic injury.25 Nevertheless, other mechanisms may be
involved in light of the multi-faceted actions (e.g., anti-inﬂammatory, neuroprotective, neurotrophic, and regenerative) of G-CSF in
stroke as well as in other types of injury.6–12
In summary, we showed that G-CSF reduced delayed tPAinduced HT post stroke likely via enhancement of endothelial cell
survival or owing to the effects of G-CSF-recruited EPCs and their
speculated actions to abrogate BBB breakdown, and increase
neovascularization or blood vessel formation in ischemic tissues.
Enhanced angiogenesis and vasculogenesis may also explain
improvement of neurological deﬁcits in G-CSF+tPA-treated rats
compared with subjects treated with tPA alone at 24 hours post
MCAo. Nevertheless, it remains to be understood whether
neurological recovery will also be observed in rats subjected to
this combination therapy using other behavioral assays, which are
more sensitive to ischemic injury (e.g., rotarod, sticky tests and
grip strength, etc.). Additional studies are also warranted to
explore whether the acute cerebrovascular preservation exerted
by G-CSF is sustained for longer periods of recovery to verify
whether effects of G-CSF are transient or permanent. Identifying
the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which G-CSF interacts
with the effects of delayed tPA treatment after stroke and how it
enhances the therapeutic time window of tPA will also be
interesting subjects for future studies. In addition, ﬁnding the
optimum dosage of G-CSF, as well as testing the effects of the
combination therapy in other experimental stroke models will
facilitate future clinical application of this approach to reduce HT
and other complications associated with delayed tPA treatment.
Nevertheless, based on the ﬁndings of this study, we believe that
G-CSF is an attractive therapeutic intervention to reduce
detrimental effects associated with delayed tPA administration,
most especially HT, and/or extend the thrombolytic efﬁcacy of tPA
in stroke patients.
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
CV Borlongan has patents and patent applications on stem cell therapy. All other
authors have no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the National Institutes of Health, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke 1R01NS071956-01A1, 1R21NS089851-01, and the
James and Esther King Biomedical Research Foundation 1KG01-33966. We thank
Genentech for providing the tPA.

REFERENCES
1 Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB et al. Heart
disease and stroke statistics-2013 update: a report from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 2013; 127: e6–245.
2 Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA. Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities
in stroke. Nature Rev Neurosci 2003; 4: 399–415.
3 Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, Brozman M, Davalos A. Thrombolysis with alteplase
3 to 4.5 h after acute ischemic stroke. N Eng J Med 2008; 359: 1317–1329.
4 The NINDS rt-PA Stroke Study Group 1997. Intracerebral hemorrhage after
intravenous tPA therapy for ischemic stroke. Stroke 2007; 28: 2109–2118.
5 Wang X, Tsuji K, Lee SR, Ning M, Furie KL, Buchan AM et al. Mechanisms
of hemorrhagic transformation after tissue plasminogen activator reperfusion
therapy for ischemic stroke. Stroke 2004; 35: 2726–2730.
6 Hartung T. Anti-inﬂammatory effects of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.
Curr Opin Hematol 1998; 5: 221–225.

© 2015 ISCBFM

7 Schabitz WR, Kollmar R, Schwaninger M, Juettler E, Bardutzky J, Scholzke MN et al.
Neuroprotective effect of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor after focal
cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2003; 34: 745–751.
8 Schneider A, Kuhn HG, Schabitz WR. A role for G-CSF (granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor) in the central nervous system. Cell Cycle 2005; 4: 1753–1757.
9 Han JL, Blank T, Schwab S, Kollmar R. Inhibited glutamate release by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor after experimental stroke. Neurosci Lett 2008; 432:
167–169.
10 Solaroglu I, Tsubokawa T, Cahill J, Zhang JH. Anti-apoptotic effect of granulocytecolony stimulating factor after focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Neuroscience
2006; 143: 965–974.
11 Shyu WC, Lin SZ, Yang HI, Tzeng YS, Pang CY, Yen PS et al. Functional recovery of
stroke rats induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-stimulated
stem cells. Circulation 2004; 110: 1847–1854.
12 Schneider A, Kruger C, Steigleder T, Weber D, Pitzer C, Laage R et al.
The hematopoietic factor GCSF is a neuronal ligand that counteracts programmed cell death and drives neurogenesis. J Clin Invest 2005; 115: 2083–2098.
13 Bussolino F, Ziche M, Wang JM, Alessi D, Morbidelli L, Cremona O et al. In vitro and
in vivo activation of endothelial cells by colony-stimulating factors.J Clin Invest
1991; 87: 986–995.
14 Shyu WC, Lin SZ, Lee CC, Liu DD, Li H. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor for
acute ischemic stroke: a randomized controlled trial. CMAJ 2006; 174: 927–933.
15 Kawada H, Takizawa S, Takanashi T, Morita Y, Fujita J, Fukuda K et al. Administration of hematopoietic cytokines in the subacute phase after cerebral infarction
is effective for functional recovery facilitating proliferation of intrinsic neural
stem/progenitor cells and transition of bone marrow-derived neuronal cells.
Circulation 2006; 113: 701–710.
16 Asahara T, Murohara T, Sullivan A, Silver M, van der Zee R, Li T et al. Isolation of
putative progenitor endothelial cells for angiogenesis. Science 1997; 175:
964–967.
17 Lee ST, Chu K, Jung KH, Ko SY, Kim EH, Sinn DI et al. Granulocyte colonystimulating factor enhances angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. Brain Res
2005; 1058: 120–128.
18 Ishikawa H, Tajiri N, Shinozuka K, Vasconcellos J, Kaneko Y, Lee HJ et al. Vasculogenesis in experimental stroke after human cerebral endothelial cell transplantation. Stroke 2013; 4: 3473–3481.
19 Won S, Lee KH, Wali B, Stein D, Sayeed I. Progesterone attenuates hemorrhagic
transformation after delayed tPA treatment in an experimental model of stroke in
rats: involvement of the VEGF-MMP pathway. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2014; 34:
72–80.
20 Ishiguro M, Kawasaki K, Suzuki Y, Ishizuka F, Mishiro K, Egashira Y et al. A Rho
kinase (ROCK) inhibitor, fasudil, prevents matrix metalloproteinase-9-related
hemorrhagic transformation in mice treated with tissue plasminogen activator.
Neuroscience 2012; 220: 302–312.
21 Ishiguro M, Mishiro K, Fujiwara Y, Chen H, Izuta H, Tsuruma K et al.
Phosphodiesterase-III inhibitor prevents hemorrhagic transformation induced by
focal cerebral ischemia in mice treated with tPA. PLoS ONE 2010; 5: e15178.
22 Acosta SA, Tajiri N, Shinozuka K, Ishikawa H, Sanberg PR, Sanchez-Ramos J et al.
Combination therapy of human umbilical cord blood cells and granulocyte
colony stimulating factor reduces histopathological and motor impairments in an
experimental model of chronic traumatic brain injury. PLoS One 2014; 129:
e90953.
23 Qin Z, Karabiyikoglu M, Hua Y, Silbergleit R, He Y, Keep RF et al. Hyperbaric
oxygen-induced attenuation of hemorrhagic transformation after experimental
focal transient cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2007; 38: 1362–1367.
24 Matsukawa N, Yasuhara T, Hara K, Xu L, Maki M, Yu G et al. Therapeutic targets
and limits of minocycline neuroprotection in experimental ischemic stroke.
BMC Neurosci 2009; 6: 126.
25 Borlongan CV. Bone marrow stem cell mobilization in stroke: a 'bonehead' may be
good after all!. Leukemia 2011; 25: 1674–1686.
26 Urbich C, Dimmeler S. Endothelial progenitor cells: characterization and role in
vascular biology. Circ Res 2004; 95: 343–353.
27 Liman TG, Endres M. New vessels after stroke: postischemic neovascularization
and regeneration. Cerebrovasc Dis 2012; 33: 492–999.
28 Risau W. Mechanisms of angiongenesis. Nature 1997; 386: 671–674.
29 Endres M, Laufs U, Liao JK, Moskowitz MA. Targeting eNOS for stroke protection.
Trends Neurosci 2004; 27: 283–289.
30 Gautier S, Ouk T, Tagzirt M, Lefebvre C, Laprais M, Pétrault O et al.
Impact of the neutrophil response to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on
the risk of hemorrhage when used in combination with tissue plasminogen
activator during the acute phase of experimental stroke. J Neuroinﬂammation
2014; 11: 96.
31 Borlongan CV. Blood brain barrier in stroke. Curr Pharm Des 2012; 18: 3613–3614.
32 Hawkins BT, Davis TP. The blood-brain barrier/neurovascular unit in health and
disease. Pharmacol Rev 2005; 57: 173–185.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

G-CSF reduces delayed tPA-induced HT
IC dela Peña et al

346
33 Ramsauer M, D’Amore PA. Getting Tie(2)d up in angiogenesis. J Clin Invest 2002;
110: 1615–1617.
34 Ishrat T, Pillai B, Ergul A, Hafez S, Fagan SC. Candesartan reduces the hemorrhage
associated with delayed tissue plasminogen activator treatment in rat
embolic stroke. Neurochem Res 2013; 38: 2668–2677.
35 Hoeben A, Landuyt B, Highley MS, Wildiers H, Van Oosterom AT, De Bruijn EA. Vascular
endothelial growth factor and angiogenesis. Pharmacol Rev 2004; 56: 549–580.
36 Ohki Y, Heissig B, Sato Y, Akiyama H, Zhu Z, Hicklin DJ et al. Granulocyte colonystimulating factor promotes neovascularization by releasing vascular endothelial
growth factor from neutrophils. FASEB J 2005; 19: 2005–2007.
37 Fan Y, Shen F, Frenzel T, Zhu W, Ye J, Liu J et al. Endothelial progenitor cell
transplantation improves long-term stroke outcome in mice. Ann Neurol 2010; 67:
488–497.
38 Navarro-Sobrino M, Rosell A, Hernandez-Guillamon M, Penalba A, Ribo M, AlvarezSabin J et al. Mobilization, endothelial differentiation and functional capacity of

endothelial progenitor cells after ischemic stroke. Microvasc Res 2010; 80:
317–323.
39 Navarro-Sobrino M, Rosell A, Hernandez-Guillamon M, Penalba A, Boada C,
Domingues-Montanari S et al. A large screening of angiogenesis biomarkers and
their association with neurological outcome after ischemic stroke. Atherosclerosis
2011; 216: 205–211.
40 Toth ZE, Leker RR, Shahar T, Pastorino S, Szalayova I, Asemenew B et al. The
combination of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and stem cell factor signiﬁcantly increases the number of bone marrow-derived endothelial cells in
brains of mice following cerebral ischemia. Blood 2008; 111: 5544–5552.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons AttributionNonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. To view a copy of
this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/

Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism website (http://www.nature.
com/jcbfm)

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 338 – 346

© 2015 ISCBFM

