Protection effect of atorvastatin in cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion injury rats by blocking
the mitochondrial permeability transition pore
T. Song, J. Liu, X. Tao and J.G. Deng
Department of Neurological Rehabilitation,
Mawangdui Hospital of Hunan Province,
Hunan Provincial Research Institute of Geriatrics, Changsha, China
Corresponding author: X. Tao
E-mail: xitaocn@163.com
Genet. Mol. Res. 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)
Received July 25, 2014
Accepted November 5, 2014
Published December 18, 2014
DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.4238/2014.December.18.5

ABSTRACT. The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of
atorvastatin on the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition
pore (MPTP) and the expression of cytochrome C (Cyt C) in SpragueDawley rats with cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R). The rat model of
cerebral artery ischemia was established by the suture-occluded method
with ischemia for 2 h and reperfusion for 72 h. Thirty-four male rats
were randomly divided into four groups: the normal group and the
sham-operation group without any treatment, the I/R group with only
intragastric administration of normal saline, and the intervention group,
which received intragastric administration of 10 mg/kg atorvastatin
at different times. All rats were sacrificed at 72 h. Compared with the
I/R group, the morphology of nerve cells in the intervention group
was reduced, the number of TUNEL-positive cells decreased, the
expression of cortical cytoplasm Cyt C decreased, and the mitochondrial
absorbance value increased. All of these differences were statistically
significant. Atorvastatin could inhibit neuronal apoptosis and alleviate
the cerebral I/R injury. The mechanism may be related to the blocking
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

Atorvastatin subcellular protection and its mechanisms

10633

of the MPTP opening and the subsequent reduction of Cyt C release.
Key words: Atorvastatin; Mitochondrial permeability transition pore;
Cytochrome C; Cerebral ischemia and reperfusion; Apoptosis

INTRODUCTION
Statins are the inhibitors of 3-hydroxy-3-glutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, which not only play a large role in lowering cholesterol, but also have multi-directional
functions such as cholesterol-independent anti-inflammatory, cell proliferation and differentiation, anti-excitement toxins, anti-oxidation, anti-platelet aggregation, neuroprotective, and
immunomodulatory activities, and are therefore one of the key drug types used to reduce
the occurrence of clinical cardiovascular events (Bösel et al., 2005; Nahrendorf et al., 2008;
Pignatelli et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2012). Statins have a wide range of positive effects for
ischemic diseases, and an increasing number of in-depth studies have focused on their protective mechanism. Owing to differences in the efficacy and side effects of different statin drugs,
some of the drugs have gradually been clinically eliminated. As a second-generation HMGCoA reductase inhibitor, atorvastatin is currently widely used in the treatment of ischemic
cerebrovascular diseases or for the primary prevention and secondary prevention of transient
ischemia, and its application has shown positive results. However, the mechanism of action of
statins is still not completely understood.
The mitochondrion is the major organ of energy metabolism, providing ATP for various cellular activities through oxidative phosphorylation. Mitochondria cannot effectively
carry out oxidative phosphorylation in ischemic and hypoxic tissues, and thus H+ accumulates,
calcium overloads, the mitochondrial membrane potential becomes reduced, the permeability
transition pore (MPTP) opens, and the mitochondria swell, which ultimately triggers apoptosis
of the mitochondrial pathway. Recent studies have found that mitochondria can be important
neuroprotective targets for cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury (Ye et al., 2012; Zhao
et al., 2013). However, in the field of cerebral ischemia and reperfusion, there are few reports
investigating whether the neuroprotective effects of ischemic stress by atorvastatin are associated with mitochondrial morphology and function. Therefore, in this study, the rat middle
artery cerebral occlusion (MACO) model was established by the suture-occluded method, 10
mg/kg atorvastatin was intragastrically administered, and the changes in MPTP opening and
cytosolic cytochrome C (Cyt C) expression were observed in different experimental groups.
These results were combined with observations of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and TUNEL
staining of brain tissues in order to elucidate the neuroprotection mechanism of atorvastatin.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
Grouping and intervention of experimental animals
Thirty-four pathogen-free male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats weighing 220-250 g were
provided from the Hunan Slack King of Laboratory Animal Limited Company (certificate No.
SCXK (Xiang) 2009-0004). The 34 male rats were numbered and randomly divided according
to the random number table into the normal control group (7 rats), the sham-operation group
(7 rats), the I/R group (10 rats), and the atorvastatin intervention group (10 rats). In the shamGenetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

T. Song et al.

10634

operation group, the neck skin of the rat was cut and the vessels were separated, but there was
no drug treatment administered. In the I/R group, the rat MACO model was prepared, normal
saline was intragastrically administered at the time of waking after reperfusion, and then at
24 h and again at 48 h. In the atorvastatin intervention group, 10 mg/kg atorvastatin (Pfizer
Company, USA), prepared with normal saline, was intragastrically administered at the same
time points as that of the I/R group. This study was carried out in strict accordance with the
recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National
Institutes of Health. The animal use protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Mawangdui Hospital of Hunan Province.

MACO model preparation
The MACO model was prepared by the suture-occluded method (Clark et al., 1997).
After the rats were weighed, they were intraperitoneally injected with 350 mg/kg 10% chloral
hydrate anesthetic. Rats were then placed in supine position and their limbs were fixed, the
soft tissues in the middle right side of the neck were separated to expose the right general carotid artery and the carotid artery, the proximal heart end of the general carotid artery and the
root of the outward carotid artery were ligated, the internal carotid artery was clipped using
arterial clamps, sutures were prepared, and a notch was cut near the bifurcation of the carotid
artery. The special sutures (Beijing Sunbio Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) were inserted,
and the artery clips were loosened; the insert depth was approximately 18-20 mm and was
stopped when slight resistance was felt. The spare lines were tied, the skin was sutured, and
then the suture was pulled out after ischemia for 2 h and reperfusion for 72 h. Animals that
died during surgery due to subarachnoid hemorrhage or neurological function impairment,
which had unqualified scores, were considered as failed model preparations, and were not
included in the analysis. The model number of any dead rat was complemented after model
preparation of the same batch of rats.

Neurological function impairment scoring
Rats were subjected to neurological function scoring after waking from anesthesia
according to the Longa 5-point scale standard (Longa et al., 1989) as follows: no symptoms
of nerve injury (0 points), could not fully extend the contralateral paw (1 point), contralateral
circling (2 points), contralateral dumping (3 points), could not spontaneously walk or loss of
consciousness (4 points). Rats with scores of 0 or 4 points were excluded from the analysis.

HE staining
At 72-h reperfusion, the rats were intraperitoneally anesthetized with 350 mg/kg 10%
chloral hydrate, and all rats were killed. Two rats from the normal group and the sham group,
and five rats from the other groups were selected, respectively, and were cardiac perfused with
250 mL 4% paraformaldehyde phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) until the liver turned white.
The brain tissues were then soaked in 4% paraformaldehyde PBS buffer at 4°C overnight,
which were then subjected to graded alcohol dehydration, cleared with xylene, embedded in
paraffin, and sliced into 5-mm sections for subsequent use.
Changes in nerve cell morphology were observed by HE staining. Sections were
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

Atorvastatin subcellular protection and its mechanisms

10635

baked at 60°C for 30 min in the oven, dewaxed with xylene I for 5 min, cleared with xylene II
for 10 min, and treated by graded alcohol for 2 to 4 min (100→95→85→75%), respectively.
The alcohol was washed away with distilled water, and immersed in hematoxylin for 5 min,
rinsed with distilled water for 2 min, and the color was separated by using 1% hydrochloric
acid alcohol for 10-20 s (several lifts and thrusts until the slices faded to pale blue), soaked
in water for 10 min, stained with eosin for 5 min, dipped in distilled water a few times, and
then re-dehydrated by graded ethanol (75→85→95→100%) for 5 min, respectively, dewaxed
in xylene I for 3 min, cleared with xylene II for 5 min, sealed in neutral gum, dried in a 37°C
oven, and finally, the pathological changes of brain tissues were observed under the microscope. Eight different fields of view of each slice were randomly observed under high magnification (400X).

TUNEL staining
The TUNEL-Staining Kit was purchased from the Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology
(Jiangsu, China). The following operation was carried out according to the kit instructions:
the paraffin slices were dewaxed in xylene for 10 min, and then further dewaxed in fresh
xylene for 5-10 min, washed in the alcohol gradient (70-100%) for 2 min, respectively, and
20 mg/mL free DNase enzyme proteinase K was added, incubated at 37°C for 15-30 min, and
washed in PBS for 2 min 3 times. Slices were further incubated in 3% freshly prepared H2O2
at room temperature for 10 min and washed in PBS for 2 min 3 times. Fresh biotin solution
was prepared, and 50 mL labeling buffer was added to each sample, which were placed in the
cartridge to keep the slices moist. Samples were then incubated at 37°C for 60 min, washed in
PBS for 2 min, and 0.2 mL reaction-terminated liquid was added and further incubated at room
temperature for 10 min and washed in PBS for 2 min 3 times.
Fifty microliters streptavidin-HRP working solution was added to each sample,
placed in the cartridge to keep the slices moist, and incubated for 30 min at room temperature.
Samples were washed in PBS for 2 min 3 times, and 0.3 mL DAB chromogenic solution was
added, and incubated at room temperature for 30-60 min, which was deemed appropriate based
on the incubation chromogenic results. Subsequently, samples were washed in PBS again 3
times, dehydrated, cleared by conventional graded alcohol, and mounted. Tissue sections were
observed under a light microscope, and the brown cells were regarded as apoptotic cells. Eight
different fields of view of each slice were randomly observed under high magnification and
the average was calculated.

Cytosolic and mitochondrial extracts of brain tissues
Five rats from each group were killed and the brain tissues were taken after
craniotomy. Approximately 100 mg cerebral cortex was taken from the ischemic border
zones. According to the literature (He et al., 2012), the specimens were placed in 0.6 mL
homogenous media (0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, l 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% BSA, pH 7.4)
at 4°C, evenly homogenized 10 times with a glass homogenizer, treated by sonication on ice,
and centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to another
centrifuge tube at 4°C, and 0.3 mL medium was added to the homogenized sediment, which
was repeatedly homogenized and then centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min. The two
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

T. Song et al.

10636

supernatants were merged, centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4°C for 10 min, collected, and dispensed
into five 0.5-mL EP tubes and stored at -80°C for cytosolic Cyt C testing. The precipitate was
carefully collected (mitochondria). The mitochondrial deposits were suspended in 10 mL
preserved media (220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 10 mM Tris, l mM EDTA, pH 7.4) for
MPTP opening testing.

Detection of mitochondrial MPTP opening
The UV-spectrophotometer was purchased from the Japan Tsushima Company. The
mitochondrial swelling assay of the MPTP opening was carried out according to the kit instructions (Gene Haijie America Pharmaceutical Technology Co., Ltd.). The initial absorbance
values in each group (A1) were measured at a 520-nm wavelength, and 200 mM CaCl2 was
added to induce MPTP opening; the absorbance values (A2) were recorded after 10 min. The
A2/A1 ratio (A) indicated the extent of MPTP opening.

Western blot
The protein electrophoresis system was provided by Bio-Rad (USA). One of the
prepared EP tubes was used to measure the protein concentration by the bicinchoninic acid
method. First, 5X sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) protein sample buffer was added at a 4:1 ratio
and denatured in boiling water for 5 min. The SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)
was prepared, and the corresponding sample volume was calculated from 50 mg denatured
protein samples, which were loaded for electrophoresis for approximately 30 min, first using
an 80-V constant voltage and then switching to a 120-V constant voltage for approximately
60-90 min; SDS-PAGE was stopped when the bromophenol blue reached the bottom of the
gel. The gel was transferred to a polyvinyldifluoride (PVDF) transmembrane at 4°C and
100 V; the transmembrane time varied according to molecular weight. Tris-buffered saline
with Tween 20 (TBST) with 5% skim milk was used for sealing. The first antibody was antirabbit anti-mouse Cyt C mAb (Sigma, USA; 1:800 diluted), which was incubated overnight
at 4°C at a dilution of 1:400 (Zhongshan Biotechnology, Beijing, China). The TBST-washed
PVDF membrane was placed on a shaker 3 times for 10 min each time, and the secondary
antibody, goat anti-rabbit (1:2000; Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) was added and incubated for 3
h at room temperature. The membrane was washed in TBST three times, dyed with A and B
mixed solution, transferred to an X-ray film tablet, and X-ray films were developed, fixed, and
scanned. The images were saved in .tif format, and the gray values of the experimental results
were analyzed using the Quantity-One software.

Statistical analysis
All data are reported as means ± standard deviation, and the statistical analysis was
performed using the SPSS 13.0 software. The comparison of data between multiple groups
was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) when the data were normally distributed,
and the least-square difference (LSD) method was selected to conduct pairwise comparisons
for groups with homogenous variance; Games-Howell analysis was used when variance was
heterogeneous. P < 0.05 indicated a statistically significant difference.
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

Atorvastatin subcellular protection and its mechanisms

10637

RESULTS
Quantitative analysis of experimental animals
Sixteen models of 20 rats were successfully prepared; 1 rat scored 0 points and 2 rats
scored 4 points in the initial neurological deficit test, and 1 rat died due to suffocation after
postoperative gavage.

Effect of atorvastatin intervention on MPTP opening of epencephalic tissues in
MACO model rats
The mitochondrial absorbance ratio (A) did not differ significantly between the normal
group and the sham-operation group (P > 0.05). The A value of the I/R group was significantly
reduced compared with the sham and normal groups (P < 0.001), suggesting that the MPTP
opening and increase in mitochondrial permeability were caused by ischemia-reperfusion.
However, the A value was significantly higher than that of the I/R group after atorvastatin
intervention (P < 0.002), indicating that atorvastatin intervention could reduce the impact of
ischemia-reperfusion on the MPTP and mitochondrial permeability (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Effects of atorvastatin on MPTP opening in cerebral cortexes subjected to MACO. Data are reported as
means ± SD (N = 5). aP < 0.002 vs normal or sham group; bP < 0.001 vs I/R group. I/R: ischemia/reperfusion; Sham:
sham operation. A2/A1: absorbance ratio at 520 nm.

Effect of atorvastatin on Cyt C expression of epencephalic tissues in MACO model
rats
No expression of cytoplasmic Cyt C was found in the normal group and in the shamoperation group. The expression of cytoplasmic Cyt C was significantly increased in the I/R
group compared to the normal and the sham-operation groups (P < 0.001). However, the expression of cytoplasmic Cyt C significantly decreased after atorvastatin intervention compared
with the I/R group (P < 0.001), indicating that atorvastatin intervention could reduce the release of Cyt C to the cytoplasm (Figure 2A and B).
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

T. Song et al.

A

10638

B

Figure 2. Effects of atorvastatin on the Cyt C protein in cerebral cortexes subjected to MACO. Data are reported as
means ± SD (N = 5). aP < 0.001 vs I/R group. I/R: ischemia/reperfusion; Sham: sham operation. A. Electrophoresis
strip of the Cyt C protein expressed in the brain cortex. Arrows indicate molecular mass. B. Levels of Cyt C protein
in the cortex of different groups.

Effect of atorvastatin intervention on apoptosis of epencephalic tissues in MACO
model rats
Few apoptotic cells were observed in the normal group and in the sham-operation
group. The TUNEL-positive cells (nuclei tan or brown under high-magnification microscope)
of the I/R group were unevenly scattered throughout the entire ischemic penumbra and relatively concentrated in some regions, and the number of TUNEL-positive cells differed significantly from those in the normal group and the sham-operation group (P < 0.001). The number
of TUNEL-positive cells in the I/R group was significantly reduced compared with that of
the atorvastatin intervention group (P < 0.001), indicating that atorvastatin intervention could
reduce apoptosis (Figure 3A and B).

A

B

Figure 3. Effects of atorvastatin on neuronal apoptosis in cerebral cortexes subjected to MACO. Data are
reported as means ± SD (normal/sham group, N = 2; I/R and atorvastatin group, N = 5). aP < 0.001 vs normal
or sham group; bP < 0.001 vs I/R group. I/R: ischemia/reperfusion; Sham: sham operation; TUNEL: terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase (TdT)-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling. A. Photomicrographs of TUNEL staining in
the brain cortex (400X). Arrows indicate apoptotic neurons. B. Numbers of TUNEL-positive neurons were counted
in 8 visual fields of each section (400X).
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

Atorvastatin subcellular protection and its mechanisms

10639

Effect of atorvastatin intervention on nerve cell morphology of epencephalic
tissues in MACO model rats
The HE staining results showed that the brain tissue structures of the normal group
and the sham-operation group were normal, and the nerve cells were tightly packed with
abundant cytoplasm and clear nucleoli. The nerve cells of the I/R group appeared sparse and
irregular, showing cell shrinkage and pyknotic-stained nuclei, and some nuclei even disappeared. These changes were abated in the atorvastatin intervention group (Figure 4).

A

B

C

D

Figure 4. Effects of atorvastatin on the cellular morphology of cerebral cortexes subjected to MACO. I/R: ischemia/
reperfusion; Sham: sham operation. A.-D. Photomicrographs of HE-staining in the brain cortex (400X).

DISCUSSION
Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury is a complex pathophysiological process. Previous
studies have found that the ischemia-reperfusion injury of the epencephalic tissues was related
to rapid cascade reactions, such as oxygen free radicals, excitatory amino acids, release of inflammatory mediators, calcium overload, and apoptosis gene activation. Therefore, it has been a
challenge to find protective treatment for brain tissues from ischemic injury in clinical settings.
Atorvastatin is the second generation of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, and is mainly metabolized through the liver or outward liver. In addition to the traditional function of lowering low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, atorvastatin also has cholesterol-independent
pleiotropic biological effects, and its neuroprotection effects have received increasing attention, in particular. Hong et al. (2006) pretreated SD rats with 10 mg/kg atorvastatin three times
before cerebral ischemia-reperfusion, and found that atorvastatin could protect the ischemic
penumbra of nerve cells by inhibiting NADPH oxidase-derived superoxide, thereby reducing
the infarct volume. Furthermore, Cui et al. (2010) administered atorvastatin to rats with acute
phase cerebral ischemia and found that the blood brain barrier permeability of rats significantly increased, brain edema decreased, infarct volume decreased. In addition, the protective
mechanism was found to be associated with the reduction in the expressions of 12/15-LOX,
p38MAPK, and cPLA2 by immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR, and Western blot analysis, which
showed dose-dependent effects. The protective effect of atorvastatin on ischemic brain tissues
was also associated with p120 increase, expression of aN-interlink synaptic adhesion protein,
and improvement in synaptic plasticity (Céspedes-Rubio et al., 2010). These studies evaluated
the short-term effects of atorvastatin, whereas Yrjanheikki et al. (2005) observed permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion of a rat group and found that atorvastatin still had a neuroproGenetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

T. Song et al.

10640

tective effect after 21 days. These studies demonstrated that atorvastatin had a definite protective effect on ischemic brain tissues at different levels. However, previous studies have mainly
concentrated on the expression of cytoplasm proteins, and few have investigated the influence
of atorvastatin on cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats at the subcellular organelle (i.e.,
mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus) level.
In this study, after cerebral ischemia for 2 h and reperfusion for 72 h and HE staining,
the morphological changes of nerve cells in the I/R group were reduced compared to those
in the atorvastatin intervention group, which confirmed the neuroprotective effect of atorvastatin in ischemia-reperfusion brain tissues shown in previous studies (Yrjanheikki et al., 2005;
Hong et al., 2006; Céspedes-Rubio et al., 2010; Cui et al., 2010). We found that the apoptosis
rate of the atorvastatin intervention group was significantly reduced compared with that of the
I/R group by TUNEL staining, suggesting that the neuroprotective effect of atorvastatin was
related to cell apoptosis inhibition.
Previous studies have shown that the effect of apoptosis is influenced by various factors,
including the membrane receptor pathway, the mitochondrial pathway, protease B particles, and
the endoplasmic reticulum pathway (Łabedzka et al., 2006). In the cellular environment, the
combination of the endogenous pathway and the extrinsic pathway could consequently cause a
series of pathophysiological changes. The intrinsic pathway is mainly triggered by mitochondria. Mitochondria not only generate the necessary ATP to maintain ion pump function and
to ensure stability of the internal environment, but also play important roles in physiological
cellular signal transduction and pathophysiological events (Cai et al., 1998; Ichas and Mazat,
1998). After cerebral ischemia-reperfusion, due to the release of inflammatory mediators and
oxygen-free radicals, the toxic effects of excitatory amino acids, calcium overload, apoptotic
gene activation, and a series of other rapid cascades of the intracellular environment, the nerve
becomes disordered, thus promoting the apoptosis pathway of mitochondria.
MPTP is a transmembrane channel protein, which is essentially located between the
inner and outer mitochondrial membrane. The key point of the information exchange within
and outside of the mitochondria mainly involves non-selective complexes including the voltage-dependent anion channel, adenylate transposons, constitutive cyclophilin D, and other
substances, which are sometimes referred to as mitochondrial irritant-receptors (Javadov et
al., 2011). The periodic opening plays an important role in maintaining the steady state and
electrochemical balance of mitochondria. MPTP in the inner mitochondrial membrane protein
is activated upon oxidative stress or calcium overload, resulting in the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation, osmotic swelling, and rupture of the outer mitochondrial membrane,
thereby releasing large amounts of Cyt C (Halestrap et al., 2000). Cyt C is a water-soluble
protein located in the outer mitochondrial intima among the respiratory chain complex III-IV,
and plays an important role in mitochondrial energy metabolism as an electron transfer carrier
of the respiratory chain (Lenaz and Genova, 2010). Cyt C binds to apoptosis activating factor-1 (Apaf-1) after being released into the cytoplasm and forms a composite body (molecular
weight, 700-1400 x 103), which then activates Caspase-9, forming a Cyt C/Apaf-1/Caspase-9
complex, i.e., the apoptotic body complex. With the reduction or dysfunction of Cyt C, the
mitochondrial respiratory chain becomes disrupted, and ATP synthesis is decreased, eventually leading to cell death (Li et al., 1997). According to the degree of MPTP opening and the
release rate of Cyt C, the cell death mode was divided into rapid necrosis (-ATP) or delayed
apoptosis (+ATP) (Orrenius, 2004; Saikumar et al., 2007). Therefore, in the process of brain
tissue ischemia-reperfusion injury, the cell death mode can be changed by inhibiting the MPTP
Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

Atorvastatin subcellular protection and its mechanisms

10641

opening, reducing the release of Cyt C, and inhibiting the formation of the apoptotic body
complex, which may ultimately save the cells close to death. In this study, atorvastatin was
found to inhibit CaCl2-induced MPTP swelling by treating the cerebral tissues after ischemiareperfusion and to increase the experimental absorbance values of the I/R group. In addition,
the release of cytoplasmic Cyt C also decreased compared to that of the I/R group, suggesting
that atorvastatin had effects on specific sites of the MPTP through the blood brain barrier,
changed the permeability of the mitochondrial transmembrane channels, inhibited mitochondrial swelling, and thereby protected mitochondrial structure and function and reduced the
pathway of cell apoptosis in mitochondria.
Together, these results suggest that atorvastatin could inhibit neuronal apoptosis and
reduce the ischemia-reperfusion injury of brain tissues, and that the mechanism may be associated with the blocking of the MPTP opening and the consequent reduction of Cyt C release.
Due to the complex apoptosis pathway involving several interweaving and intercommunicating factors, the investigation of changes in other subcellular organelles and apoptotic factors
may contribute to further understanding of the acting mechanism of atorvastatin.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research supported by the Hunan Province Medical Research Foundation (#B2010-090).

REFERENCES
Bösel J, Gandor F, Harms C, Synowitz M, et al. (2005). Neuroprotective effects of atorvastatin against glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity in primary cortical neurons. J. Neurochem. 92: 1386-1398.
Cai J, Yang J and Jones DP (1998). Mitochondrial control of apoptosis: the role of cytochrome c. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1366: 139-149.
Céspedes-Rubio A, Jurado FW and Cardona-Gómez GP (2010). p120 catenin/aN-catenin are molecular targets in the
neuroprotection and neuronal plasticity mediated by atorvastatin after focal cerebral ischemia. J. Neurosci. Res. 88:
3621-3634.
Clark WM, Lessov NS, Dixon MP and Eckenstein F (1997). Monofilament intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion
in the mouse. Neurol. Res. 19: 641-648.
Cui L, Zhang X, Yang R, Wang L, et al. (2010). Neuroprotection of early and short-time applying atorvastatin in the
acute phase of cerebral ischemia: down-regulated 12/15-LOX, p38MAPK and cPLA2 expression, ameliorated BBB
permeability. Brain Res. 1325: 164-173.
Halestrap AP, Doran E, Gillespie JP and O’Toole A (2000). Mitochondria and cell death. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28: 170-177.
He XL, Bi MG and Du GH (2012). Brain mitochondria proteome and energy metabolism in rats after chronic cerebral
hypoperfusion. Chin. Pharmacol. Bull. 28: 1200-1205.
Hong H, Zeng JS, Kreulen DL, Kaufman DI, et al. (2006). Atorvastatin protects against cerebral infarction via inhibition
of NADPH oxidase-derived superoxide in ischemic stroke. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 291: H2210-H2215.
Ichas F and Mazat JP (1998). From calcium signaling to cell death: two conformations for the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore. Switching from low- to high-conductance state. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1366: 33-50.
Javadov S, Hunter JC, Barreto-Torres G and Parodi-Rullan R (2011). Targeting the mitochondrial permeability transition:
cardiac ischemia-reperfusion versus carcinogenesis. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 27: 179-190.
Łabedzka K, Grzanka A and Izdebska M (2006). Mitochondria and cell death. Postepy. Hig Med. Dosw. 60: 439-446.
Lenaz G and Genova ML (2010). Structure and organization of mitochondrial respiratory complexes: a new understanding
of an old subject. Antioxid. Redox. Signal. 12: 961-1008.
Li P, Nijhawan D, Budihardjo I, Srinivasula SM, et al. (1997). Cytochrome c and dATP-dependent formation of Apaf-1/
caspase-9 complex initiates an apoptotic protease cascade. Cell 91: 479-489.
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R (1989). Reversible middle cerebral artery occulusion without
craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20: 84-91.
Nahrendorf M, Sosnovik D, Chen JW, Panizzi P, et al. (2008). Activatable magnetic resonance imaging agent reports

Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

T. Song et al.

10642

myeloperoxidase activity in healing infarcts and noninvasively detects the antiinflammatory effects of atorvastatin
on ischemia-reperfusion injury. Circulation 117: 1153-1160.
Orrenius S (2004). Mitochondrial regulation of apoptotic cell death. Toxicol. Lett. 149: 19-23.
Pignatelli P, Carnevale R, Pastori D, Cangemi R, et al. (2012). Immediate antioxidant and antiplatelet effect of atorvastatin
via inhibition of Nox2. Circulation 126: 92-103.
Saikumar P, Mikhailova M and Pandeswara SL (2007). Regulation of caspase-9 activity by differential binding to the
apoptosome complex. Front Biosci. 12: 3343-3354.
Ye R, Yang Q, Kong X, Li N, et al. (2012). Sevoflurane preconditioning improves mitochondrial function and long-term
neurologic sequelae after transient cerebral ischemia: role of mitochondrial permeability transition. Crit. Care Med.
40: 2685-2693.
Yrjanheikki J, Koistinaho J, Kettunen M, Kauppinen RA, et al. (2005). Long-term protective effect of atorvastatin in
permanent focal cerebral ischemia. Brain Res. 1052: 174-179.
Zhang Y, Huang S, Wang B, Sun B, et al. (2012). Atorvastatin and whisker stimulation synergistically enhance angiogenesis
in the barrel cortex of rats following focal ischemia. Neurosci. Lett. 525: 135-139.
Zhao Q, Wang S, Li Y, Wang P, et al. (2013). The role of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter in cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion injury in rats involves regulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism. Mol. Med. Rep. 7: 1073-1080.

Genetics and Molecular Research 13 (4): 10632-10642 (2014)

©FUNPEC-RP www.funpecrp.com.br

