The FASEB Journal • Research Communication

Down-regulation of MIF by NF␬B under hypoxia
accelerated neuronal loss during stroke
Si Zhang,*,1 Odysseus Zis,*,1 Philip T. T. Ly,* Yili Wu,* Shuting Zhang,*
Mingming Zhang,* Fang Cai,* Richard Bucala,†,‡ Woei-Cherng Shyu,§,储
and Weihong Song*,2
*Townsend Family Laboratories, Department of Psychiatry, Brain Research Center, Graduate
Program in Neuroscience, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada;
†
Department of Medicine and ‡Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA; and §Department of Neurology, Center for Neuropsychiatry, and 储Graduate Institute of
Immunology, China Medical University and Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan
Neuronal apoptosis is one of the major
causes of poststroke neurological deficits. Inflammation during the acute phase of stroke results in nuclear
translocation of NF␬B in affected cells in the infarct
area. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF)
promotes cardiomyocyte survival in mice following
heart ischemia. However, the role of MIF during stroke
remains limited. In this study, we showed that MIF
expression is down-regulated by 0.75 ⴞ 0.10-fold of the
control in the infarct area in the mouse brains. Two
functional cis-acing NF␬B response elements were identified in the human MIF promoter. Dual activation of
hypoxia and NF␬B signaling resulted in significant
reduction of MIF promoter activity to 0.86 ⴞ 0.01-fold
of the control. Furthermore, MIF reduced caspase-3
activation and protected neurons from oxidative stressand in vitro ischemia/reperfusion-induced apoptosis.
H2O2 significantly induced cell death with 12.81 ⴞ
0.58-fold increase of TUNEL-positive cells, and overexpression of MIF blocked the H2O2-induced cell
death. Disruption of the MIF gene in MIF-knockout
mice resulted in caspase-3 activation, neuronal loss, and
increased infarct development during stroke in vivo.
The infarct volume was increased from 6.51 ⴞ 0.74% in
the wild-type mice to 9.07 ⴞ 0.66% in the MIF-knockout
mice. Our study demonstrates that MIF exerts a neuronal protective effect and that down-regulation of MIF
ABSTRACT

Abbreviations: ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation;
CRE, cyclic-AMP response element; E, embryonic day; EMSA,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay; GSA, gel shift assay;
HIF-1␣, hypoxia-inducible factor 1␣; HEK293, human embryonic kidney 293; HRE, hypoxia responsive element; IP, immunoprecipitation; MCA, middle cerebral artery; MCAl, middle cerebral artery ligation; MCAo, middle cerebral artery
occlusion; MIF, macrophage migration inhibitory factor; muNF␬B, mutant nuclear factor ␬B; NF␬B, nuclear factor ␬B;
OGD, oxygen-glucose deprivation; PFA, paraformaldehyde;
rCCA, right common carotid artery; RLU, relative luciferase
unit; rMCA, right middle cerebral artery; ROS, reactive
oxygen species; tMCAl, transient distal middle cerebral artery
ligation; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride; TUNEL,
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling; wt-NF␬B, wild-type nuclear factor ␬B
4394

by NF␬B-mediated signaling under hypoxia accelerates
neuronal loss during stroke. Our results suggest that
MIF is an important molecule for preserving a longer
time window for stroke treatment, and strategies to
maintain MIF expression at physiological level could
have beneficial effects for stroke patients.—Zhang, S.,
Zis, O., Ly, P. T. T., Wu, Y., Zhang, S., Zhang, M., Cai,
F., Bucala, R., Shyu, W.-C., Song, W. Down-regulation
of MIF by NF␬B under hypoxia accelerated neuronal
loss during stroke. FASEB J. 28, 4394 – 4407 (2014).
www.fasebj.org
Key Words: macrophage migration inhibitory factor 䡠 caspase3 䡠 nuclear factor ␬B
Ischemic stroke that results from disturbance of
blood supply to the brain accounts for 80% of stroke
cases and significantly causes poststroke neurological
deficits and death (1). Among a number of mechanisms involved in stroke pathogenesis, activation of the
inflammatory response and the apoptotic pathways
have been shown to play pivotal roles in stroke progression (2– 4).
Ischemic stroke differentially affects brain regions
and results in an ischemic core and penumbra. Neurons in the ischemic core are rarely salvageable due to
their immediate necrosis. In contrast, neurons in the
penumbra experience a relatively milder ischemic insult and undergo delayed cell death and are the targets
for therapeutic intervention (4). In the penumbra,
neurons can undergo both necrosis and apoptosis.
Necrosis induced by glutamate diffusion from the necrotic core can be diminished by blocking a specific
subtype of NMDA receptors (5). Most of the neurons in
1

These authors contributed equally to this work
Correspondence: Department of Psychiatry, The University of British Columbia, 2255 Westbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC
V6T 1Z3, Canada. E-mail: weihong@mail.ubc.ca
doi: 10.1096/fj.14-253625
This article includes supplemental data. Please visit http://
www.fasebj.org to obtain this information.
2

0892-6638/14/0028-4394 © FASEB
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

the penumbra undergo apoptosis. Antiapoptotic strategies, including inhibition of Apaf-1 (involved in intrinsic apoptosis), expressing dysfunctional FasL (involved
in extrinsic apoptosis) and knockdown of AIF (involved
in caspase-independent apoptosis), were shown to successfully reduce neuronal loss and infarct volume (2).
Ischemic stroke-induced acute brain damage rapidly
activates inflammatory responses, which lead to upregulation and release of pro- and anti-inflammatory
factors, such as tumor necrosis factor ␣ (TNF-␣), IL-1␤,
IL-6, IL-10, IL-20 and TGF-␤ (3). In the brain, the
cytokines are produced not only by infiltrating immune
cells but also by resident brain cells including neurons
and glial cells (6). As one of the major consequences of
ischemic stroke, inflammation amplifies stroke outcome regardless of the triggering stimuli (7, 8), and
anti-inflammatory approaches are beneficial in reducing infarct volume and promoting cell survival (9, 10).
This highly finding suggests that inflammation plays a
key role in stroke-induced progressive brain damage.
Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a 114
aa protein, was first identified as a proinflammatory
cytokine (11, 12) and later was found to function as a
pleiotropic protein involved in many cellular activities,
such as regulating cell death and survival (13–15). The
role of MIF during ischemia, either being protective by
suppressing apoptosis or detrimental by promoting
inflammation, is not well characterized. A study on
intestinal ischemia demonstrated that lack of MIF gene
expression significantly suppressed circulating inflammatory cytokines and reduced lethality in mice (16).
MIF has been shown to promote cell survival by modulating glucose uptake and metabolism during energy
deprivation in mouse model of myocardial infarction
(17, 18). MIF has also been shown to inhibit the
transcription of tumor suppressor p53 and negatively
regulate JNK signaling, thereby preventing immune
cells, such as macrophages, to undergo apoptosis,
growth arrest, and cellular senescence (13–15). In
addition, MIF possesses redox activity through its CysXaa-Xaa-Cys group, suppressing oxidative stress induced apoptosis (19, 20). These studies suggest that
MIF could be protective during ischemia. Limited
studies have focused on the role of MIF in brain
disorders. We recently reported that MIF is dysregulated during ischemic stroke in both patients and a rat
stroke model in a temporal manner (21). MIF was
found to contribute to stroke pathology in mice and
neuronal death in vitro following oxygen-glucose deprivation (22) and knockout of the Mif gene results in
smaller infarct volume at 7 d after stroke by promoting
the macrophage and microglia response (23), which
suggests a detrimental role of MIF in cerebral ischemia.
The same group also concluded that MIF was not
involved in promoting inflammatory response during
these 7 d (22), leaving an open debate regarding the
role of MIF in regulating neuronal death/survival in
the central nervous system.
The human MIF gene, located on chromosome
22q11.23, spans 855 bp and contains 3 exons and 2

introns. Human MIF is expressed in the heart, brain,
lung, liver and kidney (24 –26). However, the expression of MIF in the central nervous system has not been
well characterized. The TATA-less promoter of MIF
containing a GC box controls its constitutive expression
in many types of cells including neurons and glial cells
(11, 25, 26). The MIF promoter also contains cyclicAMP response elements (CREs), which directly interact
with CRE-binding protein (CREB) for transcriptional
regulation of MIF gene expression in pituitary cells
(27). Our laboratory and others identified several hypoxia responsive elements (HREs) in the MIF promoter
(21, 28, 29). The binding of hypoxia-inducible factor
1␣ (HIF-1␣) to the HREs in MIF promoter resulted in
transcriptional up-regulation in vitro and in the ischemic hemisphere of rats during stroke (21).
Nuclear factor ␬B (NF␬B) signaling plays an important role in gene regulation and is implicated in
inflammation, oxidative stress, apoptosis, and neurodegenerative disorders (30 –34). Activation of NF␬B signaling also has been observed during stroke, despite
appearing to have dual roles with respect to neuronal
survival and stroke outcomes (35, 36). NF␬B regulates
genes involved in both pro- and antiapoptotic processes
and plays a complex role in neuronal survival/death
(36, 37). The active NF␬B is a dimer composed of 2 of
the 5 subunits in the NF␬B family, RelA (p65), c-Rel,
RelB, p105/p50, and p100/p52. The most abundant
dimer in mammalian cells consists of p65 and p50 and
specifically recognizes a DNA sequence of 5=-GGGRNNYYCC (where N and Y represent any base and pyrimidine, respectively; refs. 38, 39). Active NF␬B modulates
gene transcription by direct binding to the cis-acting
elements on DNA sequences. On stimulation, the I␬B
kinase (IKK) phosphorylates I␬B, resulting in the degradation of I␬B by the ubiquitin proteasome pathway.
Degradation of I␬B releases its binding partner NF␬B,
and allows it to be translocated from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus, where it activates the transcription of its
target genes. During stroke, nuclear translocation of
NF␬B p65 is observed in neurons located in the infarct,
indicating an active role of NF␬B in ischemic neurons
(35). Despite the fact that both NF␬B activation and
alteration of MIF expression are observed during the
early stages of cerebral ischemia (21, 40), the interaction between NF␬B and MIF and its role in cerebral
ischemia remain undefined. In the present study, we
report two functional cis-acting NF␬B binding elements
on the MIF gene promoter and demonstrate that NF␬B
regulates MIF expression by transcriptional activation
of the MIF gene promoter via these two sites. Futhermore, we demonstrate that MIF gene transcription is
reduced by activation of NF␬B signaling under hypoxic
condition. We show that NF␬B plays an important role
in the temporospatial expression pattern of MIF in the
brain following focal ischemia. We further show that
MIF reduces caspase-3 activation and protects neurons
from oxidative stress-induced and in vitro ischemia/
reperfusion-induced apoptosis. Finally, we demonstrate
that disruption of MIF gene expression results in ele-

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4395

vated caspase-3 activation and exacerbates neuronal
death as well as increased infarct development during
stroke in Mif-knockout mice in vivo. Our results suggest
that MIF exhibits neuroprotective qualities following
stroke and may be an important molecule for preserving a longer time window for stroke treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of human MIF expression plasmid and
promoter constructs
Human MIF cDNA was amplified from human embryonic
kidney 293 (HEK293) cells and cloned into pcDNA4-mycHis
vector to generate pMIF-mycHis mammalian expression plasmid. pMIF-Stop, expressing human MIF protein without any
tag, was generated from pMIF-mycHis. Previously, we have
constructed a 5= upstream fragment of the human MIF gene
promoter regions ⫺2634 to ⫹35 and ⫺553 to ⫹8 bp into
pGL3-basic vector to generate MIF promoter luciferase report
plasmid phMIFluc and HRE-deleting plasmid phMIF␦Hluc,
respectively (21). phMIFluc was digested by KpnI to remove a
fragment between two KpnI sites and the new construct
phMIF-Bluc plasmid containing promoter region from
⫺2158 to ⫹35 bp. Plasmids phMIF-Cluc and phMIF-Dluc,
containing the human MIF promoter region from ⫺553 to
⫹35, and ⫺194 to ⫹35 bp, respectively, were generated by
PCR amplification from phMIFluc and cloned into pGL3basic vector at XhoI and HindIII sites. Human MIF promoter
fragment of ⫺5415 to ⫺3090 bp was amplified by PCR with
primers NheIHMIF1f (5=-ctagctagcgagcgaggccttgtttctacca)
and BglIIHMIF1r (5=-ggaagctctctttggccatgcgagtccttaca), and
cloned into pGL3-basic at NheI and BglII sites to generate
phMIF1-luc. Plasmid phMIF2-luc contains human MIF promoter from ⫺3358 to ⫹35 bp inserted between NheI and
HindIII, having an endogenous BglII site located at ⫺3355. To
generate phMIF5k-luc, phMIF1-luc digested by NheI and
BglII, and the fragment spanning ⫺5415 to ⫺3354 bp was
inserted into phMIF2-luc between NheI and BglII site. Plasmid
pMIF-NF␬Bluc was generated by cloning a double-strand oligonucleotide (5=-ccgGGGGCTTTCCcaatGGGGCCTCCCagcaGGGAAGTTCCctg) containing 3 NF␬B cis-acting elements from
human MIF promoter, namely MIF-NF␬B, into the pGL-pl
vector (41) at SacI and NheI sites.
Cell culture, transfection, and ELISA
The HEK293 cell line, mouse microglia BV-2 cell line, and
human neuroblastoma N2A cell line were maintained in
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum, 1 mM of sodium pyruvate, 2 mM of
l-glutamine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were
cultured at 37°C in an incubator supplemented with 5% CO2.
Plasmids were transfected by either the calcium-phosphate
method or Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following the
manufacturer’s instruction. Plasmid (2 ␮g) was transfected
into one 35 mm tissue culture plate. Fresh medium was
changed 6 h after transfection. Culture medium was collected, centrifuged at 3000 g for 2 min at 4°C. Human MIF
expression was measured by human MIF ELISA kit (R&D
Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Luciferase assays
Cells were plated onto 24-well plates 24 h prior to transfection
and cultured to ⬃50% confluency before transfection. In
4396

Vol. 28

October 2014

each well, cells were transfected with 0.5 ␮g of plasmids using
calcium phosphate transfection methods. pCMV-Rluc plasmid (1 ng) expressing Renilla luciferase was cotransfected for
normalization for the transfection efficiency. After 48 h
transfection, cells were harvested and lysed with 100 ␮l 1⫻
passive lysis buffer, and a dual luciferase assay was performed
as described previously (42). Firefly luciferase activities and
Renilla luciferase activities were measured using the dualluciferase reporter assay system (Promega, Madison, WI,
USA). The firefly luciferase activity was normalized to the
Renilla luciferase activity and expressed as relative luciferase
units (RLU) to reflect the promoter activity.
Gel shift assay (GSA)
GSA, or electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), was
performed as described previously (43). Nuclear extract was
fractionated from the HEK293 lysate with NF␬B overexpression, as described previously (44). Oligonucleotide probes
were labeled with IR700 dye (Integrated DNA Technologies,
Coralville, IA, USA) and annealed to generate doublestranded probes at a final concentration of 0.1 ␮M. For
competition experiments, nuclear extract was incubated with
the 0.5 pmol of labeled probe and excess of unlabeled
competition oligonucleotides for 20 min at 22°C. For the
supershifting assay, mouse anti-NF␬B p65 monoclonal antibody (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added to the above
reaction and incubated for an additional 20 min. The samples
were analyzed on a 4% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel,
and the gel was scanned using the Odyssey scanner at a
wavelength of 700 nm (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE,
USA). The sequences of the sense strand oligonucleotides to
generate the double-strand probes or competitors are as
follows: consensus wild-type NF␬B (wt-NF␬B), 5=-agttgagGGGACTTTCCcaggc; mutant NF␬B (mu-NF␬B), 5=-agttgagGCCACTTTCCcaggc; MIF-NF␬B-A, 5=-gctccgGGGGCTTTCCcaagga; MIF-NF␬B-B, 5=-ggccatGGGGCCTCCCagctgg; MIFNF␬B-C, 5=-ggttcaGGGAAGTTCCctggat.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
ChIP assay was performed, as described previously (45).
Cross-linking between protein and chromatin was achieved by
adding formaldehyde to the final concentration of 1.42% in
NF␬B-enriched HEK293 cells for 15 min at 22°C and was
quenched with glycine at final concentration of 125 mM for 5
min. Cells then were harvested in cold PBS and lysed with
immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer containing 150 mM NaCl,
50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, Nonidet P-40 (0.5%
v/v), and Triton X-100 (1.0% v/v), supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail Complete (Roche Molecular Biochemicals, Pleasanton, CA, USA). The nuclear pellets were
isolated by centrifugation at 12,000 g for 1 min and resuspended with the IP buffer. The chromatin then was sheared
by sonication on ice. For isolation of NF␬B binding complex,
the chromatin solution was incubated with a monoclonal
rabbit-anti-NF␬B p65 antibody (cat no. 8242; Cell Signaling
Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) overnight at 4°C. The normal rabbit serum was used for the sham IP control. After IP,
cross-link was reversed by boiling the sample with Chelex100
(Bio-Rad, Richmond, CA, USA) for 10 min. The supernatant
containing DNA fragments was isolated by centrifugation at
12,000 g for 1 min and then used as template for PCR analysis
of the chromatin fragments. The following pairs of primers,
5=-atagcctcgaaggacaggacagg and 5=-aatccagtttgcccacattttcc, 5=cagctgcaggaaccaataccc and 5=-ctcagagatttccagggagg, and 5=agctgagcacgtttgaaccac and 5=-tagtcatcgcggcaggtgaga, were
used to specifically amplify fragments containing MIF-

The FASEB Journal 䡠 www.fasebj.org

Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

ZHANG ET AL.

NF␬B-A, -B, and -C, respectively. ␤-Actin was amplified by
5=-gacaggatgcagaaggagat and 5=-ttgctgatccacatctgctg as the
internal control.
Semiquantitative RT-PCR
Cell samples were homogenized with the Tri reagent (Invitrogen), and total RNA was extracted following the manufacturer’s instruction. The first-strand cDNA was generated from
the total RNA (1 ␮g) by the ThermoScript reverse transcriptase
with Oligo(dT)20 as the primer (Invitrogen). The resultant
cDNA products were used as templates to quantify the expression of target genes by semiquantitative PCR with TaqDNA
polymerase and specific primer sets. The human MIF gene
specific primers were 5=-gtagtctgacgtcagcggaggc (mMIFqRT-57F)
and 5=-ctaaaagtcatgagctggtccg (mMIFqRT234R). The primers
specifically amplifying a mouse EST were 5=-atgccgatgttcatcgtaaacacc and 5=-ttaggcgaaggtggagttgttccagc. The GAPDH gene
specific primers were 5=-ccagtgagcttcccgttcagc and 5=-cccatcaccatcttccaggagc. The PCR products were separated on a 2%
agarose gel, and the band intensity was analyzed by ImageJ
(U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
Middle cerebral artery ligation (MCAl)
Animal experiment protocols were approved by The University of British Columbia Animal Care and Use committee.
Mif⫹/⫺ mice on the BALB/c (generation N10) have been
described previously (46). All the mice were allowed access to
water and food ad libitum. Male mice, between 10 and 12 wk
of age, were subjected to transient distal MCAl (tMCAl)
surgery (47) with modifications. Briefly, following isolation of
the right common carotid artery (rCCA), the mouse was put
on a stereotactic frame (Kopf, Tujunga, CA, USA) and
positioned on its right side for MCAl. A skin incision was
made between the right eye and ear, and the muscle fibers
were separated and retracted to expose the skull surface. The
right MCA (rMCA) was easily visualized through the skull,
and a 1 mm burr hole was opened by a dental drill around the
rMCA to expose the rMCA for ligation with a 10 – 0 suture.
Quickly after ligation of rMCA, the rCCA was occluded by a
nontraumatic microclamp (S&T Microsurgical Instruments,
Birmingham, AL, USA). Saline (1 ml) was injected subcutaneously before and after the surgery, and the mouse was laid
on a warm blanket to recover. After transient rMCA and rCCA
ligation for 2 h, the suture and microclamp were removed,
and the mice were allowed reperfusion. Control mice underwent similar surgical procedures, except that the rMCA and
rCCA were not ligated.
Sample collection and 2,3,5-triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride
(TTC) staining
A pilot study was carried out to determine the sampling
strategy. Following the tMCAl procedure, mice were euthanized at 0, 2, 8, or 22 h after reperfusion. The freshly
dissected brains were placed on a brain slice matrix, and
coronal sections were made to generate 1-mm-thick slices
beginning from the anterior edge of the cerebral cortex. The
brain slices were incubated in 1% TTC solution in PBS for 10
min at 37°C. After incubation, the slices were fixed in cold 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA) solution and scanned for subsequent analysis. ImageJ was used for infarct area determination. Focal ischemia resulted in tissue infarction and was
illustrated by the complete loss of TTC staining, contrasting
with the surrounding dark red-stained viable tissue. The
infarcted area was restricted to the cerebral cortex supplied
by MCA at 24 h postischemia. The rest of the cerebral cortex

supplied by anterior/posterior cerebral arteries was not affected following the tMCAl procedure. Brain tissues from the
ischemic and contralateral nonischemic area were dissected
for protein expression analysis. For the sham surgery mice,
equivalent areas were dissected. All samples were stored in
⫺80°C before biochemical analysis.
Immunohistology, immunoblot analysis, and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling
(TUNEL) assay
The 4% PFA-fixed brain samples were prepared for either
cryosectioning at 20 ␮m thickness or paraffin-embedded
sectioning at 5 ␮m thickness. TUNEL assay (Promega) was
performed on the 5-␮m-thick slices following the manufacturer’s instruction. For immunostaining, the brain slices were
permeabilized in 0.3% Triton X-100 in PBS (PBS-Tx) for 30
min and blocked with 5% BSA in PBS for 1 h at 22°C. Next,
the slices were incubated with primary antibodies in PBS with
1% BSA at 4°C overnight. After rinsing with PBS-Tx 3 times,
the slices were applied with secondary antibodies biotinylated
swine anti-rabbit in PBS-Tx with 1% BSA for 1 h at 22°C, and
visualized by the ABC and DBA method. For immunoblotting,
brain tissue and cells were lysed with the RIPA-DOC buffer.
The lysates were resolved by gel electrophoresis, and the
protein was analyzed by Western blot. The primary antibodies
were recognized by IRDye 800CW-labeled goat anti-mouse or
IRDye 700CW-labled goat anti-rabbit, and were visualized and
analyzed using the Odyssey system (LI-COR Biosciences). The
primary antibodies were anti-cleaved caspase-3 (Cell Signaling Technology) for immunohistology, anti-NF␬B p65 subunit (cat no. 8242; Cell Signaling Technology) for immunohistology and immunoblotting, anti-MIF antibody (Torrey
Pines Biolabs, Secaucus, NJ, USA) for immunoblotting, and
anti-␤-actin antibody (AC-15; Sigma) for immunoblot, used as
a loading control.
Human MIF purification, primary neuronal culture, oxygenglucose deprivation (OGD) treatment, and MTS assay
To obtain human MIF protein for primary neuronal treatment, pMIF-mycHis was transfected into HEK293 cells, and
cell lysate was prepared under undenatured conditions. MycHis-tagged MIF protein was purified using nickel-NTA magnetic agarose beads (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) following
the manufacturer’s protocol. The identity of the purified
protein was verified by Western blot, and the purity was
assessed by Coomassie blue staining following gel electrophoresist (Supplemental Fig. S2). Primary neuronal cultures were
derived from embryonic day 14 (E14) mouse embryos as
described previously (48). Cultures of mouse neurons (10 d)
were subjected to either 50 ␮M H2O2 for 16 h or “in vitro
ischemia/reperfusion” treatment. The latter was achieved by
incubating primary cultures under OGD condition for 2 h,
followed by normal incubation conditions for an additional
16 h. For cells undergoing OGD, the cells were cultured with
either fresh Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) for control
cells or glucose-free Neurobasal medium (Invitrogen) for
OGD treatment under hypoxic condition (2% oxygen complemented with nitrogen). Both Neurobasal media were
supplemented with B27 (Invitrogen) and L-glu (Invitrogen).
The cells were treated with purified mycHis-tagged human
MIF protein or vehicle solution during the entire experimental period. Cell viability was assessed using the MTS assay
(Promega) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Cell
viability was calculated by dividing the absorbance of treated
or untreated cells by the average absorbance of nontreated
(control) cells and expressed as a survival ratio.

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4397

Statistics
All results are presented as means ⫾ sd. Statistical analysis was
performed by 1-way ANOVA with Tukey posttest, 2-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni posttests, and Student’s t test.

RESULTS
Down-regulation of MIF expression in infarct regions
after cerebral ischemia in mice
Previously we showed that MIF gene expression was
altered in patients with stroke and in the brains of
stroke model rats (21). In the present study, we further
studied the spatial alteration of MIF expression and
focused on the brain region undergoing acute infarction within 24 h after focal ischemia induced by the
tMCAl procedure. Since the rMCA was ligated, with
additional ligation of the rCCA, the blood supply was
impaired in the entire right hemisphere, and this
stroke model precisely produced an infarct restricted to
the MCA-supplied cortical region. Mice (10 to 12 wk of
age) were subjected to the tMCAl procedure and
reperfused for 4 or 22 h. At 22 h postreperfusion, a
clear infarction in the MCA-supplied cortical region
was obtained, as assessed by TTC staining (Fig. 1A). The
MCA territory and cortical peri-MCA area were defined
as described in Fig. 1A. The brain tissue in the respective areas, along with its counterpart in the unaffected
hemisphere (as control), were dissected for MIF protein analysis. At 6 h after the onset of ischemia, MIF
expression in the MCA territory was significantly re-

duced to 0.80 ⫾ 0.07-fold on the ischemic hemisphere
compared to the unaffected counterpart (P⬍0.05; Fig.
1B, C). At 24 h after the onset of ischemia, brain
samples collected from the MCA-supplied territory
were assessed for protein expression even though significant tissue decomposition had occurred. The results
showed that the level of ␤-actin, serving as internal
control, was significantly reduced (Fig. 1D), even
though the same amount of protein was loaded for
evaluation, confirming severe decomposition of the
parenchyma. Significantly lower expression of MIF to
0.75 ⫾ 0.10-fold (P⬍0.05) reduction in the ischemic
hemisphere was also observed (Fig. 1D, E). MIF protein
expression in the cortical peri-MCA territory was also
examined. The results showed no apparent effect on
protein expression in the cortical peri-MCA area at
either 6 h (Fig. 1F, G) or 24 h (Fig. 1H, I) postischemia
(P⬎0.05).
Identification of functional NF␬B elements in the
human MIF promoter
A significant increase in nuclear NF␬B and the activation of the NF␬B signaling pathway within the infarcted
area following stroke suggest that NF␬B may be involved in MIF dysregulation in the MCA territory (35,
49). To investigate this issue, we first examined the
expression of NF␬B p65 in the brain following stroke.
Compared with the peri-MCA area, the increase of
nuclear p65 in the MCA territory was confirmed by
immunostaining (Fig. 2A), indicating that NF␬B was
activated in this region. To examine whether NF␬B

Figure 1. Reduced MIF expression in the infarct-targeted area after cerebral focal ischemia in mice. BALB/c mice were
subjected to 2 h rMCAl, followed by 4 or 22 h of reperfusion or a sham procedure on the right hemisphere. The brain was freshly
cut into 1 mm slices and subjected to TTC staining or protein expression analysis. A) At 22 h after reperfusion, infarcted tissue
restricted to the MCA-supplied cerebral cortex was clearly distinguished by pale TTC staining and defined as the MCA territory
(area 1) and the cortical peri-MCA area (area 2). B, D) At 6 h (B) or 24 h (D) after tMCAl, the MCA territory was lysed by
RIPA-Doc buffer with 1% SDS. The lysate was resolved on a 12% Tris-tricine SDS-PAGE gel. MIF was detected by anti-MIF
antibody, and ␤-actin was detected by ␤-actin antibody as control. C, E) Quantification of B and D, respectively. The ratio of MIF
to ␤-actin was further normalized to unaffected hemisphere in sham-treated mice. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 6
for sham treatment and 7 for MCAl. *P ⬍ 0.05; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest. F, H) At 6 h (F) or 24 h (H) after tMCAl,
the lysates of peri-MCA territory were subjected to 12% Tris-tricine SDS-PAGE. MIF and ␤-actin were detected by their respective
antibodies. G, I) Quantification of F and H, respectively. The ratio of MIF to ␤-actin was normalized to unaffected hemisphere
in sham-treated mice. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 6 for sham treatment and 7 for MCAl. P ⬎ 0.05; 2-way ANOVA
with Bonferroni posttest.
4398

Vol. 28

October 2014

The FASEB Journal 䡠 www.fasebj.org

Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

ZHANG ET AL.

Figure 2. Identification of the functional NF␬B
binding sites on the human MIF promoter. A)
Brain slices from BALB/c mice subjected to 2 h
tMCAl followed by 2 h reperfusion were stained
for NF␬B p65. In the MCA territory, p65 exhibited nuclear localization (solid arrowheads),
while in the cortical peri-MCA region, p65
diffused in the cytoplasm (open arrowheads).
Scale bars ⫽ 20 ␮m. B) Schematic diagram
shows the relative location of the putative NF␬B
binding sites on the human MIF promoter, and
the corresponding sequence of the oligonucleotides. C, D) GSAs were performed using a
wt-NF␬B consensus oligonucleotide labeled
with IRDye 700 as the probe. Lane 1 is labeled
probe alone without nuclear extract. Incubation of the wt-NF␬B probe with nuclear extract
resulted in a shifted band composed of DNAprotein complex (lane 2). Addition of antiNF␬B p65 monoclonal antibody in the incubation mixture as in lane 2 resulted in a
supershifted band (C, lane 9). Competition
assays were performed by adding 5- or 50-fold
molar excess of unlabeled wt-NF␬B oligonucleotide (lanes 3, 4), mu-NF␬B oligonucleotide
(lanes 5, 6), MIF-NF␬B (C, lanes 7, 8), MIFNF␬B-A (D, lanes 7, 8), MIF-NF␬B-B (D, lanes 9,
10), MIF-NF␬B-C (D, lanes 11, 12), and 50-fold
molar excess of wt-NF␬B (C, lane 10). E, F)
GSAs and supershift assays were performed
using MIF-NF␬B-A oligonucleotide (E) or MIFNF␬B-C oligonucleotide (F) labeled with IRDye
700 as probes. Lane 1 is labeled probe alone
without nuclear extract. Incubation of IRDye
700-MIF-NF␬B-A or -C with nuclear extracts
resulted in a shifted band (lane 2). Addition of anti-NF␬B p65 monoclonal antibody resulted in a supershifted band (lane 5).
Competition assays were achieved by adding 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled wt-NF␬B (lanes 3, 6) or the same amount of
mu-NF␬B (lane 4). G) ChIP assay; details are described in Materials and Methods. Monoclonal rabbit-anti-p65 antibody was used
to precipitate DNA fragments that could bind to NF␬B p65. Normal rabbit serum was used for sham IP control. Target DNA
fragments containing sequences corresponding to MIF-NF␬B-A, -B, and -C were amplified by PCR. PCR products were resolved
on 1.5% agarose gel. ␤-Actin was amplified as control.

signaling modulates MIF gene expression following
stroke, human MIF gene promoter function was analyzed. Sequence analysis revealed 3 putative NF␬B
cis-acting binding elements on the MIF promoter, located at ⫺2536 to ⫺2527, ⫺1027 to ⫺1018, and ⫺513
to ⫺504 bp (Fig. 2B), suggesting that MIF may be
regulated by NF␬B. To investigate whether these putative binding sites could bind to NF␬B p65, GSA was
performed. Double-strand oligonucleotides containing
the core sequences of all 3 sites (MIF-NF␬B) or an
individual site (MIF-NF␬B-A, -B, or -C) with flanking
nucleotides were synthesized (Fig. 2B). Incubation of
the wt-NF␬B probe (wt-NF␬B-IRDye 700) with NF␬B
p65-enriched HEK nuclear extracts resulted in a shifted
band composed of DNA-protein complex (Fig. 2C, lane
2). Competition assays demonstrated that the intensity
of the shifted band was significantly reduced or abolished by adding a 5- or 50-fold molar excess of unlabeled wt-NF␬B oligonucleotide (Fig. 2C, lanes 3, 4),
while the mu-NF␬B oligonucleotide did not compete
with the probe at either concentration (Fig. 2C, lanes 5,
6). MIF-NF␬B significantly reduced the intensity, or
completely abolished the shifted band at a 5- or 50-fold

molar excess of the probe, respectively (Fig. 2C, lanes 7,
8). Addition of anti-NF␬B p65 monoclonal antibody
further retarded the migration of the DNA-protein
complex (Fig. 2C, lane 9), resulting in a supershifted
band, which was abolished by adding 50-fold molar
excess of wt-NF␬B (Fig. 2C, lanes 9, 10). This result
confirmed the binding between the NF␬B p65 and the
probe. These data indicated that ⱖ1 of 3 putative
binding sites could bind with NF␬B p65.
To determine which binding sites acts as the cisacting element for NF␬B, GSAs were performed with
individual putative MIF-NF␬B binding oligonucleotides
using wt-NF␬B-IRDye 700 as the probe. MIF-NF␬B-A,
located at ⫺2536 to ⫺1517 bp, and MIF-NF␬B-C, at
⫺513 to ⫺504 bp, reduced the binding intensity of the
probe significantly (Fig. 2D, lanes 7, 8, 11, 12), whereas
MIF-NF␬B-B, at ⫺1027 to ⫺1018 bp, did not compete
with the probe (Fig. 2C, lanes 9, 10). This result
indicated that MIF-NF␬B-A and MIF-NF␬B-C contained
the NF␬B cis-acting element that could bind with
transcription factor NF␬B p65 in vitro. To further
confirm the binding, MIF-NF␬B-A and MIF-NF␬B-C
were labeled with IRDye 700 and used as probes. After

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4399

incubating MIF-NF␬B-A probe with NF␬B p65-enriched
HEK nuclear extract, a shifted band was observed (Fig.
2E, lane 2), which was completely abolished by adding
100-fold molar excess of unlabeled wt-NF␬B as the
competitor (Fig. 2E, lane 3) but not by the same
amount of mu-NF␬B (Fig. 2E, lane 4). Addition of
anti-NF␬B p65 monoclonal antibody further retarded
the shift of the DNA-protein complex (Fig. 2E, lane 5),
and the supershifted band was abolished by adding
100-fold molar excess of the unlabeled wt-NF␬B (Fig.
2E, lane 6). The same results were observed for MIFNF␬B-C (Fig. 2F). These results clearly demonstrate
that the MIF promoter contains 2 cis-acting elements
for NF␬B binding.
Next, a ChIP assay was performed to examine
whether NF␬B could recognize the consensus sequences on the MIF promoter under physiological
conditions. NF␬B p65 monoclonal antibody was used
to precipitate the DNA fragments that could bind to
NF␬B p65. DNA fragments from the immunoprecipitates pulled down by NF␬B p65 antibody were amplified by PCR using 3 pairs of MIF-NF␬B putative consensus binding site-specific primers. The results confirmed
that sequences corresponding to MIF-NF␬B-A and -C
but not MIF-NF␬B-B were amplified (Fig. 2G). ␤-Actin,
as the control for antibody specificity, could not be
amplified after immunoprecipitation (Fig. 2G). Sheared
gDNA without immunoprecipitation was amplified by all
the pairs of primers, indicating that the target DNA
sequences on the MIF promoter were intact due to
their binding to NF␬B p65, while after sham immunoprecipitation, none of these pairs of primers amplified
the targeting sequences, indicating that none of our
tested DNA sequences could be precipitated nonspecifically (Fig. 2G). Taken together, these results confirm that the two cis-acting elements MIF-NF␬B-A and
-C on the human MIF promoter were specifically recognized by transcription factor NF␬B under physiological conditions.
NF␬B down-regulates MIF gene transcription under
hypoxia
To investigate whether NF␬B signaling regulates transcriptional activation of MIF gene expression via the
cis-acting elements identified in the MIF promoter, a
series of MIF gene promoter deletion plasmids were
constructed and assayed. Previously, a 2.6 kb human
MIF promoter from ⫺2634 to ⫹35 bp was cloned into
a luciferase reporter plasmid to generate phMIF-luc,
and this promoter activity was up-regulated under
hypoxia (21). In the present study, MIF promoter
constructs were cotransfected with an NF␬B p65 expression plasmid or its backbone as the control into cells,
and the promoter activities were measured by luciferase
assay. Overexpression of NF␬B p65 significantly increased the MIF promoter activity to 1.99 ⫾ 0.09-fold of
the control (P⬍0.05; Fig. 3A), further confirmed by
Western blot showing that the luciferase protein level
was increased to 1.33 ⫾ 0.12-fold of the control
4400

Vol. 28

October 2014

(P⬍0.05; Supplemental Fig. S1A, B). To further investigate the effect of NF␬B signaling on the MIF promoter, plasmid phMIF-5kluc, containing ⫺5415 to ⫹35
bp of the MIF promoter, was cotransfected with an
NF␬B p65 expression plasmid. The promoter activity of
phMIF-5kluc was elevated by 2.33 ⫾ 0.19-fold compared to control (P⬍0.05), similar to the effect on
phMIF-luc (Fig. 3A). To confirm the cis-acting elements’ effect, the MIF-NF␬B oligonucleotides containing the binding sites (Fig. 2A) were cloned into a
modified luciferase reporter vector, pGL-pl (41), to
generate the plasmid pMIF-NF␬Bluc. This plasmid was
created to exclude the interference of other elements
with the interaction between NF␬B and the MIF promoter. NF␬B p65 overexpression markedly increased
the promoter activity of pMIF-NF␬Bluc by 33.3 ⫾
1.9-fold (P⬍0.001; Fig. 3A). To determine the contribution of the individual binding sites to the promoter
activity on NF␬B activation, plasmids containing MIF
promoter fragments with different NF␬B binding sites
and/or pseudo-binding sites were generated (Fig. 3B).
Notably, overexpression of NF␬B did not affect the
promoter activity of phMIF-Dluc that lacked NF␬B
binding sites. In contrast, the promoter activities of
phMIF-luc, phMIF-Bluc, and phMIF-Cluc were significantly increased on overexpression of NF␬B p65 by 1.53 ⫾
0.17-, 1.33 ⫾ 0.11-, and 1.38 ⫾ 0.06-fold (P⬍0.05; Fig.
3B). The results clearly demonstrate that activation of
NF␬B signaling enhances MIF promoter activity.
To examine the effect of NF␬B signaling on endogenous MIF gene expression, an NF␬B p65 expression
plasmid was transfected into N2A and HEK293 cells. At
24 h after transfection, cells were harvested for mRNA
and protein level analysis. NF␬B p65 expression significantly increased MIF expression at both the mRNA
(Fig. 3C) and protein (Fig. 3E) levels to ⬃1.68 ⫾
0.11-fold (P⬍0.05; Fig. 3D) and 2.42 ⫾ 0.36-fold of the
controls (P⬍0.05; Fig. 3F) in N2A cells, respectively.
The endogenous levels of MIF mRNA (Supplemental
Fig. S1C) and protein (Supplemental Fig. S1E) further
were significantly increased in HEK293 cells after transfection with NF␬B p65 expression plasmid. The level of
MIF mRNA was increased to 1.29 ⫾ 0.08-fold of the
control (P⬍0.05; Supplemental Fig. S1D), and the protein
level was increased to 1.70 ⫾ 0.25-fold of the control
(P⬍0.05; Supplemental Fig. S1F).
Microglia cells are the major immune cell type in the
brain responding to stroke. Therefore, we investigated
the effect of NF␬B signaling activation on MIF expression in BV-2 cells, a mouse microglia cell line. NF␬B
p65 expression plasmid was transfected into BV-2 cells.
At 24 h after transfection, cells were harvested for
mRNA and protein level analysis. MIF mRNA expression in BV-2 cells was significantly up-regulated by 1.42 ⫾
0.16-fold of the control (P⬍0.05; Supplemental Fig.
S1G, H); and the protein level of MIF also was elevated
by 1.93 ⫾ 0.12-fold of the control (P⬍0.05; Supplemental Fig. S1I, J).
Taken together, these results clearly demonstrate
that MIF gene expression is up-regulated by activation

The FASEB Journal 䡠 www.fasebj.org

Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

ZHANG ET AL.

Figure 3. Regulation of human MIF gene expression by NF␬B signaling. A) HEK293 cells
were cotransfected with MIF promoter plasmids and NF␬B p65 expression plasmid or its
backbone. Cells were harvested with passive
lysis buffer and measured for luciferase activity.
Firefly luciferase activity was normalized to Renilla luciferase activity for transfection efficiency control, and expressed as RLU to reflect
the promoter activity. Values are expressed as
means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 6. *P ⬍ 0.001 vs. controls;
2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttests. B)
Schematic diagram of deletion plasmids containing different human MIF promoter fragments in front of the firefly luciferase reporter
gene. Vertical arrows indicate starting location
of the putative NF␬B binding sites. Deletion
plasmids were confirmed by sequencing and
restriction enzyme digestion checking, and digested samples were analyzed on a 0.7% agarose gel. Vector size is 4.7 kb, and the MIF
promoter fragment inserts range from ⬃230 bp to 2.7 kb. Luciferase assay was performed as in A. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd,
n ⫽ 6. *P ⬍ 0.001 vs. controls; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttests. C) N2A cells were transfected with NF␬B expression
plasmid. Total RNA was extracted from cells by Tri reagent, and semiquantitative RT-PCR was used to measure mouse MIF
mRNA in N2A cells with mouse MIF gene-specific primers. GAPDH mRNA was used as the internal control. D) Quantification
of C. Level of MIF mRNA is expressed as relative ratio to GAPDH. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 3. *P ⬍ 0.01 vs.
controls; Student’s t test. E) N2A cells were transfected with NF␬B expression plasmid. Protein levels of MIF in N2A cells were
assessed by Western blot on a 12% Tris-tricine SDS-PAGE gel. MIF was detected by anti-MIF antibody; ␤-actin was used as internal
control. F) Quantification of E. Level of MIF protein is expressed as relative ratio to ␤-actin. Values are expressed as means ⫾
sd, n ⫽ 3. *P ⬍ 0.01 vs. controls; Student’s t test. G) HEK293 cells were transfected with MIF promoter plasmids and subjected
to hypoxia treatment or cotransfected with NF␬B p65 expression plasmid. Promoter activities were evaluated as in A. Values are
expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 6. *P ⬍ 0.01 vs. controls; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest. H) HEK293 cells were
cotransfected with NF␬B p65 expression plasmid with additional hypoxia treatment, and promoter activities were evaluated as
in A. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 6. *P ⬍ 0.01 vs. controls; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttests. I) HEK293
cells were transfected with NF␬B expression plasmid and subjected to hypoxia (2% of oxygen balanced by nitrogen). Total RNA
was extracted from cells by Tri reagent, and semiquantitative RT-PCR was used to measure MIF mRNA with MIF gene specific
primers. GAPDH mRNA was used as the internal control. J) Quantification of I. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 3.
*P ⬍ 0.001 vs. controls; Student’s t test. K) HEK293 cells were transfected with NF␬B expression plasmid and subjected to
hypoxia (2% of oxygen balanced by nitrogen). Protein levels of MIF were assessed by Western blot on a 12% Tris-tricine
SDS-PAGE gel. L) Quantification of K. Values are expressed as means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 3. *P ⬍ 0.01 vs. controls; Student’s t test.

of NF␬B signaling. We have shown that both hypoxia
(21) and activation of NF␬B signaling alone result in
up-regulation of MIF gene expression. It remained
intriguing as to why MIF expression was down-regulated
in the MCA territory at 6 h after the onset of stroke,
when massive tissue decomposition has yet to occur. A
previous report showed that, although the CRE on the
MIF promoter was responsive to CRF-mediated MIF
gene up-regulation (27), it also is involved in MIF gene
down-regulation under hypoxic conditions (28). Given
that the HREs on the MIF promoter were 33 and 43 bp
upstream of MIF-NF␬B-A and -C, respectively (Supplemental Fig. S1K), we examined the effect of NF␬B
signaling on MIF promoter activity under hypoxia,
which better mimics the condition of NF␬B activation
following ischemia. The promoter activity of phMIF-luc
was elevated by either hypoxia (2.66⫾0.20-fold of the
control, P⬍0.05) or transfection of NF␬B p65 alone
(5.66⫾0.17-fold of the control, P⬍0.05), whereas
HREs-deficient plasmid phMIF␦H-luc responded to
NF␬B p65 overexpression with a 10.43 ⫾ 0.20-fold
increase in activity (P⬍0.05), but did not respond to
hypoxia (Fig. 3G). Successful induction of signaling
pathways were confirmed by enhanced promoter activ-

ities of positive control plasmids pEpoE-luc by hypoxia
and pNF␬B-luc by NF␬B (data not shown). To assess
the effect of hypoxia on NF␬B signaling-mediated MIF
promoter activity, the NF␬B p65 expression plasmid,
cotransfected cells were subjected to hypoxia treatment. Dual activation of hypoxia and NF␬B signaling
resulted in significant reduction of the luciferase activity of phMIF-luc to 0.86 ⫾ 0.03 of the control (P⬍0.05),
while the elevation of the promoter activity of
phMIF␦H-luc by NF␬B signaling was not affected by
additional activation of the hypoxia signaling pathway
(Fig. 3H). These data indicate that induction of HIF-1␣
by hypoxia does not directly affect the ability of the
cis-acting elements in the MIF gene promoter to bind
NF␬B and the reduction of promoter activity under
dual signals most likely was due to the interaction
between the HRE and NF␬B binding motif on the MIF
promoter.
We further examined the effect of NF␬B signaling on
endogenous MIF expression under hypoxic conditions.
Dual activation of hypoxia and NF␬B signaling was
achieved by overexpressing NF␬B p65 expression plasmid under hypoxic condition. MIF mRNA (Fig. 3I) and
protein (Fig. 3K) expression was reduced significantly

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4401

to 0.80 ⫾ 0.05-fold (P⬍0.05; Fig. 3J) and 0.16 ⫾
0.01-fold (P⬍0.05; Fig. 3L), respectively. Taken together, these results indicate that activation NF␬B
signaling under hypoxic condition contributes to downregulation of endogenous MIF gene expression.
MIF protects neurons from oxidative stress- and in
vitro ischemia/reperfusion-induced apoptosis by
attenuating caspase-3 activation
Our results suggested that activation of NF␬B signaling
under hypoxic conditions contributes to down-regulation of MIF expression in the MCA territory during the
acute phase of stroke. To further determine the role of
MIF in stroke, we first assessed the function of MIF on
cultured primary cortical neurons under strokelike
conditions. Strokelike conditions were induced in cultured mouse cortical neurons by an in vitro model of
ischemia/reperfusion. The primary neuronal culture
was challenged in glucose-free medium under hypoxic
condition for 2 h (ischemic period), the culture medium then replaced by normal medium, followed by 16
h of incubation under normoxic conditions (reperfusion). In vitro ischemia/reperfusion resulted in significant loss of neurons, 88.08 ⫾ 2.93% viability (P⬍0.01),
measured by a MTS assay (Fig. 4A). The effect of MIF
was assessed by adding human purified MIF protein
(Supplemental Fig. S2A). Treatment of cortical neurons with purified human MIF at a concentration of
200 ng/ml during ischemia and reperfusion periods
completely rescued the detrimental effect induced by
in vitro ischemia/reperfusion with cell viability of

100.04%⫾3.34% (P⬍0.001; Fig. 4A). These results suggest a protective role for MIF on neurons under in vitro
ischemia-reperfusion-like conditions.
Oxidative stress contributes to cell death induced by
ischemia, particularly following reperfusion (50). To
determine the effect of MIF on oxidative stress-induced
neuronal death, primary cultures of cortical neurons
isolated from mouse embryos were treated with H2O2.
H2O2 treatment of cortical neurons resulted in a significant decrease in neuronal viability to 67.52 ⫾ 1.18% vs.
control (P⬍0.01), as assessed by the MTS assay (Fig.
4B). When cortical neurons were incubated with purified MIF at a concentration of 200 ng/ml, H2O2induced cell death was significantly prevented, and cell
viability was increased to 90.06 ⫾ 1.03% relative to
control (P⬍0.01; Fig. 4B). These results clearly demonstrate that MIF rescues neuronal loss following strokelike conditions in vitro and may be particularly protective against reperfusion induced oxidative stress.
To study the effect of MIF on neuronal apoptosis,
HEK293 and SHSY5Y were transfected with a human
MIF expression plasmid to generate HMS (Supplemental Fig. S2B) and SYMS stable cell lines (Supplemental
Fig. S2D). HMS and SYMS robustly express human MIF
protein 2.46 ⫾ 0.14-fold (Supplemental Fig. S2C) and
7.02 ⫾ 0.40-fold (Supplemental Fig. S2E) compared to
control in cell lysates detected by Western blot. MIF
levels in culture medium of these cell lines, as detected
by ELISA, were also significantly increased from 18.5 ⫾
1.11 to 54.30 ⫾ 3.29 ng/ml in SYMS (P⬍0.01) and
32.00 ⫾ 2.36 to 384.39 ⫾ 20.05 ng/ml in HMS

Figure 4. MIF protected neurons by inhibiting
caspase-3 activation. Cortical neurons cultured
from E14 mouse embryos were subjected to an
in vitro model of ischemia/reperfusion or oxidative stress. A) In vitro ischemia/reperfusion
was achieved by challenging the primary neuronal culture in glucose-free medium under
hypoxic conditions for 2 h (ischemia period),
followed by 16 h incubation under normoxic
conditions after medium exchange to normal
medium (reperfusion period). Purified human
his-tagged MIF (200 ng/ml) or vehicle was
added in the medium during the entire experiment. Cell viability was assessed by using MTS
assays. Survival ratio represents the average
absorbance to control absorbance. Values represent means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 10. *P ⬍ 0.01; Student’s t test. B) Oxidative stress was induced by
50 ␮M of H2O2 for 16 h in normal medium.
Purified human his-tagged MIF (200 ng/ml) or vehicle was added in the medium during the entire experiment. Cell viability
was assessed by using MTS assays. Survival ratio represents the average absorbance to control absorbance. Values represent
means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 6, *P ⬍ 0.001; Student’s t test. C) HEK293 and MIF stable HMS cells were treated with 50 ␮M H2O2 for 24
h in medium lacking sodium pyruvate, followed by TUNEL assay (green channel). DAPI (blue channel) was used to stain nuclei.
Scale bars ⫽ 100 ␮m. D) Quantification of cell numbers identified by DAPI staining and apoptotic cells identified by TUNEL
labeling by ImageJ. Signals were averaged from 5 randomly selected views. Values represent means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 3. *P ⬍ 0.01 vs.
cells without H2O2 treatment; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttests. E) SHSY5Y and MIF stable SYMS cells were treated with
200 ␮M H2O2 for 16 h. MIF inhibitor ISO-1 (50 ␮M) was added to block the effect of MIF. Cells were lysed by Chap cell extract
buffer. Lysate was resolved on a 12% Tris-tricine SDS-PAGE gel, and protein levels were analyzed by Western blot. An
anti-caspase-3 antibody recognizing both pro- and cleaved caspase-3 was used. F) Quantification of E. Ratio of the cleaved form
of caspase-3 to ␤-actin level was analyzed. Values represent means ⫾ sd, n ⫽ 3. *P ⬍ 0.01; 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni
posttests.
4402

Vol. 28

October 2014

The FASEB Journal 䡠 www.fasebj.org

Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

ZHANG ET AL.

(P⬍0.01) stable cells, respectively (Supplemental Fig.
S2F). To further examine the protective role of MIF,
TUNEL assay was performed. H2O2 treatment at a
concentration of 50 ␮M significantly induced cell death
in HEK293 cells (Fig. 4C), resulting in 12.81 ⫾ 1.01-fold
increase of TUNEL-positive cells (P⬍0.01; Fig. 4D). In
contrast, overexpression of MIF in HMS cells (Fig. 4C)
blocked the H2O2-induced cell death (Fig. 4D). H2O2
treatment at a concentration of 100 ␮M resulted in
complete detachment of HEK cells 24 h after treatment, whereas 33.44 ⫾ 2.52% HMS cells survived after
treatment, and 7.82 ⫾ 1.70% of the surviving cells were
TUNEL positive (data not shown). Our results clearly
demonstrate that MIF is essential in combating oxidative stress-induced cell death and promoting cell survival under such conditions.
Since MIF exhibited strong rescue effects on neurons
subjected to H2O2 treatment, and H2O2-induced oxidative stress triggers activation of the caspase cascade,
we sought to investigate whether MIF’s protective effect
was mediated through the caspase signaling pathway.
SYMS and SHSY5Y cells were treated with H2O2 for 16
h, and caspase-3 cleavage was analyzed by Western blot.
In the control groups, no cleaved form could be
detected in both cell lines (Fig. 4E). H2O2 treatment
markedly induced the cleaved active form of caspase-3
in both cell lines (Fig. 4E). However, there was 38.40 ⫾
6.45% (P⬍0.01) lower levels of the cleaved caspase-3
form in SYMS than in SH-SY5Y control cells. Furthermore, addition of the MIF inhibitor ISO-1 significantly
increased the level of the cleaved form of caspase-3 by
1.36 ⫾ 0.05-fold in SHSY5Y and 2.47 ⫾ 0.12-fold in
SYMS (P⬍0.001; Fig. 4F).
Disruption of MIF gene expression accelerates
neuronal death within the MCA territory
To examine the effect of MIF on neuronal apoptosis
during the acute phase of stroke in vivo, TUNEL assays
were performed on MIF-knockout (Mif⫺/⫺) and wildtype (Mif⫹/⫹) mice subjected to experimental stroke.
The results showed that Mif⫺/⫺ mice developed
TUNEL-positive cells in the MCA territory as early as 6
h after the onset of ischemia, and nuclei in this area
appeared to be condensed (Fig. 5B). In contrast, nuclei
in the MCA territory displayed healthy appearance, and
no TUNEL-positive cells appeared in Mif⫹/⫹ mice (Fig.
5A). At 8 h after ischemia onset, the number and area
of TUNEL-positive cells were significantly increased in
Mif⫺/⫺ mice, while scarce TUNEL-positive cells developed in Mif⫹/⫹ mice (data not shown). Consistent with
the TTC staining results, the difference between Mif⫺/⫺
and Mif⫹/⫹ mice is less evident at 24 h after stroke,
54.65 ⫾ 9.17% in Mif⫹/⫹ vs. 65.58 ⫾ 6.75% in Mif⫺/⫺
mice (P⬎0.05; Fig. 5B).
We have shown that MIF protects neurons from
oxidative stress induced apoptosis by inhibiting activation of caspase-3 in vitro. To examine whether MIF could
exert the same effect in vivo following experimental
stroke, Mif⫺/⫺ and Mif⫹/⫹ mice were subjected to tMCAl,

Figure 5. MIF reduced cell death and infarct development during
stroke. A) Wild-type (Mif⫹/⫹) and MIF-knockout (Mif ⫺/⫺)
mice were subjected to 2 h tMCAl, followed by 4 or 22 h
reperfusion, and the brain slices were analyzed for cell
apoptosis by TUNEL assay (green channel). Nuclei were
stained with DAPI (blue channel). Representative images
were taken from the same location in the MCA territory. B)
Average counts of the nuclei and TUNEL-positive cells from
5 selected views were quantified by ImageJ; bars represent
percentage of TUNEL signal. Values represent means ⫾ sd,
n ⫽ 3. P ⬎ 0.05; Student’s t test. C) Cleaved caspase-3 was
determined histologically in wild-type and MIF-knockout
mice 4 h after 2 h tMCAl. Sample images were taken from the
cortical peri-MCA region and MCA territory. Activation of
caspase-3 is indicated by positive staining of the cleaved form
of caspase-3. Arrows indicate caspase-3-positive cells. Scale
bar ⫽ 20 ␮m. D) Mif⫹/⫹ and Mif⫺/⫺ mice were subjected to
2 h tMCAl on the right hemisphere, followed by 2, 8 or 22 h
reperfusion. The brain was freshly cut into 1 mm slices and
subjected to TTC staining.

and the cleaved form of caspase-3 was determined histologically 2 h after reperfusion. To avoid batch to batch
variation, immunostaining was performed side by side for
Mif⫹/⫹ and Mif⫺/⫺ mice. Sample images were taken from
the peri-MCA region and MCA territory for evaluation of
caspase-3 activation (Fig. 5C). In the peri-MCA region,
both wild-type and knockout mice displayed weak background caspase-3 signal (Fig. 5C, top panels). Cleaved
caspase-3 was detected in the MCA territory in Mif⫺/⫺ and
Mif⫹/⫹ mice, and Mif⫺/⫺ mice displayed stronger staining
signals for the cleaved form of caspase-3 in the MCA
territory compared to Mif⫹/⫹ wild-type mice (Fig. 5C,
bottom panels). Taken together, these results demonstrate that MIF negatively regulates caspase-3 and, in turn,
protects against neuronal death during the acute phase of
stroke, and disruption of MIF gene expression accelerates
neuronal death and infarct development within the MCA
territory.
Focal ischemia-induced infarction was routinely examined to assess stroke outcome. Since MIF promoted
neuronal survival, we assessed whether it affected infarct formation in vivo. Wild-type and MIF-knockout

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4403

mice were subjected to tMCAl. At 4, 10 and 24 h after
the onset of ischemia, TTC staining was performed to
assess infarct development during the acute phase of
stroke (Fig. 5D). Loss of TTC staining was not significant at 4 h after stroke onset in both wild-type and
MIF-knockout mice. Impaired cell activity/incomplete
infarction in the MCA-supplied region, indicated by
partial loss of TTC staining, was observed at 10 h after
stroke onset, and Mif⫺/⫺ mice exhibited a significantly
greater loss of TTC staining, including the development of a complete infarct, compared to the wild-type
mice (Fig. 5D). The infarct volume was 6.51 ⫾ 1.48%
for the wild-type mice and 9.07 ⫾ 1.32% for MIFknockout mice (n⫽4, P⬍0.05). However, both Mif⫹/⫹
and Mif⫺/⫺ mice exhibited complete loss of TTC
staining 24 h after stroke onset, and no difference was
found in terms of the infarct volume (Fig. 5D). The
infarct volume was 9.91 ⫾ 0.69% and 9.13 ⫾ 0.71% for
wild-type and knockout mice, respectively (n⫽3,
P⬎0.05). These results indicate that MIF deficiency
results in loss of cell function relatively early following
stroke and accelerates development of an infarct. Interestingly, the protective effect of MIF in the MCA
territory in MIF⫹/⫹ mice diminished during later
phases of infarct development.

DISCUSSION
MIF is expressed in many organs, including the brain,
and as a pleiotropic protein is involved in a variety of
biological processes. It plays fundamental roles in inducing inflammatory responses and regulating cell
death and survival (11, 13–15). A recent review systematically summarized the most up-to-date studies on the
roles of MIF on cardiomyocytes in vitro and in vivo, and
its relevance to clinical outcomes after heart ischemia,
and suggested multiple mechanisms underlying the
protective effect of MIF (51). Stroke is detrimental to
neurons in a similar way as a myocardial infarct is to
cardiomyocytes. However, the effect of MIF on neurons
experiencing ischemia remains elusive. A recent study
showed that Mif⫺/⫺ mice had smaller infarcts compared to wild-type mice following focal ischemia (23).
We previously demonstrated altered MIF expression
following stroke with initial up-regulation and eventual
down-regulation (21), which suggests the expression
pattern of MIF could affect its function. In the present
study, we examined the temporospatial expression of
MIF and its role during stroke. We adapted a stroke
model that produced infarction in the frontal and
parietal cortex, which is supplied mainly by the MCA.
Infarction induced by this stroke model is highly reproducible. Compared to other focal stroke models, such
as proximal MCA occlusion (MCAo), in which the
developed infarct spreads beyond the cerebral cortex,
this model produces smaller infarcts restricted to the
MCA-supplied cerebral cortex, providing us an opportunity to assess the expression and function of MIF in a
relatively homogenous cell group, especially for neu4404

Vol. 28

October 2014

rons. Our results demonstrate that MIF expression is
selectively down-regulated in the infarcted MCA territory, while MIF expression is not affected in the posterior cerebral artery/anterior cerebral artery-supplied
peri-MCA area, despite its direct connection to the
infarcted MCA territory. Our observations are consistent with a previous study showing that MIF is expressed
in the peri-infarct area up to 72 h after stroke, and
diminishes in the ischemic core 3 h after ischemia (23).
Both hypoxia and NF␬B signaling pathways are activated following stroke in the infarct area (35, 49, 52). In
previous studies, activation of NF␬B signaling within
the area that later became infarcted was shown by
EMSA using brain lysates, and nuclear localization was
observed histologically (35, 49). Stephenson et al. (49)
further attributed early activation of NF␬B signaling to
neuronal rather than glial cells. In this study, we
confirmed nuclear localization of NF␬B in the MCA
territory, and it was mainly diffuse in the adjacent
peri-MCA area. Hypoxia activates HIF-1␣, which mediates up-regulation of MIF gene expression via interaction with HREs on the MIF promoter (21, 28, 29). The
present study identifies two functional cis-acting NF␬B
binding elements in the MIF promoter through which
activation of NF␬B signaling regulates MIF gene expression by transcriptional activation of the MIF promoter.
We found that activation of either hypoxia or the NF␬B
pathway alone drives up-regulation of MIF gene transcription. However, NF␬B signaling was activated under
hypoxic conditions, leading to an inhibition of MIF
gene expression. Since deletion of HREs in the MIF
promoter eliminated the direct effect of HIF-1␣ on
promoter activity and preserved the ability of NF␬B to
up-regulate gene expression during hypoxia, it was
likely that an interaction could have occurred between
HRE and NF␬B binding elements on the MIF promoter
under hypoxic conditions. Previous studies demonstrated that HIF-1␣ is significantly induced in the
infarcted area 1 h after stroke onset, peaks at 12 h, and
gradually declines thereafter (52), and a significant
up-regulation of NF␬B signaling was also observed in a
similar time window (49). Furthermore, it was reported
that, under hypoxia, the induction of a HIF-1␣ mediated HRE reporter gene occurred before NF␬B signaling mediated the NF␬B responsive element (NRE)
reporter gene (53), indicating that activation of HIF-1␣
precedes that of NF␬B signaling. Taken together, it is
likely that, in the infarcted area, rapid activation of
HIF-1␣ contributes to the initial up-regulation of MIF
and that subsequent activation of NF␬B signaling suppresses MIF expression thereafter. Activation of NF␬B
signaling after stroke is evident despite the controversial conclusions as to whether it is protective or deleterious to stroke outcome (36). It is plausible that MIF
may serve as a downstream effector responsible for
synchronizing the upstream regulatory signals, such as
NF␬B signaling, and, in turn, determining cell fate.
Our results suggest that MIF expression is tightly regulated by NF␬B and hypoxia and could serve as an

The FASEB Journal 䡠 www.fasebj.org

Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

ZHANG ET AL.

effector that directly regulates cell survival during the
acute phase of stroke.
Anti-inflammation and inhibition of apoptosis are
two key therapeutic approaches to reduce stroke-related neurological dysfunction. Interestingly, the function of MIF has been implicated in both of these
processes, being antiapoptotic but proinflammatory.
MIF exhibits strong antiapoptotic properties by suppressing p53 activity by transcription inhibition and
negatively regulating JNK signaling (13–15). Under
ischemic conditions, MIF is protective by stimulating
AMP-activated protein kinase during ischemia-reperfusion induced energy deprivation in the heart (17).
However, the main effector of this pathway, GLUT4,
only has been shown to function in the cerebellum
(54). Recently, a similar study in heart ischemia observed increased infarction in Mif⫺/⫺ mice and suggested a protective effect of MIF via reduction of
oxidative stress-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS)
accumulation and cytochrome c release (55). Oxidative
stress induced by massive ROS generation also occurs
after stroke and is one of the major insults leading to
neuronal apoptosis (50). Neurons undergoing apoptosis during stroke are often the target for therapeutic
interventions. Cell apoptosis under stroke conditions
may be activated through caspase-dependent pathways
involving the dysfunction of mitochondria (2). It was
reported that postischemic reperfusion resulted in the
overproduction of ROS in mitochondria (56), in turn
affecting the release of cytochrome c and leading to
caspase-3 activation. The role of MIF in reducing ROS
levels has been observed during heart ischemia (55),
and it was suggested that MIF’s CXXC motif (Cys57-AlaLeu-Cys60) plays a role in redox balance under stressed
conditions (19, 20). In our study, we clearly demonstrate that stably expressing MIF in a human neuronal
cell line reduced casapase-3 cleavage induced by H2O2
treatment, and this effect was diminished after addition
of ISO-1, a MIF inhibitor (57). The effect of MIF
expression on inhibition of caspase-3 activation under
oxidative stress and reduction of TUNEL staining confirmed the protective role of MIF. We also observed
these characteristics of MIF in vivo. In MIF knockout
mice, caspase-3 activation in the infarct area was markedly increased when compared to wild-type mice.
An antiapoptotic role for MIF in suppressing JNK
activation by direct interaction with its coactivator Jab1
also has been suggested (14). It also has been reported
that knockout of JNK3, which among the 3 JNKs (JNK1,
JNK2, and JNK3) is expressed primarily in the brain,
contributes to neuronal resistance to excitotoxicity (58,
59). Also of note, we observed a protective effect of MIF
in reducing NMDA induced excitotoxicity in primary
neuronal cultures (data not shown). Furthermore, we
showed that MIF exhibited a strong effect in combating
oxidative stress induced by H2O2. In addition, we
observed faster neuronal apoptosis in Mif⫺/⫺ mice at 6
and 8 h after stroke onset, and deletion of the MIF gene
accelerated infarct development during the acute

phase of stroke. Taken together, these data clearly
support a neuroprotective role for MIF during stroke.
The area of the infarct gradually extends to adjacent
areas, lasting for several days following the acute phase
of stroke. This late-phase process is slower when compared to the infarction that evolves in the area directly
supplied by the blocked artery during the acute phase
of stroke. This circumstance suggests that different
mechanisms may be involved between acute and late
phase infarct development. Interestingly, a recent study
assessed the infarct volume at d 7 following transient
MCAo and found that Mif⫹/⫹ mice developed slightly
larger infarcts when compared to Mif⫺/⫺ mice (23).
Although no differences in cytokine production were
found between the Mif⫹/⫹ and Mif⫺/⫺ mice during
these 7 d (22), the results indeed demonstrated that
MIF mediated the response of macrophages/microglia
to ischemia (23). The role of MIF in initiating and
sustaining inflammatory responses has been well characterized outside of the central nervous system. It has
been shown that constitutive expression of MIF is
essential to combat common infections, and knockout
of the Mif gene can result in higher mortality to certain
infections (60) but protection from excessive host
inflammation (61). A protective effect of MIF has been
attributed to its unique ability to override the antiinflammatory effects of glucocorticoids (61), thereby
promoting the production of proinflammatory cytokines (60, 61). In addition, constitutive expression of
MIF maintains the surface expression of TLR4, which,
in turn, is responsible for sensing infection and initiating a host defense response (11). These characteristics
of MIF suggest that MIF both has an antistress role and
is necessary to activate the first line of host defense. In
contrast, under chronic inflammatory conditions, such
as rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis, and Alzheimer’s disease, MIF is persistently up-regulated (62, 63).
Recruitment of macrophages is involved in the pathology of rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis and was
shown to be mediated by the interaction between MIF
expressed at the lesion site and the chemokine receptors on inflammatory cells (64). Although the mechanism for sustained MIF expression is unknown, in
comparison to the effect of MIF during acute inflammation, MIF appears to have a predominant deleterious effects in chronic inflammation. Similar mechanisms may explain the late-phase infarct development.
Up-regulation of MIF expression in the peri-infarct area
in response to acute stress induces a macrophage/
microglia response, which, in turn, contributes to a
larger infarct volume by prolonging infarct development. MIF could play dual roles following ischemia
depending on the time window. It worth noting that a
recent study on heart ischemia took into consideration
the severity of the ischemic insult and assessed infarct
volume during both early and late phases of infarct
development. It reported that mice lacking MIF expression developed larger infarcts following mild ischemic
insult (15 min occlusion) during the early phase (4 h
after the ischemic insult) of infarct development, while

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4405

this protective effect of MIF was not observed at 24 h
following an ischemic insult induced for 30 min (55).
This observation is in concordance with our results and
is likely due to the loss of MIF expression.
To date, inhibition of MIF has been suggested in
many therapeutic strategies, especially in inflammationinduced diseases. Our results show that down-regulation of MIF by NF␬B signaling accelerates neuronal
apoptosis during stroke, which suggests that use of a
MIF inhibitor may reduce the already narrow therapeutic windows following stroke and confer a higher risk of
ischemic damage. Our study indicates that MIF protects
neurons against ischemia and a strategy to control MIF
expression at a therapeutic level could have beneficial
effects for patients with stroke.
The authors thank Dr. Cheryl Wellington [University of
British Columbia (UBC)] for providing the BV-2 cell line.
This work was supported by Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) operating grant MOP-97825, the Jack
Brown and Family Alzheimer’s Research Foundation (to
W.S.), and U.S. National Institutes of Health grant AI042310
(to R.B.). W.S. is the holder of the Tier 1 Canada Research
Chair in Alzheimer’s Disease. Si Z. is the recipient of a
National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada–Canada Graduate Scholarships Doctoral (NSERCCGSD) scholarship and a UBC 4YF Scholarship. M.Z. is
supported by UBC 4YF Scholarship. Sh.Z. was supported by
the Chinese Scholarship Council award. The authors declare
no conflicts of interest.

11.
12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

4406

Donnan, G. A., Fisher, M., Macleod, M., and Davis, S. M. (2008)
Stroke Lancet 371, 1612–1623
Broughton, B. R., Reutens, D. C., and Sobey, C. G. (2009)
Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia. Stroke 40, e331–
339
Iadecola, C., and Anrather, J. (2011) The immunology of stroke:
from mechanisms to translation. Nat. Med. 17, 796 –808
Lipton, P. (1999) Ischemic cell death in brain neurons. Physiol.
Rev. 79, 1431–1568
Liu, Y., Wong, T. P., Aarts, M., Rooyakkers, A., Liu, L., Lai, T. W.,
Wu, D. C., Lu, J., Tymianski, M., Craig, A. M., and Wang, Y. T.
(2007) NMDA receptor subunits have differential roles in
mediating excitotoxic neuronal death both in vitro and in vivo.
J. Neurosci. 27, 2846 –2857
Amor, S., Puentes, F., Baker, D., and van der Valk, P. (2010)
Inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases. Immunology 129,
154 –169
Xiong, X., Barreto, G. E., Xu, L., Ouyang, Y. B., Xie, X., and
Giffard, R. G. (2011) Increased brain injury and worsened
neurological outcome in interleukin-4 knockout mice after
transient focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 42, 2026 –2032
Ziegler, G., Freyer, D., Harhausen, D., Khojasteh, U., Nietfeld,
W., and Trendelenburg, G. (2011) Blocking TLR2 in vivo
protects against accumulation of inflammatory cells and neuronal injury in experimental stroke. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31,
757–766
Zhang, L., Zhang, Z. G., Zhang, R. L., Lu, M., Krams, M., and
Chopp, M. (2003) Effects of a selective CD11b/CD18 antagonist
and recombinant human tissue plasminogen activator treatment alone and in combination in a rat embolic model
of stroke. Stroke 34, 1790 –1795
Lazovic, J., Basu, A., Lin, H. W., Rothstein, R. P., Krady, J. K.,
Smith, M. B., and Levison, S. W. (2005) Neuroinflammation and
both cytotoxic and vasogenic edema are reduced in interleukin-1 type 1 receptor-deficient mice conferring neuroprotection. Stroke 36, 2226 –2231

Vol. 28

October 2014

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.

Calandra, T., and Roger, T. (2003) Macrophage migration
inhibitory factor: a regulator of innate immunity. Nat. Rev.
Immunol. 3, 791–800
Bernhagen, J., Calandra, T., Mitchell, R. A., Martin, S. B.,
Tracey, K. J., Voelter, W., Manogue, K. R., Cerami, A., and
Bucala, R. (1993) MIF is a pituitary-derived cytokine that
potentiates lethal endotoxaemia. Nature 365, 756 –759
Hudson, J. D., Shoaibi, M. A., Maestro, R., Carnero, A., Hannon,
G. J., and Beach, D. H. (1999) A proinflammatory cytokine
inhibits p53 tumor suppressor activity. J. Exp. Med. 190, 1375–
1382
Kleemann, R., Hausser, A., Geiger, G., Mischke, R., BurgerKentischer, A., Flieger, O., Johannes, F. J., Roger, T., Calandra,
T., Kapurniotu, A., Grell, M., Finkelmeier, D., Brunner, H., and
Bernhagen, J. (2000) Intracellular action of the cytokine MIF to
modulate AP-1 activity and the cell cycle through Jab1. Nature
408, 211–216
Mitchell, R. A., Liao, H., Chesney, J., Fingerle-Rowson, G.,
Baugh, J., David, J., and Bucala, R. (2002) Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) sustains macrophage proinflammatory function by inhibiting p53: regulatory role in the innate
immune response. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 345–350
Amaral, F. A., Fagundes, C. T., Guabiraba, R., Vieira, A. T.,
Souza, A. L., Russo, R. C., Soares, M. P., Teixeira, M. M., and
Souza, D. G. (2007) The role of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in the cascade of events leading to reperfusioninduced inflammatory injury and lethality. Am. J. Pathol. 171,
1887–1893
Miller, E. J., Li, J., Leng, L., McDonald, C., Atsumi, T., Bucala,
R., and Young, L. H. (2008) Macrophage migration inhibitory
factor stimulates AMP-activated protein kinase in the ischaemic heart. Nature 451, 578 –582
Koga, K., Kenessey, A., Powell, S., Sison, C. P., Miller, E. J., and
Ojamaa, K. (2011) Macrophage migration inhibitory factor
provides cardioprotection during ischemia/reperfusion by reducing oxidative stress. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 14, 1191–1202
Nguyen, M. T., Beck, J., Lue, H., Funfzig, H., Kleemann, R.,
Koolwijk, P., Kapurniotu, A., and Bernhagen, J. (2003) A
16-residue peptide fragment of macrophage migration inhibitory factor, MIF-(50 – 65), exhibits redox activity and has MIFlike biological functions. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 33654 –33671
Nguyen, M. T., Lue, H., Kleemann, R., Thiele, M., Tolle, G.,
Finkelmeier, D., Wagner, E., Braun, A., and Bernhagen, J.
(2003) The cytokine macrophage migration inhibitory factor
reduces pro-oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. J. Immunol. 170,
3337–3347
Wang, L., Zis, O., Ma, G., Shan, Z., Zhang, X., Wang, S., Dai, C.,
Zhao, J., Lin, Q., Lin, S., and Song, W. (2009) Upregulation of
macrophage migration inhibitory factor gene expression
in stroke. Stroke 40, 973–976
Inacio, A. R., Bucala, R., and Deierborg, T. (2011) Lack of
macrophage migration inhibitory factor in mice does not affect
hallmarks of the inflammatory/immune response during the
first week after stroke. J. Neuroinflammation 8, 75
Inacio, A. R., Ruscher, K., Leng, L., Bucala, R., and Deierborg,
T. (2011) Macrophage migration inhibitory factor promotes cell
death and aggravates neurologic deficits after experimental stroke. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 1093–1106
Paralkar, V., and Wistow, G. (1994) Cloning the human gene for
macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF). Genomics 19,
48 –51
Bacher, M., Meinhardt, A., Lan, H. Y., Dhabhar, F. S., Mu, W.,
Metz, C. N., Chesney, J. A., Gemsa, D., Donnelly, T., Atkins,
R. C., and Bucala, R. (1998) MIF expression in the rat brain:
implications for neuronal function. Mol. Med. 4, 217–230
Calandra, T., Bernhagen, J., Mitchell, R. A., and Bucala, R.
(1994) The macrophage is an important and previously unrecognized source of macrophage migration inhibitory factor. J.
Exp. Med. 179, 1895–1902
Waeber, G., Thompson, N., Chautard, T., Steinmann, M.,
Nicod, P., Pralong, F. P., Calandra, T., and Gaillard, R. C. (1998)
Transcriptional activation of the macrophage migration-inhibitory factor gene by the corticotropin-releasing factor is mediated by the cyclic adenosine 3=,5=- monophosphate responsive
element-binding protein CREB in pituitary cells. Mol. Endocrinol.
12, 698 –705

The FASEB Journal 䡠 www.fasebj.org

Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

ZHANG ET AL.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.
33.

34.

35.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

41.
42.
43.

44.

45.
46.

47.
48.

Baugh, J. A., Gantier, M., Li, L., Byrne, A., Buckley, A., and
Donnelly, S. C. (2006) Dual regulation of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) expression in hypoxia by CREB and
HIF-1. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 347, 895–903
Welford, S. M., Bedogni, B., Gradin, K., Poellinger, L., Broome
Powell, M., and Giaccia, A. J. (2006) HIF1alpha delays premature senescence through the activation of MIF. Genes Dev. 20,
3366 –3371
Schreck, R., Albermann, K., and Baeuerle, P. A. (1992) Nuclear
factor kappa B: an oxidative stress-responsive transcription
factor of eukaryotic cells (a review). Free Radic. Res. Commun. 17,
221–237
Baeuerle, P. A., and Henkel, T. (1994) Function and activation
of NF-kappa B in the immune system. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 12,
141–179
Stockley, J. H., and O’Neill, C. (2007) The proteins BACE1 and
BACE2 and beta-secretase activity in normal and Alzheimer’s
disease brain. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 35, 574 –576
Chen, C. H., Zhou, W., Liu, S., Deng, Y., Cai, F., Tone, M., Tone,
Y., Tong, Y., and Song, W. (2012) Increased NF-kappaB signalling up-regulates BACE1 expression and its therapeutic potential in Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 15, 77–90
Tong, Y., Zhou, W., Fung, V., Christensen, M. A., Qing, H., Sun,
X., and Song, W. (2005) Oxidative stress potentiates BACE1
gene expression and Abeta generation. J. Neural. Transm. 112,
455–469
Schneider, A., Martin-Villalba, A., Weih, F., Vogel, J., Wirth, T.,
and Schwaninger, M. (1999) NF-kappaB is activated and promotes cell death in focal cerebral ischemia. Nat. Med. 5,
554 –559
Ridder, D. A., and Schwaninger, M. (2009) NF-kappaB signaling
in cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience 158, 995–1006
Mattson, M. P., Culmsee, C., and Yu, Z. F. (2000) Apoptotic and
antiapoptotic mechanisms in stroke. Cell Tissue Res. 301, 173–
187
Baldwin, A. S., Jr. (1996) The NF-kappa B and I kappa B
proteins: new discoveries and insights. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 14,
649 –683
Miyamoto, S., and Verma, I. M. (1995) Rel/NF-kappa B/I kappa
B story. Adv. Cancer Res. 66, 255–292
Huang, F. P., Wang, Z. Q., Wu, D. C., Schielke, G. P., Sun, Y.,
and Yang, G. Y. (2003) Early NFkappaB activation is inhibited
during focal cerebral ischemia in interleukin-1beta-converting
enzyme deficient mice. J. Neurosci. Res. 73, 698 –707
Cai, F., Chen, B., Zhou, W., Zis, O., Liu, S., Holt, R. A., Honer,
W. G., and Song, W. (2008) SP1 regulates a human SNAP-25
gene expression. J. Neurochem. 105, 512–523
Zhou, W., and Song, W. (2006) Leaky scanning and reinitiation
regulate BACE1 gene expression. Mol. Cell. Biol. 26, 3353–3364
Ly, P. T., Wu, Y., Zou, H., Wang, R., Zhou, W., Kinoshita, A.,
Zhang, M., Yang, Y., Cai, F., Woodgett, J., and Song, W. (2013)
Inhibition of GSK3beta-mediated BACE1 expression reduces
Alzheimer-associated phenotypes. J. Clin. Invest. 123, 224 –235
Chen, C. H., Zhou, W., Liu, S., Deng, Y., Cai, F., Tone, M., Tone,
Y., Tong, Y., and Song, W. (2011) Increased NF-kappaB signalling up-regulates BACE1 expression and its therapeutic potential in Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. 18, 1–14
Xu, Q., Guo, H., Zhang, X., Tang, B., Cai, F., Zhou, W., and
Song, W. (2012) Hypoxia regulation of ATP13A2 (PARK9)
gene transcription. J. Neurochem. 122, 251–259
Mizue, Y., Ghani, S., Leng, L., McDonald, C., Kong, P., Baugh,
J., Lane, S. J., Craft, J., Nishihira, J., Donnelly, S. C., Zhu, Z., and
Bucala, R. (2005) Role for macrophage migration inhibitory
factor in asthma. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 14410 –14415
Chen, S. T., Hsu, C. Y., Hogan, E. L., Maricq, H., and Balentine,
J. D. (1986) A model of focal ischemic stroke in the rat:
reproducible extensive cortical infarction. Stroke 17, 738 –743
Sun, X., He, G., and Song, W. (2006) BACE2, as a novel APP
theta-secretase, is not responsible for the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease in Down syndrome. FASEB J. 20, 1369 –1376

49.

50.

51.
52.

53.

54.

55.

56.
57.

58.
59.
60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

Stephenson, D., Yin, T., Smalstig, E. B., Hsu, M. A., Panetta, J.,
Little, S., and Clemens, J. (2000) Transcription factor nuclear
factor-kappa B is activated in neurons after focal cerebral ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 20, 592–603
Niizuma, K., Endo, H., and Chan, P. H. (2009) Oxidative stress
and mitochondrial dysfunction as determinants of ischemic
neuronal death and survival. J. Neurochem. 109(Suppl. 1), 133–
138
Rassaf, T., Weber, C., and Bernhagen, J. (2014) Macrophage
migration inhibitory factor in myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Cardiovasc. Res. 102, 321–328
Zhang, X., Deguchi, K., Yamashita, T., Ohta, Y., Shang, J., Tian,
F., Liu, N., Panin, V. L., Ikeda, Y., Matsuura, T., and Abe, K.
(2010) Temporal and spatial differences of multiple protein
expression in the ischemic penumbra after transient MCAO
in rats. Brain Res. 1343, 143–152
Nakayama, K. (2013) cAMP-response element-binding protein
(CREB) and NF-kappaB transcription factors are activated during prolonged hypoxia and cooperatively regulate the induction
of matrix metalloproteinase MMP1. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 22584 –
22595
Bakirtzi, K., Belfort, G., Lopez-Coviella, I., Kuruppu, D., Cao, L.,
Abel, E. D., Brownell, A. L., and Kandror, K. V. (2009) Cerebellar neurons possess a vesicular compartment structurally and
functionally similar to Glut4-storage vesicles from peripheral
insulin-sensitive tissues. J. Neurosci. 29, 5193–5201
Koga, K., Kenessey, A., Powell, S. R., Sison, C. P., Miller, E. J.,
and Ojamaa, K. (2011) Macrophage migration inhibitory factor
provides cardioprotection during ischemia/reperfusion by reducing oxidative stress. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 14, 1191–1202
Szeto, H. H. (2006) Mitochondria-targeted peptide antioxidants: novel neuroprotective agents. AAPS J. 8, E521–E531
Al-Abed, Y., Dabideen, D., Aljabari, B., Valster, A., Messmer, D.,
Ochani, M., Tanovic, M., Ochani, K., Bacher, M., Nicoletti, F.,
Metz, C., Pavlov, V. A., Miller, E. J., and Tracey, K. J. (2005)
ISO-1 binding to the tautomerase active site of MIF inhibits its
pro-inflammatory activity and increases survival in severe sepsis.
J. Biol. Chem. 280, 36541–36544
Leppa, S., and Bohmann, D. (1999) Diverse functions of JNK
signaling and c-Jun in stress response and apoptosis. Oncogene
18, 6158 –6162
Wagner, E. F., and Nebreda, A. R. (2009) Signal integration by
JNK and p38 MAPK pathways in cancer development. Nat. Rev.
Cancer 9, 537–549
Koebernick, H., Grode, L., David, J. R., Rohde, W., Rolph, M. S.,
Mittrucker, H. W., and Kaufmann, S. H. (2002) Macrophage
migration inhibitory factor (MIF) plays a pivotal role in immunity against Salmonella typhimurium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 99, 13681–13686
Calandra, T., Bernhagen, J., Metz, C. N., Spiegel, L. A., Bacher,
M., Donnelly, T., Cerami, A., and Bucala, R. (1995) MIF as a
glucocorticoid-induced modulator of cytokine production. Nature 377, 68 –71
Bacher, M., Deuster, O., Aljabari, B., Egensperger, R., Neff, F.,
Jessen, F., Popp, J., Noelker, C., Reese, J. P., Al-Abed, Y., and
Dodel, R. The role of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Med. 16, 116 –121
Morand, E. F., Leech, M., and Bernhagen, J. (2006) MIF: a new
cytokine link between rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis.
Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 5, 399 –410
Bernhagen, J., Krohn, R., Lue, H., Gregory, J. L., Zernecke, A.,
Koenen, R. R., Dewor, M., Georgiev, I., Schober, A., Leng, L.,
Kooistra, T., Fingerle-Rowson, G., Ghezzi, P., Kleemann, R.,
McColl, S. R., Bucala, R., Hickey, M. J., and Weber, C. (2007)
MIF is a noncognate ligand of CXC chemokine receptors in
inflammatory and atherogenic cell recruitment. Nat. Med. 13,
587–596
Received for publication March 13, 2014.
Accepted for publication June 16, 2014.

DOWN-REGULATION OF MIF BY NF␬B DURING STROKE
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

4407

Down-regulation of MIF by NFκB under hypoxia accelerated
neuronal loss during stroke
Si Zhang, Odysseus Zis, Philip T. T. Ly, et al.
FASEB J 2014 28: 4394-4407 originally published online June 26, 2014
Access the most recent version at doi:10.1096/fj.14-253625

Supplemental
Material
References

Subscriptions

http://www.fasebj.org/content/suppl/2014/07/02/fj.14-253625.DC1.html

This article cites 63 articles, 26 of which can be accessed free at:
http://www.fasebj.org/content/28/10/4394.full.html#ref-list-1
Information about subscribing to The FASEB Journal is online at
http://www.faseb.org/The-FASEB-Journal/Librarian-s-Resources.aspx

Permissions

Submit copyright permission requests at:
http://www.fasebj.org/site/misc/copyright.xhtml

Email Alerts

Receive free email alerts when new an article cites this article - sign up at
http://www.fasebj.org/cgi/alerts

© FASEB
Downloaded from www.fasebj.org to IP 129.215.141.98. The FASEB Journal Vol.28, No.10 , pp:4394-4407, October, 2016

