Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 463 (2015) 479e482

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc

MRI measurement of bloodebrain barrier transport with a rapid
acquisition refocused echo (RARE) method
Jeffrey H. Walton a, *, Kit Fai Ng b, Steven E. Anderson c, John C. Rutledge b
a

NMR Facility and Biomedical Engineering Graduate Group, University of California, Davis, USA
Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of California, Davis, USA
c
Department of Physiology and Membrane Biology, University of California, Davis, USA
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 16 April 2015
Available online 19 May 2015

Dynamic Contrast Enhanced (DCE) MRI is increasingly being used to assess changes in capillary
permeability. Most quantitative techniques used to measure capillary permeability are based on the Fick
equation that requires measurement of signal reﬂecting both plasma and tissue concentrations of the
solute being tested. To date, most Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) methods for acquiring appropriate
data quickly rely on gradient recalled echo (GRE) type acquisitions, which work well in clinical low ﬁeld
settings. However, acquiring this type of data on high ﬁeld small animal preclinical MRIs is problematic
due to geometrical distortions from susceptibility mismatch. This problem can be exacerbated when
using small animal models to measure blood brain barrier (BBB) permeability, where precise sampling
from the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) is commonly used to determine the plasma concentration of the
contrast agent. Here we present results demonstrating that a standard saturation recovery rapid
acquisition refocused echo (RARE) method is capable of acquiring T1 maps with good spatial and temporal resolution for Patlak analysis (Patlak, 1983) to assess changes in BBB Gd-DTPA permeability
following middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion in the rat. This method limits known
problems with magnetic susceptibility mismatch and may thus allow greater accuracy in BBB permeability measurement in small animals.
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Keywords:
Rat brain capillary transport
DCE-MRI
Rapid acquisition refocused echo
RARE

1. Introduction
Changes in blood brain barrier permeability are often characterized using Dynamic Contrast Enhanced (DCE) imaging, specifically, by injecting a bolus of contrast agent such as Gd-DTPA
intravenously and following changes in tissue and plasma spin
lattice relaxation rate, R1 (¼1/T1) over time. Under these conditions, changes in R1 (DR1) are commonly treated as linear with
changes in [Gd-DTPA] [1]. Measurement of R1 vs. time and space
yields the spatial distribution of [Gd-DTPA] over time. This permits
examination of the dynamics of the exchange of Gd-DTPA across
the blood brain barrier that can be modeled with the Fick equation
for diffusional ﬂux and analyzed using a Patlak plot [2e4].

* Corresponding author. UC Davis NMR Facility, 4303 Tupper Hall, One Shields
Ave., University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
E-mail address: jhwalton@ucdavis.edu (J.H. Walton).

Critical to this analysis is measurement of T1 with maximum
resolution in time and space. Typically this is done via a LookLocker method [5,6] with TOMROP [7] and echo planar modiﬁcations [8] that work quite well on humans at clinical ﬁelds. However,
gradient echo type sequences have drawbacks at high ﬁelds due to
well-documented distortion from magnetic susceptibility
mismatch at tissue boundaries and air tissue interfaces [9,10]. These
known drawbacks are exacerbated in small animals. Susceptibility
mismatch effects also increase with ﬁeld and preclinical small animal MRI systems are now being delivered at 17.6 T. Moreover,
TOMROP uses only a fraction of the magnetization for acquiring
each image in the T1 map.
Rapid acquisition refocused echo (RARE) [11] imaging is well
established to be relatively insensitive to susceptibility mismatch.
Thus it produces good images at high ﬁeld [10] without spending
extensive time shimming. Furthermore, because it is refocused, all
the available magnetization is used for image acquisition. But the
trade off is that there are many RF pulses potentially heating the
animal and the echo times are longer, sometimes leading to a loss of
signal due to T2 relaxation. RARE has recently been used to better

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.034
0006-291X/© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

480

J.H. Walton et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 463 (2015) 479e482

establish baseline values of T1 and T2 at 17.6 T in mice [12]. Thus,
we examined RARE with a variable relaxation delay for the measurement of T1 in small animals at high ﬁeld with the purpose of
obtaining data with adequate S/N and resolution for DCE-MRI
measurements suitable for Patlak analysis.

2. Materials and methods
This study was conducted in accordance with the Animal Use
and Care Guidelines issued by the National Institutes of Health
using a protocol approved by the Animal Use and Care Committee
at University of California Davis (IACUC protocol #15946). All surgery was performed under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia, and
all efforts were made to minimize suffering. The experiments
described were conducted using SpragueeDawley rats (Charles
River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA, USA) weighing 180e250 g.
Animals were anesthetized with i.p. injection of sodium pentobarbital (60 mg/kg body weight) and surgical plane anesthesia was
maintained with a quarter dose (15 mg/kg body weight) every
30e45 min. Body temperature was maintained using an electric
heating pad during surgery and a water heating pad (Gaymar Inc.,
Orchard Park, NY, USA) during MRI data acquisition. The left
femoral vein was cannulated with PE-10 polyethylene tubing for
infusion of gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA - Magnevist;
Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, Wayne, NJ, USA). Animals used
for the Patlak experiments were prepared using the middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) model as previously described [13] but
reperfused for 18 h after 3 h occlusion as modiﬁed from Nagaraja
et al. [3].
The RARE experiment was performed on a Bruker Biospec 7T
imaging system using ParaVision Version 4 with a modiﬁed RAREVTR method. The imaging parameters were: TE ¼ 10.26 ms, TR
array ¼ 168.4, 500.2, 927.1, 1525.9, 2538 and 7500 ms, RARE
factor ¼ 16, slice thickness ¼ 2 mm, FOV ¼ 64  64 mm,
matrix ¼ 128 x 128, and total experiment time ¼ 105 s for each T1
map. MRI data were collected in a saturation recovery mode where
TR was varied to collect a series of T1 weighted images from which
a T1 map was generated. The measured T1 values for the rat brain
were 1772 ± 227 and 2138 ± 384 ms (mean ± SD) for the right (unoccluded) and left (occluded) hemispheres, respectively. This
agrees well with previous studies using a similar MCAO with
reperfusion model [14]. A representative T1 map is shown as an
inset to Fig. 2. Such maps are converted to R1 maps and delta R1 vs.
time was calculated. Rectal temperature was monitored with a type
T thermocouple to assess possible heating due to SAR (Speciﬁc
Absorption Rate). During the experiment core temperatures
nominally increased at a rate of 0.05  F/min independent of RARE
imaging and did not exceed the normal rat body temperature
range.
The data were analyzed using the Patlak Model [2e4] with
locally written Matlab code. Brieﬂy, transport is modeled using the
equation Ct(t) ¼ Ki!Cp(t)dt þCp(t)Vp where Ct is the Gd-DTPA tissue
concentration (per volume), and Cp is the Gd-DTPA arterial plasma
concentration (per volume). Ki is the product of the permeability
and the surface area per volume (per minute), i.e. the transfer
constant for contrast agent movement from the blood to the tissue.
Vp ¼ fractional “volume of the various tissue compartments in
which water with intravascular-Gd-changed relaxation rates
distribute” [1] (ml/g) prior to Gd-DTPA crossing the BBB. In the fast
exchange limit R1 ¼ R10 þ R1*[Gd-DTPA] for both tissue and
plasma. In general, DR1 is the change in pixel R1 following Gd-DTPA
infusion. Thus in tissue, DR1t(t) can be substituted for Ct(t). When
Hct ¼ the fraction of blood that is cells, DR1p(t)/(1-Hct) in the superior sagittal sinus (SSS) can be substituted for Cp(t). Plotting (1-

Hct)Ct(t)/Cp(t) vs. “stretch time” ¼ !Cp(t)dt/Cp(t), the data can be
ﬁt linearly with slope Ki [1].
3. Results
Results showing R1 for the SSS and representative pixels from
both hemispheres after MCAO/reperfusion are shown in Fig. 1 along
with the Patlak plot for the same data.
Further analysis gave Ki values of 0.00012 ± 0.00085 and
0.00177 ± 0.00254 min1 (mean ± SD) for the right (un-occluded)
hemisphere and the left (occluded) hemisphere respectively. These
values compare well with those previously published for a similar
rat model [3]. The Ki distributions of the left and right hemispheres
are plotted in Fig. 2 and mapped in the insert. These results
compare well with those published by others [3,15].
4. Discussion
The criteria for obtaining DCE-MRI data useful for characterizing
changes in capillary permeability using Patlak analysis are, 1)
acquisition intervals short enough that repeated acquisitions capture the dynamics of the process, 2) sufﬁcient spatial resolution to
sample precisely from the structures of interest, and 3) sufﬁcient
signal to noise to measure changes in contrast agent concentration,
both in the tissue and within the vascular space. Given common
limitations in MRI imaging, criterion 1 is in conﬂict with criteria 2
and 3. Criterion 2 is also in conﬂict with 3 and all of these criteria
present a challenge in small animals because almost all structures
one wishes to sample are diminished in size.
Most researchers address issues of acquisition time using LookLocker [5,6] type sequences such as TOMROP [7] or IR/SE EPI [8], but
these are known to have limited spatial resolution especially where
magnetic susceptibility mismatch can occur [16]. TOMROP is fast
due to using a low tip angle (and thus only some of the magnetization) and acquiring a line of k-space for several delays after an
inversion. EPI acquires several lines of k-space for each inversion
thus increasing acquisition speed. RARE also acquires multiple lines
of k-space in a single shot, but uses all of the magnetization. The
gradient echo type sequences (TOMROP, IR/SE EPI) also use inversion recovery (IR) to measure T1. Here we use saturation recovery
rather than IR to speed up the process. Time is saved with saturation recovery over IR because 5T1's are not required between each
scan. Saturation recovery sacriﬁces some dynamic range in the T1
measurement, but with sufﬁcient S/N this is an acceptable tradeoff.
Using higher ﬁeld magnets can resolve some of these issues
because higher ﬁeld increases signal to noise thus allowing higher
spatial resolution and/or shorter acquisitions times. Currently
preclinical imaging is commercially available at 17.6 T. However
conducting experiments at higher ﬁeld also leads to image distortion such as those due to magnetic susceptibility mismatch and
thus loss of signal from intravoxel dephasing [10]. Moreover, these
effects become worse as the ﬁeld increases. RARE has the advantage
that signal is not lost due to intravoxel dephasing. Moreover, the
geometric distortions associated with shimming and tissue interfaces in gradient echo type sequences are in large part corrected
for in RARE. In some small animal experiments this is a potential
advantage because time spent shimming should be diminished.
The issue of spatial distortion is likely to be troublesome when
attempting to assess changes in contrast agent concentration
within vessels and particularly in the SSS in small animals where a
number of tissue borders including bone and air are in close
proximity. Some investigators have attempted to limit problems
with MRI measurement of plasma contrast agent concentration by
using literature values for the arterial input function [17,18] but this

J.H. Walton et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 463 (2015) 479e482

481

Fig. 1. The graph on the left shows R1 values for 3 pixels before and after Gd-DTPA injection. Closed diamonds correspond to data acquired from the superior sagittal sinus (SSS); the
other two sets of data are from symmetrically sampled pixels in the occluded (left) and un-occluded (right) hemispheres. The ﬁgure on the right shows the Patlak plot for the same
two tissue pixels. Note the F-test shows the data from the un-occluded right hemisphere has a slope ¼ Ki not signiﬁcantly different from zero, while the slope for the data from the
occluded left hemisphere is signiﬁcantly greater than zero.

Fig. 2. The Ki distribution. The histogram shows the number of pixels vs. measured Ki has a distribution similar to normal brain [15] but with a subpopulation of pixels corresponding to the ischemia/reperfused region. The left inset shows the T1 map for this data set generated in ParaVision by ﬁtting to a single exponential and using the M∞ map to
segment and mask the noise outside the head. The right inset shows the map of Ki values superimposed on the T1 map. The color table has its max set at 0.01 min1. The Ki overlay
includes all brain Ki values greater than the meanþ2SD measured for the un-occluded hemisphere. The 95% conﬁdence limit was calculated using the mean Ki and standard
deviation (0.00012 ± 0.00085) from the un-occluded hemisphere yielding an upper 95% conﬁdence limit of 0.00178. Note that the right hemisphere is on the left side of the images.
(For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

is likely to introduce a variety of errors unless contrast agent injection and intravascular mixing are identical in all experiments.
RARE is a fast imaging protocol collecting multiple lines of kespace
for each acquisition. In general the image resolution is much better
than necessary to adequately sample the brain tissue in which one
desires to measure the transfer of Gd-DTPA. However, of equal or
greater importance, is resolving the blood vessel that is used to
measure the arterial input function (AIF). We use the superior

sagittal sinus (SSS) as it has been previously shown to provide a
satisfactory sample of the AIF, especially for relatively low permeability vessels such as those of the blood brain barrier [1]. Ideally
the acquired images should have one pixel entirely within the SSS.
Assuming square pixels (our case) and the SSS is oriented
perpendicular to the imaging plane, based upon geometrical considerations, a  d/(2(2^0.5)) where d ¼ SSS diameter and a ¼ the
resolution, would guarantee at least one pixel entirely within the

482

J.H. Walton et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 463 (2015) 479e482

SSS. Recent optical [19] and CT [20] studies have measured the SSS
diameter to be ~700e750 mm. Our resolution of 500 mm is larger
than optimum, but the criteria can be relaxed. If the voxel of interest has a majority of spins from the SSS, since the R1 of the SSS is
the largest rate in the voxel, i.e. larger than R1 from non-SSS tissue
within the voxel, the R1 of the SSS will dominate the measurement.
Again using geometrical arguments, assuming square pixels with
side a, and a circular SSS with radius r, the minimum overlap between the SSS and a pixel is when the intersection of four pixels is
at the center of the SSS. Thus the criteria for a pixel to have part of
the SSS occupy more than 50% of the pixel is (p/4)r2 > a2/2 and with
a ¼ 500 micron and r ~ 350 micron, we are very close to fulﬁlling
this condition.
We also note that in principle we have the ﬂexibility to measure
the arterial input function (AIF) in the SSS in a slice different than
the imaging slice, thus picking out the SSS at it largest dimension.
This would naturally fall out in multislice acquisition.
Enhancement of spatial resolution has been addressed recently
using a radial keyhole sampling strategy [18]. It remains to be seen
whether this technique will gain acceptance, but we note that these
investigators also used literature values for the AIF function rather
than using their own measurement.
Another advantage of the gradient echo type sequences over
RARE is that many fewer pulses are used. Thus the issue of animal
heating due to SAR is generally not considered in gradient echo
type sequences. However, RARE has many pulses drastically
increasing SAR. Here we observed no heating, however these were
single slice experiments so this should be carefully tested in multislice experiments.
Most methods used to measure BBB permeability in rodents
have been ex vivo and involve measurement of a labeled molecule
in the brain after a period of perfusion with blood. These techniques
have been used to measure catastrophic brain injury, such as that
occurring after MCAO. The technique describe herein will enable
the investigator to serially measure subtle changes in BBB permeability over time. This approach will enable evaluation of chronic
diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia, where
disease progression is incremental rather than catastrophic.
In conclusion, although current methods for DCE-MRI measurement of capillary permeability are satisfactory for clinical use
with relatively large subjects at low ﬁeld strength, preclinical imaging is trending toward using DCE-MRI in small animals at high
ﬁeld strength for basic science research. Here we have demonstrated that a RARE pulse sequence, previously demonstrated to
limit errors due to magnetic susceptibility mismatch to improve
resolution, combined with a saturation recovery measurement of
T1, previously demonstrated to improve sensitivity, can be used
successfully for measuring blood brain barrier permeability at high
ﬁeld in small animals.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was conducted in part with support from NSF OSTI
97-24412 and NIH R01-AG039094 and the Richard A. and Nora

Eccles Harrison Endowed Chair in Diabetes Research. The funding
agencies had no involvement in study design, collection, analysis
and interpretation of data, writing of the report or the decision to
submit the article for publication.

Transparency document
The transparency document associated with this article can be
found in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.
05.034.

References
[1] J.R. Ewing, R.A. Knight, T.N. Nagaraja, et al., Patlak plots of Gd-DTPA MRI data
yield bloodebrain transfer constants concordant with those of 14C-sucrose in
areas of bloodebrain opening, Magn. Reson Med. 50 (2003) 283e292.
[2] J.R. Ewing, S.L. Brown, M. Lu, et al., Model selection in magnetic resonance
imaging measurements of vascular permeability: gadomer in a 9L model of rat
cerebral tumor, J. Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab. 26 (2006) 310e320.
[3] T.N. Nagaraja, K. Karki, J.R. Ewing, et al., Identiﬁcation of variations in bloodbrain barrier opening after cerebral ischemia by dual contrast-enhanced
magnetic resonance imaging and T 1sat measurements, Stroke 39 (2008)
427e432.
[4] C.S. Patlak, R.G. Blasberg, J.D. Fenstermacher, Graphical evaluation of blood-tobrain transfer constants from multiple-time uptake data, J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 3 (1983) 1e7.
[5] D.R. Locker, D.C. Look, Measurement of electron spin-lattice relaxation times
using ordinary EPR spectrometers, J. Appl. Phys. 39 (1968) 6119e6120.
[6] D.C. Look, D.R. Locker, Time saving in measurement of NMR and EPR relaxation times, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 41 (1970) 250e251.
[7] G. Brix, L.R. Schad, M. Deimling, et al., Fast and precise T1 imaging using a
TOMROP sequence, Magn. Reson Imaging 8 (1990) 351e356.
[8] R. Sood, S. Taheri, E.Y. Estrada, et al., Quantitative evaluation of the effect of
propylene glycol on BBB permeability, J. Magn. Reson Imaging 25 (2007)
39e47.
[9] R.A. de Graaf, D.L. Rothman, K.L. Behar, Adiabatic RARE imaging, NMR Biomed.
16 (2003) 29e35.
[10] S.M. Grieve, A.M. Blamire, P. Styles, The effect of bulk susceptibility on murine
snapshot imaging at 7.0 T: A comparison of snapshot imaging techniques,
Magn. Reson Med. 43 (2000) 747e755.
[11] J. Hennig, A. Nauerth, H. Friedburg, RARE imaging: a fast imaging method for
clinical MR, Magn. Reson Med. 3 (1986) 823e833.
[12] F. Kara, F. Chen, I. Ronen, et al., In vivo measurement of transverse relaxation time in the mouse brain at 17.6 T, Magn. Reson Med. 70 (2013)
985e993.
[13] M.E. O'Donnell, Y.-J. Chen, T.I. Lam, et al., Intravenous HOE-642 reduces brain
edema and Na uptake in the rat permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion
model of stroke: evidence for participation of the blood-brain barrier Na/H
exchanger, J. Cereb. Blood Flow. Metab. 33 (2013) 225e234.
[14] P.A. Barber, L. Hoyte, D. Kirk, et al., Early T1- and T2-weighted MRI signatures
of transient and permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in a murine
stroke model studied at 9.4T, Neurosci. Lett. 388 (2005) 54e59.
[15] S. Taheri, C. Gasparovic, N.J. Shah, et al., Quantitative measurement of bloodbrain barrier permeability in human using dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI
with fast T1 mapping, Magn. Reson Med. 65 (2011) 1036e1042.
[16] R.T. Constable, J.C. Gore, The loss of small objects in variable TE imaging:
implications for FSE, RARE, and EPI, Magn. Reson Med. 28 (1992) 9e24.
[17] N.G. Harris, V. Gauden, P.A. Fraser, et al., MRI measurement of blood-brain
barrier permeability following spontaneous reperfusion in the starch microsphere model of ischemia, Magn. Reson Imaging 20 (2002) 221e230.
[18] E. Subashi, E.J. Moding, G.P. Cofer, et al., A comparison of radial keyhole
strategies for high spatial and temporal resolution 4D contrast-enhanced MRI
in small animal tumor models, Med. Phys. 40 (2013) 022304.
[19] P. Miao, H. Lu, Q. Liu, et al., Laser speckle contrast imaging of cerebral blood
ﬂow in freely moving animals, J. Biomed. Opt. 16 (2011) 090502.
[20] E. Stolz, M. Yeniguen, M. Kreisel, et al., Angioarchitectural changes in subacute
cerebral venous thrombosis. A synchrotron-based micro- and nano-CT study,
Neuroimage 54 (2011) 1881e1886.

