[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
STROKE
Results of a preclinical randomized controlled
multicenter trial (pRCT): Anti-CD49d treatment for
acute brain ischemia
Gemma Llovera,1,2 Kerstin Hofmann,1,2 Stefan Roth,1,2 Angelica Salas-Pérdomo,3,4
Maura Ferrer-Ferrer,3,4Carlo Perego,5 Elisa R. Zanier,5 Uta Mamrak,1,2Andre Rex,6Hélène Party,7
Véronique Agin,7 Claudine Fauchon,8 Cyrille Orset,7,8 Benoît Haelewyn,7,8
Maria-Grazia De Simoni,5Ulrich Dirnagl,6Ulrike Grittner,9Anna M. Planas,3,4Nikolaus Plesnila,1,2
Denis Vivien,7,8 Arthur Liesz1,2*
Numerous treatments have been reported to provide a beneficial outcome in experimental animal stroke models;
however, these treatments (with the exception of tissue plasminogen activator) have failed in clinical trials. To improve
the translation of treatment efficacy from bench to bedside, we have performed a preclinical randomized controlled
multicenter trial (pRCT) to test a potential stroke therapy under circumstances closer to the design and rigor of a
clinical randomized control trial. Anti-CD49d antibodies, which inhibit the migration of leukocytes into the brain, were
previously investigated in experimental stroke models by individual laboratories. Despite the conflicting results from
four positive and one inconclusive preclinical studies, a clinical trial was initiated. To confirm the preclinical results and
to test the feasibility of conducting a pRCT, six independent European research centers investigated the efficacy of
anti-CD49d antibodies in two distinct mouse models of stroke in a centrally coordinated, randomized, and blinded
approach. The results pooled from all research centers revealed that treatment with CD49d-specific antibodies significantly
reduced both leukocyte invasion and infarct volume after the permanent distal occlusion of the middle cerebral
artery, which causes a small cortical infarction. In contrast, anti-CD49d treatment did not reduce lesion size or affect
leukocyte invasion after transient proximal occlusion of themiddle cerebral artery, which induces large lesions. These
results suggest that the benefits of immune-targeted approaches may depend on infarct severity and localization. This
study supports the feasibility of performing pRCTs.
INTRODUCTION
Ischemic stroke, a leading cause of death and disability worldwide (1),
induces the rapid loss of specific brain functions, a result of insufficient
blood flow to specific brain regions. Together with other downstream
effects, stroke triggers an acute inflammatory response in the brain,
which activates harmful signaling cascades that contribute to secondary
brain damage (2). Although stroke places enormous medical and economic
burdens on society, thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator
(tPA) is currently the only clinically approved therapy for
ischemic stroke. Safety considerations require, however, that tPA must
be administered within a very narrow time window after the onset of
symptoms, and tPA treatment has important contraindications such as
hemorrhage or oral anticoagulation (3,4). Because of these constraints,
tPA is only provided to a small percentage of all stroke patients in industrialized
countries; the overall therapeutic impact of tPA is negligible
when developing countries are also considered.
In recent decades, several experimental therapies have been developed
and tested for their ability to mitigate stroke-related brain injury, which
can include postischemic, excitotoxic neuronal damage, spreading depolarization
, apoptosis, and/or inflammation (5,6). Unfortunately, none
of the tested drugs that show promise in animal models of stroke have so
far been translated into clinical use for stroke patients (7, 8), and most
major pharmaceutical companies have stopped research and development
in this area. The cause of this failure in clinical trials is multifactorial
and may include poorly designed preclinical and clinical studies, biased
selection of substances for clinical testing, and underpowered clinical
trials with overambitious and pathophysiologically irrelevant therapeutic
windows (5, 9). Indeed, academic and industrial researchers, as well as
funding agencies and journals, now recognize the existence of a “reproducibility
crisis”: the results of preclinical studies in many research fields,
including stroke, lack robustness, and only a small fraction of these studies
can be replicated (10).
To overcome the current limitations of preclinical in vivo studies,
strict operational and statistical guidelines have been developed for
the data reporting, and suggestions have been implied for design and
performance of preclinical studies (11). In addition, pRCTs have been
proposed as a way to help bridge the gap between experimental laboratory
research and clinical trials (12–14). Such studies would be primarily
confirmatory, designed to test efficacy of previously defined therapeutic
concepts in a study design with the highest standards for statistics,
analysis, and reporting (15). Finally, such a study will have many of the
1Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research, Klinikum der Universität München, Feodor-
Lynen-Straße 17, 81377 Munich, Germany. 2Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy),
81377 Munich, Germany. 3Department of Brain Ischemia and Neurodegeneration, Institut
d’Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas (CSIC), 08036 Barcelona, Spain.4Àrea de Neurociències, Institut d’Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 08036 Barcelona, Spain. 5Neuroscience Department,
IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, 20156 Milan, Italy. 6Department of
Experimental Neurology and Center for Stroke Research Berlin (CSB), Charité–Universitätsmedizin
Berlin; German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) and German Center for
Cardiovascular Diseases (DZHK), Berlin sites; Excellence Cluster NeuroCure, 10117 Berlin,
Germany. 7INSERM, UMR-S U919, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, team Serine Proteases
and Pathophysiology of the neurovascular Unit, GIP Cyceron, F-14074 Caen Cedex, France.
8Experimental Stroke Research Platform (ESRP), IBiSA platform, Centre Universitaire de
Ressources Biologiques (CURB), Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, F-14074 Caen Cedex,
France. 9Department of Biostatistics and Clinical Epidemiology, Charité–Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, 12203 Berlin, Germany.
*Corresponding author. E-mail: arthur.liesz@med.uni-muenchen.de
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 1
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
characteristics of adequately poweredclinical trials. Several international
consortia have been established to perform such studies, and multicenter
investigations have been reported, but no pRCT has been
published to date. Therefore, our objective was to implement a preclinical
multicenter trial by applying rigorous design, experimental,
and analysis standards to test the efficacy of an anti-inflammatory therapeutic
intervention (that is, blocking leukocyte migration with anti-
CD49d antibodies) in two experimental models of stroke.
Brain leukocyte invasion is a key mechanism that mediates secondary
neuronal injury after an acute brain lesion (2, 16). Transendothelial
migration is tightly regulated by adhesion molecules, specifically the interaction
between the molecules VLA-4 (leukocyte very late antigen-4)
and VCAM-1 (vascular cell adhesion molecule-1) (17, 18). Antibodies
against the a chain of VLA-4 (anti-CD49d antibodies) have shown efficacy
in several models of autoimmune diseases, and the humanized
antibody natalizumab is currently one of the most effective therapies
forpatientswithmultiplesclerosis( 19). Four single-center studies reported
that anti-CD49d antibodies confer cerebroprotective properties
in mouse models of brain ischemia by blocking the postischemic
invasion of leukocytes into the brain (20–23). However, one of these
studies reported different efficacies between different stroke models
(20). The neuroprotective potential of anti-CD49d treatment was challenged
further by a subsequent study that reported no treatment effect
(24). A phase 2 clinical trial is currently testing the effect of natalizumab
in patients after acute ischemic stroke (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:
NCT01955707).
The availability of reliable preclinical data is essential for selecting
the drug candidates with the highest clinical potential and for designing
the most effective clinical study, thereby minimizing unnecessary, costly
, and even harmful clinical trials. We therefore tested anti-CD49d
treatment in a multicenter, randomized
preclinical trial. The predetermined primary
end point for the trial was infarct
volume measured in two ischemic stroke
models. The secondary end points were
functional outcome and the invasion of
leukocytes into the brain.
RESULTS
For this experimental trial, we used two
different models of focal brain ischemia
(Fig. 1, A to C) to address potential pathophysiological
differences among commonly
used stroke models (25, 26). Small
lesions confined to the cortex were induced
by coagulation of the distal middle cerebral
artery (cMCAO), whereas lesions in the
cortex and subcortical structures were induced
by transiently occluding the MCA
at its origin for 60 min with an endovascular
filament (fMCAO). A total of 315 male
C57BL/6J mice from the following five
independent European research centers
were randomized in this trial by the author
indicated by their initials [center 1: Caen
(D.V.), center 2: Milan (M.-G.D.S.), center
3: Barcelona (A.M.P.), center 4: Munich (N.P.), and center 5: Berlin
(U.D.)], whereas the sixth center centrally coordinated the study and
analyzed the data (Munich, A.L.). A total of 81 and 174 mice were included
in the final analyses of the cMCAO and fMCAO groups, respectively
(Fig. 1D). The animals’ physical features, mortality incidences,
and reasons for exclusion are summarized in Table 1. The body temperature
of the mice at center 3 differed significantly from the other centers,
and the body weight of the mice at center 4 differed significantly from
the other centers; however, all values were within their respective normal
physiological range for mice.
Anti-CD49d treatment reduces infarct volume after
cortical stroke
Previous studies performed in individual laboratories with relatively
small sample sizes suggested that anti-CD49d antibodies might improve
outcome after stroke (20–23); in contrast, another study reported no
significant benefit of this treatment (24). We therefore examined the
efficacy of anti-CD49d treatment in experimental ischemic stroke by
performing a pRCT, using pooled infarct volume of all centers per each
stroke model as the primary end points. The anti-CD49d antibody or a
control immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody (300 mgeach)wasadministered
intraperitoneally in a randomized and blinded fashion
3 hours after stroke induction. Analysis of the pooled data from all centers
revealed that treatment with anti-CD49d antibodies resulted in 19%
smaller infarct volume 7 days after cMCAO compared to administration
of control IgG (P < 0.05) (Fig. 2A). In contrast, 4 days after inducing
fMCAO, infarct volume did not differ between control IgG–treated
and anti-CD49d–treated mice, regardless of whether the data were analyzed
for each individual center or as a pooled data set (Fig. 2B). To additionally
show the effect sizes (ESs, standardized mean difference) of
Fig. 1. Animalmodelsandanalysis
diagram. (A) Illustration of
the circle of Willis looking caudally
from the rostral side, indicating
the MCAs with the distal or
proximal occlusion sites used in
the cMCAO or fMCAO models, respectively.
ACA, anterior cerebral
artery; BA, basilar artery; PCA,
posterior cerebral artery; ICA, internal
carotid artery. (B and C)
Representative cresyl violet (CV)–
stained sections 7 days after cMCAO
(B) or 4 days after fMCAO (C). Dashed
lines demarcate the lesion area.
(D) Protocol diagram summarizing
the number of animals included (incl) (315 mice), with exclusion (excl) per group and included animal
numbers for final analysis. Exclusion criteria were defined as described in Materials and Methods. “†” indicates
dead animals.
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 2
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.946036126)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
antibody treatment in the two stroke models, we performed a metaanalysis
using inverse-variance weighting (random-effects model)
from all centers; these results are illustrated as a forest plot (Fig. 2C).
Consistent with the results from the mixed
model analysis used to test the primary end
point (Fig. 2, A and B), the result from the
cMCAO model showed no significant effect
of treatment if analyzed separately
for each center, whereas a subtotal analysis
(pooled for cMCAO) revealed a significant
treatment effect [ES, 0.57; 95% confidence
interval (CI), 0.01 to 1.13]. As in
the mixed model primary analysis, no
significant effect was found in the analysis
for pooled infarct volume after fMCAO.
When the data were pooled from all treatment
centers and both models, the ES no
longer favored treatment (ES, 0.23; 95%
CI,−0.1 to 0.55).
Next, we investigated the accuracy of
our assessment of the primary end point.
Infarct volume was independently measured
by two researchers (G.L. and A.L.)
at the central study center. These researchers
were blinded with respect to the groups,
and concordance of their results was confirmed
using Bland-Altman analysis and
calculation of intraclass correlation coefficient
(ICC), which revealed excellent
interrater reliability (ICC, 0.99; 95% CI,
0.990 to 0.994; Fig. 2D and fig. S1A).
Moreover, each study center reevaluated
the infarct volumes of the samples, confirming
reliability between the central analysis
and the analyses from each center (ICC
range, 0.88 to 0.99; fig. S1B). Together, these
results support the hypothesis that anti-
CD49d treatment reduces infarct volume
in cortical lesions after permanent MCA occlusion
; moreover, our results suggest that
treatment efficacy might depend on infarct type and severity, because
anti-CD49d treatment was not effective after transient occlusion of the
proximal MCA.
Table 1. Animal characteristics.
Center
Stroke
model
Time after lesion
(days)
Total
n
Mortality
Exclusion: No
infarct
Exclusion: Other
criteria*
Final
n
Mean body
temperature†
Mean body
weight
1 Filament 4 45 1 9 1 34 37.43 25.02
2 Filament 4 45 9 6 — 30 37.88 23.13
3 Filament 4 45 6 3 — 36 38.77‡ 23.35
4 Filament 4 45 — —  — 45§ — 20.60‡
5 Filament 4 45 7 2 7 29 37.95 24.81
1 Coagulation 7 30 — —  — 30 37.51 24.62
2 Coagulation 7 30 — 2 2 26 37.74 23.39
3 Coagulation 7 30 — 5 — 25 38.35‡ 23.88
*Other exclusion criteria: Neuroscore <8 at 24 hours after fMCAO, overt mechanical damage, or disruption of the brain sample or sham animals with lesion. †Baseline values before
anesthesia induction. ‡P < 0.05 [analysis of variance (ANOVA)]. §P < 0.05 (c2).
Fig. 2. Primary end point analysis.(A)Infarct
volumes 7 days after cMCAO with
isotype IgG control or anti-CD49d treatment
3 hours after MCAO induction. Results are
presented per individual contributing center
[center 1: n(IgG control): 10, n(anti-CD49d):
10; center 2:n(IgG control): 8,n(anti-CD49d):
9; and center 3:n(IgG control): 7,n(anti-CD49d): 8] and as pooled samples from all centers [N(IgG control): 25,
N(anti-CD49d): 27]. Mixed model analysis revealed significantly (b = 1.8, SE = 0.8, P = 0.027) lower infarct
volumes in the anti-CD49d treatment group. (B) Corresponding results for infarct volumes 4 days after
fMCAO (b =−0.3, SE = 3.3, P = 0.947). Results are presented per individual contributing center [center
1:n(IgG control): 11,n(anti-CD49d): 9; center 2:n(IgG control): 6,n(anti-CD49d): 9; center 3:n(IgG control):
12,n(anti-CD49d): 9; center 4:n(IgG control): 15,n(anti-CD49d): 15; and center 5:n(IgG control): 5,n(anti-
CD49d): 9] and as pooled samples from all centers [N(IgG control): 49, N(anti-CD49d): 51]. Center labels
for contributing centers are consistent between the two stroke models. Data are presented as means ± SD.
(C) Forest plot of ES estimation by the inverse-variance method in a random-effects model in individual centers
and in all-center pooled data, corresponding to centers depicted in (A) and (B). (D) Bland-Altman
plot for interrater concordance of infarct volume measurement for the two independent and blinded raters
at the central study center. LA, limit of agreement.
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 3
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.56020590)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Anti-CD49d treatment reduces the invasion of leukocytes
into the brain after cortical stroke
Previous studies (20,24) suggested that anti-CD49d treatment exerts its
primary therapeutic effect on brain ischemia by inhibiting leukocyte
invasion of the brain. To investigate this process, we prepared brain
sections from mice after MCAO or sham surgery; we then immunostained
the sections with antibodies against CD45, a marker for leukocytes
(Fig. 3A). The stained sections were analyzed by researchers who
were blinded with respect to the surgical and treatment groups.
Cumulative topographic maps of leukocyte invasion after cMCAO revealed
that leukocytes infiltrated the region surrounding the infarct
core, with predominant localization in the peri-infarct cortical area
(Fig. 3B). Anti-CD49d treatment significantly (P < 0.001) reduced the
number of leukocytes in the infarct area after cMCAO (Fig. 3, B and C),
consistent with our finding of reduced lesion volume in anti-CD49d–
treated mice after cMCAO. Mice that underwent fMCAO had significantly
fewer cerebral leukocytes than those that underwent MCAOcMCAO
[mean (SD), 5.4 (3.6) versus 11.4 (4.4) cells per section, respectively; P <
0.001], and anti-CD49d treatment did not affect the invasion of leukocytes
afterfMCAO(Fig.3D).Becauseofthehigh variability in lesion size and
location in the fMCAO model, we were unable to generate topographic
maps; however, we measured a weak yet significant inverse correlation
between infarct volume and cerebral
leukocyte count in the fMCAO-induced
group (Fig. 3E), suggesting a relationship
between lesion size and cellular poststroke
neuroinflammation.
Other secondary outcome
parameters were not affected by
anti-CD49d treatment
In addition to the infiltration of leukocytes
into the brain, we also measured the
following outcomes as predefined secondary
end points: mortality, physiological
parameters, and behavioral deficits. Our
analysis revealed that none of these outcomes
was significantly affected by anti-
CD49d treatment. For the cMCAO model,
we used the rotarod test and the adhesive
removal test, two well-established functional
tests for this stroke model. An
analysis of functional outcome with the
per-protocol analysis revealed that sensorimotor
deficits in both tests (at three time
points after stroke) did not differ significantly
between the sham surgery group
and either the control-treated or anti-
CD49d–treated cMCAO groups. Hence,
we were unable to discriminate between
cMCAO and sham surgery, indicating that
these commonly used tests lacked sufficient
sensitivity to detect the limited neurological
deficits in the cMCAO model (fig. S2,
A to C and E). Additionally, the mean absolute
values for both tests differed greatly
between individual centers (fig. S2, A and
B), indicating high intercenter variability in
performing these tests, despite the use of harmonized procedures. To eliminate
intercenter variability as a source for increased variability for this
parameter, we performed a secondary analysis in which the poststroke deficits
were normalized to their respective baseline values (fig. S2F). This analysis
revealed a cMCAO-induced deficit in the adhesive removal test;
however, treatment with the anti-CD49d antibody had no significant effect
on this deficit. Because of the substantial behavioral deficits induced by
fMCAO, the tests used for cMCAO could not be applied in this model.
Therefore, we tested deficits in the fMCAO model by a composite Neuroscore
, with no difference apparent between treatment groups (fig. S3A);
this lack of treatment effect is consistent with the lack of treatment effect on
infarct volume in this model. The composite Neuroscore test robustly detected
significant deficits in the animals (compared to sham treatment) in
all five research centers 4 days after stroke. A correlation analysis of this
large cohort of animals (n = 174 fMCAO-induced mice) revealed moderate
correlation between infarct volume and Neuroscore outcome (r=
0.76 and r=0.77,2and4daysafterstroke,respectively;fig.S3B).Although
cMCAO did not cause mortality (within 7 days after stroke), fMCAO
resulted in similar mortality rates in the control IgG–treated (16.0%) and
the anti-CD49d–treated (14.6%) groups (fig. S4). Similarly, the physiological
parameters (body temperature and body weight) were affected by
fMCAO but not by cMCAO (fig. S5). Specifically, fMCAO-induced brain
Fig. 3. Leukocyte brain infiltration after cMCAO and fMCAO.(A) Representative image of CD45 immunohistological
staining in the peri-infarct area 7 days after cMCAO. Green, CD45–Alexa Fluor 488; blue, 4′,6-
diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Scale bar, 10 mm. (B) Cumulative topographic representation of each
single CD45+ leukocyte detected on one coronal section per brain, excluding the infarct core area. Topographic
maps for each section were superimposed for both treatment groups [n(IgG control): 25, n(anti-
CD49d): 27]. Total CD45+ count in ipsilateral hemispheres was 284 cells in the IgG group and 196 cells in
the anti-CD49d group. (C) Quantitative analysis of CD45+cell count per one coronal section in ipsilateral (ip)
and contralateral (con) hemispheres of sham-operated animals (n= 30) and anti-CD49d–treated (n=25)or
IgG control–treated (n= 27) mice 7 days after cMCAO. (D) Corresponding quantification of CD45+cells 4 days
after fMCAO, sham-operated animals (n= 74), and anti-CD49d–treated (n= 49) or IgG control–treated (n=51)
mice. Data in (C) and (D) are presented as means ± SD. (E) Linear regression analysis of CD45+cell counts per
ipsilateral hemisphere of both treatment groups (xaxis) and infarct volume (yaxis) 4 days after fMCAO.
r, Pearson correlation coefficient.
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 4
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1664860592)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
damage led to pronounced hypothermia and weight loss, whereas sham
surgery did not; however, these parameters were not affected by treatment
with the anti-CD49d antibody.
DISCUSSION
Here, we report the results of an international multicenter, randomized,
controlled, and blinded experiment for the preclinical testing of drug
efficacy. The design of this study was modeled on phase 3 clinical randomized
controlled trials, which are the current standard in clinical
drug development and are required to license a new drug. Our study
was performed in response to the “replication crisis” (10), the exceedingly
low reproducibility, and lack of robustness of preclinical results in
academic research (27–29). In addition, our approach may help to resolve
the translational roadblock, in which promising preclinical
approaches fail to be translated to clinically effective therapies (30–32).
Thus, international research consortia—which provide larger sample sizes
with sufficient statistical power and a study design that reduces the
confounding effects of bias—have been proposed as a way to improve
the robustness and translational predictability of preclinical research
(13, 14, 33–35).
To improve the quality and reliability of preclinical research, several
international research consortia have been established, including the
European Union (EU)–funded Multi-PART (Multicentre Preclinical
Animal Research Team) consortium for stroke research and the National
Institutes of Health–funded CAESAR (Consortium for preclinicAl
assESsment of cARdioprotective therapies) consortium for
cardiovascular research. Systematic efforts by these consortia and others
have revealed that inadequate reporting of data, statistical flaws, and
missing cross-validation of data from independent study centers are
major flaws in preclinical translational research (5, 13, 33, 36, 37). Virtually
all preclinical studies performed by individual research groups are
underpowered and often fail to adequately control for bias (for example,
using randomization and blinding) (38). For example, the average
group size in more than 2000 different experiments involving more
than 35,000 rodents (in which hundreds of different treatments were
tested in ischemic stroke models) is only 8.6 animals per group (median,
8; range, 1 to 54) (39). Ioannidis et al.( 34) examined a random sample
of in vivo animal studies published since 2006 and found that fewer than
30% of studies used randomization and fewer than 10% performed a
blinded assessment of outcome; with respect to experimental stroke research
, these percentages are even lower (40). A meta-analysis of 49
published preclinical meta-analyses (comprising 730 primary individual
studies in the field of neuroscience) revealed that the median statistical
power was only 21% (41). This means that of 100 studies that are
conducted to investigate a genuine treatment effect, only 21 will actually
be powered in such a way as to be able to demonstrate the effect, a result
of small sample sizes. Until as recently as several decades ago, clinical
trials were challenged by the same issues that face preclinical biomedical
research today, including low internal validity, low statistical power, and
a high rate of false positives. By developing and implementing rigorous
standards for the design, execution, analysis, and reporting of studies,
today’sclinicaltrialscandeliverrobust and relevant results. Learning—
and adopting key measures—from current clinical trial design (for example
, randomization, blinding, and a priori power analysis), as in our
pRCT, may help to overcome the current crisis of preclinical translational
medicine. Such an approach has clear advantages over a meta-analysis,
which pools results from studies with different methodological and statistical
standards, potentially differing protocols, and lack of monitoring.
In contrast, as explained in detail below, our pRCT approach aimed to
harmonize protocols and warranted a prospective, blinded, and randomized
study design, central monitoring of data quality, and centralized
analysis and data deposition.
Here, we used the two most common experimental models of ischemic
stroke to test a drug candidate that is already being tested in a phase
2 clinical trial after only a few, small-scale, single-center studies in mice.
In all but one case (8), this approach in stroke research has led until now
to costly failures and the exposure of patients to ineffective—or potentially
harmful—drugs (42). Many other medical fields share this frustrating
experience. The primary objective in the design of our study
was to achieve maximum harmonization of the methods used by the
various participating study centers. The basic protocol, as well as the
primary and secondary end points, was predefined by coordination between
the six laboratories. In clinical trials, patient care among various
trial sites is relatively uniform and performed in accordance with national
and international guidelines. In our study, achieving harmonization
of the materials and standard operating procedures was a challenge
in the initial phase of our study because the various laboratories generally
use different strategies for testing drugs in the stroke models. We
achieved the best possible harmonization of the surgical procedures and
behavioral tests by using same-age and same-gender mice obtained
from the same commercial breeder, centrally supplying all critical
materials (for example, the filaments used to induce transient stroke),
and defining the methods used for the surgical procedures, behavioral
tests, and data acquisition. Severalfactors could not be harmonized fully
, including the use of specific anesthetics and analgesics (a result of
differences in local regulations regarding the conduct of animal
experiments), the expertise of the surgeons, postsurgical care, body temperature
maintenance, and monitoring of cerebral blood flow after vessel
occlusion; all of these factors can potentially influence stroke
outcome. Nevertheless, comparable differences in equipment, legal requirements
, and the skills of the medical personnel also confound most
clinical RCTs. Other variables included between-site differences in the
use of sedation protocols, in postoperative anesthesia and analgesic
drugs, and in mouse microbiota.
These remaining methodological differences might actually increase
the robustness of our obtained results with respect to clinical translation.
Indeed, we were able to demonstrate that drug efficacy could be demonstrated
despite the above-mentioned procedural differences. Furthermore
, increasing the sample size by pooling the efforts of multiple
laboratories reduced statistical variability and increased sensitivity of
outcome measures such as the infarct volume in the cMCAO model,
cerebral leukocyte counts, and the Neuroscore.
Another aspect of the study that was handled individually by each
study site was the approval of the animal experiments. Because of differing
regulatory processes in Spain, France, Italy, and Germany, a uniform
approval for all European partner sites was not achievable despite
the European directive 2010/63/EU. However, future pRCTs could get
approval more easily or via a single-point process for all partner sites if
pRCTs showed more robust results than a single study and were regarded
as a part of the preclinical evaluation of drug development.
Natalizumab, a humanized anti-CD49d antibody, is currently one of
themosteffectivedisease-modifyi ng drugs for multiple sclerosis (19).
With more than 7 years of clinical use, the efficacy and safety profiles
for natalizumab are well established. The major risk associated with this
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 5
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
treatment approach (the induction of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
) usually emerges after long-term treatment, but not after a
single dose. Recently, several research groups established that lymphocyte
invasion plays a role in stroke pathophysiology (20, 43–46). For
example, lymphocyte-deficient mice have substantially smaller lesion
volumes compared to wild-type mice (43). Therefore, targeting the
adaptive immune system is a promising therapeutic strategy for stroke.
However, the contribution of secondary neuroinflammation to poststroke
pathophysiology is far less explored, and the translatability of
murine mechanisms to the human situation regarding stroke immunology
is still under discussion (47, 48). On the basis of previous experimental
studies with anti-CD49d antibodies in stroke models (20–22)
and the safety data on natalizumab use in patients with multiple sclerosis
, a phase 2 clinical trial was initiated recently to test the effect of natalizumab
in patients with acute ischemic stroke [ACTION (Effect of
Natalizumab on Infarct Volume in Acute Ischemic Stroke) trial, Clinical-
Trials.gov identifier: NCT01955707]. During the ACTION trial, an animal
study was published that reported no effect of natalizumab on stroke (24),
raising concerns about the efficacy of this approach (24, 49). In contrast,
in our multicenter study, consistent with previous results (20), we found
that anti-CD49d treatment exerted a modest yet significant neuroprotective
effect in the cMCAO model, but not in the fMCAO model of transient
occlusion, which causes extensive damage. Notably, this protective effect
was statistically significant when the cMCAO results were pooled from all
centers but not when analyzed in each individual center. When we pooled
results from both stroke models, no significant treatment effect was observed.
The difference in the neuroprotective efficacy of anti-CD49d treatment
between the two models might be attributed to biological differences in the
underlying pathophysiology and/or insufficient statistical power as a result
of the unexpectedly high variability in the fMCAO model. In a head-tohead
comparison of the fMCAO and cMCAO models, the authors found
large differences in neuroinflammatory markers between the two models
(26). Unexpectedly, moderate-sized cortical lesions, which appeared after
permanent occlusion in the cMCAO model, induced higher levels of leukocyte
brain invasion, microgliosis, and proinflammatory cytokine release
than did the extensive hemispheric lesions of the transient ischemia model
(26). Consistent with these results, we also found about twofold higher cerebral
leukocyte counts after cMCAO than fMCAO. However, it should be
noted that different time points (4 days after fMCAO versus 7 days after
cMCAO) were used in the two models because of the high mortality rate in
the fMCAO-treated mice after 4 to 5 days; moreover, the cMCAO model
requires craniectomy and penetration of the dura. However, a recent study
by Chu et al. reported twofold higher cerebral leukocyte cell counts after
permanent occlusion by a filament in the fMCAO model compared to
transient occlusion in the same stroke model, indicating that there may
be pronounced leukocyte brain invasion in situations in which reperfusion
is not established, regardless of the stroke model used (50). In our study, the
cerebral leukocyte counts in the anti-CD49d–treatedcMCAOgroup(the
permanent occlusion model) were considerably higher than in the fMCAO
group, and we found no treatment effect of anti-CD49d on the relatively
low leukocyte numbers in the fMCAO model. Therefore, inhibition of the
migration of leukocytes into the brain with anti-CD49d antibodies may be
more effective in strokes that trigger a more robust inflammatory reaction.
This possibility has been generally overlooked in preclinical testing of immunotherapeutics
for stroke, and it has also not been considered in the
design of clinical studies.
Because of its unique design (pooling results from five centers and
the unprecedented large sample size in a single preclinical experiment),
our study provides a critical view of commonly used methods in experimental
stroke research. The variability of outcomes differed substantially
between the two models; specifically, the overall SD in the
control-treated cMCAO group was 30% [mean (SD), 8.9 (2.7); n =25
mice], which is considerably lower than the surprisingly high SD in the
control-treated fMCAO group [53%; mean (SD), 36.4 (19.9); n = 49].
Furthermore, our study also revealed an unexpectedly weak sensitivity
of some of the most widely used behavioral tests, particularly in the
cMCAO model, which induced only subtle neurological deficits. The rotarod
and adhesive tape removal tests are two of the most common tests
performed in experimental stroke research (51), and they have been successfully
used by each laboratory in our study. Nevertheless, the rotarod
test failed to detect poststroke deficits compared to sham surgery, even
after the test results were normalized to baseline values, thus excluding
intercenter differences. Moreover, the adhesive removal test results
showed wide variability, even after normalization, and therefore lacked
statistical power to detect treatment effects; nevertheless, this test was able
to detect significant deficits after cMCAO. In addition, the Neuroscore,
which was used to quantify deficits after fMCAO, also had high variability
and revealed only a moderate correlation between test results and
lesion volume. It was also apparent that the laboratory with previous
experience using the Neuroscore (center 2) obtained more consistent
results with this test than did laboratories that used this test for the first
time (fig. S3). This finding might reflect a more general challenge with
respect to harmonizing procedures, which was a necessary step in
designing our pRCT. For example, deciding a priori to use mice of a
specific age or deciding to centrally distribute the surgical material
might necessitate changes in local standard operating procedures,
which, in turn, could increase variability. Nevertheless, we reasoned that
harmonizing the basic procedures and using similar materials were essential
for achieving a multicenter,randomized, blinded pRCT, thereby
minimizing intercenter effects and facilitating the analysis of pooled
data based on group means.
Onthebasisofthepreviousconsiderationsandnewmethodological
insights gained in our study, we were able to define several points of
potential improvement for future pRCTs: an obvious limitation for
our analysis strategy was the constraint to a per-protocol analysis,
lacking an additional intention-to-treat analysis. This is due to a substantial
amount of missing data for the primary outcome measure (infarct
volume) because of mortality or no infarct demarcation. This
might be circumvented in future studies by using inclusion criteria similar
to clinical trials such as imaging modalities for confirmation of an
infarct, a defined neurological deficit range as an inclusion criterion, and
use of a behavioral readout marker or mortality as primary end point. In
analogy to clinical trials, which pool stroke patients with differing stroke
etiology, future pRCTs might also consider pooling outcome of different
models for testing drug efficacy.
One surprise in our study was the low performance of the behavioral
tests, as well as exceedingly high variability of the fMCAO model. It
would be desirable to evaluate such methodological characteristics in
“pretrials” before future pRCTs, with the aim to validate the used
methods and grade of harmonization in-between study centers before
performing the actual pRCT. Such a pretrial would also give the opportunity
to include a dose-escalation study for the investigated drug before
defining the dose for the pRCT. Finally, central assessment of behavioral
outcomes based on video recordings might reduce variability and
improve test sensitivity, which should be evaluated in a pretrial for
a future pRCT.
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 6
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(8.0.0.2542,587573302 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
Given the lack of funding for international collaborative confirmatory
research, the apparent lack of incentives for individual researchers
and laboratories, and the competitiveness associated with preclinical
biomedicine, so-called pRCT studies—although deemed necessary—are
often believed to be impossible to implement. Here, we report the feasibility
of this approach, despite the existence of several obstacles, and
we hope that this study will encourage researchers in all biomedical research
fields to consider forming similar consortia to perform essential
preclinical trials before advancing to clinical development; this approach
is particularly relevant to biomedical research fields that have
traditionally been hampered by lack of reproducibility and translational
roadblock. We estimated the total full cost of our study at about€165,000
($ 180,000), including more than€30,000 direct drug costs (table S1). Because
the use of pRCTs may avoid unnecessary clinical trials and improve
our ability to predict successful translation, these costs for a confirmatory
study seem reasonable (52).
Our study demonstrates that poststroke treatment with anti-CD49d
antibodies confers a neuroprotective benefit in a specific mouse model
of stroke. We found differences between the results from two ischemic
stroke models with respect to cerebral leukocyte invasion and the efficacy
of anti-CD49d treatment; therefore, future clinical trials testing immunotherapeutic
drugs for stroke will need to ensure that the included
study population feature a substantial neuroinflammatory reaction to
the brain injury, which may improve its potential to profit from such
therapeutic approaches. Finally, the ability of a pRCT to advance
translational research and increase the reliability of preclinical findings
should be tested by comparing the results of clinical trials with the
results of their preceding pRCTs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
A key objective of this study was to implement and to test the feasibility
of performing an international pRCT in experimental biomedicine. Another
objective was to use this pRCT approach to robustly test the neuroprotective
effect of CD49d-specific antibodies in two murine models of
experimental stroke. This study was performed from June 2013 (initiation
) through October 2014 (unblinding) by an international consortium
consisting of six independent research groups. The infarct volume
of the pooled samples from all centers and from each model was a predetermined
primary end point of the study. The secondary end points
were functional outcome and the migration of leukocytes into the brain.
The Munich study center (A.L.) initiated the trial, coordinated the study
design, and performed central data analysis, whereas the other five
centers [Caen (D.V.), Milan (M.-G.D.S.), Barcelona (A.M.P.), Munich
(N.P.), and Berlin (U.D. and A.R.)] contributed to study design, performed
the experimental part of the study, and validated centrally
determined infarct volumes. In total, 315 male C57BL/6J mice (8 to
10 weeks of age) were used [90 mice for cMCAOMCAO model (30 mice
per treated group) and 225 mice for fMCAOMCAO (75 mice per treated
group)]. Overall sample size per stroke model was determined a priori by
performing a power calculation with G*Power (version 3.1) software
using the two-tailed Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test for two groups. For
both models, analevelof0.05andapowerof0.9wererequired.Forthe
cMCAOMCAO model, a Cohen’s d ES of 0.9 was used [a conservative
assumption based on our previous results demonstrating an ES d of 1.2
(20)]. In contrast, previous studies using the fMCAO model in mice did
not detect a significant treatment effect that we could use to calculate ES.
Therefore, we assumed an ES dof 0.6 to be biologically relevant, a highly
conservative assumption based on our previous experience, which revealed
greater variability of infarct volume after fMCAO compared to
cMCAO. In addition, a 4-day mortality rate of 20% was assumed for
thefMCAOgroup.Thisyieldedafinalsamplesizeof29micepertreatment
group for cMCAO and 63 mice per treatment group for fMCAO.
Coded samples of anti-CD49d and control antibodies, as well as some
additionalitems(forexample,thefilamentsusedtooccludetheMCA
and the behavioral test equipment), were distributed to each study center.
The operational exclusion criteria were predefined (see below), and analytical
exclusion criteria (see specifications below) were defined during
dataacquisition.Themicewereallocatedtothetreatmentandsurgery
groups using randomization lists generated with an online randomizer
tool (www.randomizer.org) provided by the coordinating center. Treatment
,surgery,analysisofinfarctvolume,andsecondaryoutcomemeasures
were performed by researchers who were blinded with respect to
the treatment groups. Unblinding was performed after the statistical
analyses were completed.Digital scans of the brain sections and all analysis
files were stored on a central database that was accessible to all study
contributors. The complete set of data is reported, including outliers.
The full data set obtained from this study is publicly available at the figshare
repository (http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1289824). The
study protocol is available in the Supplementary Materials as fig. S6.
Animals
This study was conducted in accordancewith the respective national guidelines
regarding the use of experimental animals, and all procedures were
approved by the respective government and institutional committees for
the individual research groups [Munich: Regierungspräsidium Oberbayern;
Barcelona: Ethics Committee (CEEA) of the University of Barcelona
and the Departament d’Agricultura, Ramaderia,Pesca, Alimentació i Medi
Natural de la Generalitat de Catalunya; Milan: Institutional guidelines
and authorization by the Italian Ministry of Health; Berlin: Landesamt
für Gesundheit und Soziales, Berlin; and Caen: Regional ethics committee
of Lower Normandy]. Approval for the performed experiments was
reached at each study site by different means, such as including the experiments
in a 3-year laboratory program, as an addendum to an existing
license, or applying for a new license as a “proof-of-principle” study. In
total, 315 male C57BL/6J mice (8 to 10 weeks of age) were supplied to the
research groups from Charles River Laboratories (stock #664). The animals
were housed in a controlled temperature (22 ± 2°C) with a 12/12-hour
light/dark cycle and access to pelleted food and water ad libitum. The number
of mice per cage, the use of environmental enrichment, and food type
were all determined individually by each research group in accordance with
locally approved standard procedures. Where applicable, body weight
(measured daily) and body temperature (measured on the surgery day
and1,3,and7daysaftersurgery)were measured for each mouse. All procedures
regarding the study design, animal experiments, statistical analysis,
and data reporting fulfill the criteria of the ARRIVE (Animal Research: Reporting
of In Vivo Experiments) guidelines (see checklist in the Supplementary
Materials as fig. S7).
Antibody treatment
Animals received an intraperitoneal injection of antibodies 3 hours after
stroke was induced (by coagulation occlusion or filament insertion);
300 mg of monoclonal mouse anti-CD49d antibody (clone R1-2,
eBioscience) or rat IgG2b isotype control antibody (clone LTF-2, Bio
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 7
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-819457585)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
X Cell) was diluted to 1 mg/ml in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and
prewarmed to 37°C before injection. The antibody concentration was
chosen on the basis of information in two previous reports that used
thesameantibodycloneinexperimentalstrokemodels( 20, 24).
Transient MCAO (fMCAO) model
Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane in a 30 to 70% mixture of O
2
and N
2
O, and the temporal bone was exposed with an incision between the
ear and the eye. A laser Doppler probe (at centers 1, 3, and 4) was affixed to
the skull above the MCA territory. The animal was then placed in the supine
position. Using a midline neck incision, the common carotid artery
and the external carotid artery (right side, groups 1 to 3; left side, groups 4
and 5) were isolated and ligated; a 2-mm silicon-coated filament
(#701912PK5Re, Doccol) was threaded into the internal carotid artery,
and MCA occlusion was confirmed by a reduction in the corresponding
laser Doppler flow. After 60 min of occlusion, the animals were reanesthetized
, and the filament was removed. For the postsurgical survival period,
the animals were housed in their home cages with access to water and food.
Sham-operated control mice received the same surgical procedure, except
the filament was not inserted. Body temperature was maintained during
surgery using a feedback-controlled heating pad. Analgesia was provided
during surgery and in the postoperative phase in accordance with each
center’s local regulations.
Surgical exclusion criteria: Centers 1, 3, and 4 used laser Doppler flow
during the operation to confirm sufficient MCA occlusion (a reduction in
blood flow to <20% of the baseline value). In addition, at all five contributing
centers, mice that did not develop sufficient neurological deficits
(that is, Neuroscore <8) 24 or 48 hours after MCAO were excluded. Mice
that died during the observation period were excluded from all analyses,
but differences in the mortality rate between the treatment groups during
the observation period were determined.
Permanent MCAO (cMCAO) model
Centers 1, 2, and 3 performed the cMCAO procedure as described (53).
In brief, the animals were anesthetized with isoflurane in a 30 to 70%
mixture of O
2
and N
2
O and placed in a lateral position. The skin was
incised between the eye and the ear, the temporal muscle was removed,
and the MCA was identified. A burrhole was drilled over the MCA, and
the dura mater was removed carefully. The MCA was permanently occluded
with either bipolar electrocoagulation forceps or an electrocauterizer.
Permanent occlusion of the MCA was confirmed visually before
closing the wound with sutures. During surgery, body temperature was
maintained using a feedback-controlled heating pad. Sham-operated
mice received the same surgical procedure without MCA coagulation.
Surgical exclusion criteria: Mice that developed a subarachnoid hemorrhage
during surgery were excluded from the analysis. In addition, mice
that died during the observation period were excluded from analysis.
Functional outcome tests
The rotarod and adhesive removal tests were performed 1, 3, and 7 days
after cMCAO. These tests were chosen because they are the most
commonly used tests for measuring the effect of cMCAO, which results
in only minor behavioral deficits, and because these tests were used previously
by all three centers that performed the cMCAO model.
The rotarod test was used to measure coordination and sensorimotor
performancebeforeandaftercMCAO( 54). Mice were trained daily for
3daysbeforeMCAOorshamsurgery , and baseline performance was
recorded the day before cMCAO using the following strategy: the rod
accelerated from 8 to 40 rpm over 240 s, with a mean of three consecutivetrialspermouseandtimepoints.Thelatencytofallofftherodwas
recorded, and postsurgical performance was calculated by dividing the
postsurgical values by the individual animal’s baseline performance.
The adhesive removal test was used to evaluate sensory and motor deficits
(55). A round (4-mm-diameter) adhesive sticker was placed on the
palmar side of the forepaw; the same pressure was applied for each adhesive
application. The day before surgery (and at the indicated times after
cMCAO or sham surgery), three trials per test were performed. The latency
to contact the paw with the adhesive and the latency to remove the adhesive
were recorded. Motor performance was expressed as the difference between
the latency to contact the paw and the latency to remove the adhesive.
The Neuroscore was performed before surgery and 2 and 4 days after
fMCAO or sham surgery; this test was used to evaluate the general
status and focal neurologic dysfunction after fMCAO, which induces
substantial deficits in contrast to the cMCAO model, and was performed
as described (56). The score ranges from 0 (no deficits) to 56 (representing
the poorest performance in all items) and is calculated as the sum of
the general and focal deficits. The Neuroscore results were expressed
as a composite neurological score, which included the following general
deficits (scores): fur (0 to 2), ears (0 to 2), eyes (0 to 4), posture (0 to 4),
spontaneous activity (0 to 4), and epileptic behavior (0 to 12); and the
following focal deficits: body asymmetry (0 to 4), gait (0 to 4), climbing
on a surface inclined at 45° (0 to 4), circling behavior (0 to 4), front-limb
symmetry (0 to 4), circling behavior (0 to 4), and whisker response to
light touch (0 to 4).
Tissue sampling and processing
Mice were deeply anesthetized 7 days after cMCAO, 4 days after fMCAO,
and at the respective times for mice in the corresponding sham surgery
groups. The brain was removed, frozen immediately on powdered dry
ice,andstoredat−20°C. All biological samples were shipped on dry ice
to the central analysis center in Munich, where the samples were stored
at −80°C until further analysis and for central archiving. All brains were
cryosectioned by researchers who were blinded with respect to the surgery
and treatment groups. Coronal brain sections (20mm thick) were prepared
at 400-mm intervals and used to analyze infarct volume. In addition, 12-m
m-thick coronal sections were obtained at the level of the anterior commissure
and were used for immunohistochemistry. Sections were mounted on
Superfrost Plus slides (Thermo Scientific) and stored at−80°C.
Infarct volumetry
Infarct volume was measured in CV-stained sections as described (53).
In brief, one series of serial (20-mm-thick) sections from each animal
was air-dried at room temperature for30min.Theslideswerestained
with a 0.1% CV solution at 60°C for 10 min and then rinsed twice in
distilledwaterfor1min.Afterwashing and dehydration, the slides were
covered with Roti-Histokit mounting medium (Roth). CV-stained
sections were scanned at 600 dpi on a flatbed scanner (LiDE 210,
Canon). For the cMCAO model, the direct infarct demarcation on CV-
stained sections (unstained area) was measured after confirming the absenceofedemaattheinvestigatedtimepoint
(7daysaftercMCAOor
sham surgery). For the fMCAO model, we corrected the infarct volume
for edema with the following equation: (Ischemic area) = (Direct
lesion volume)−[(Ipsilateral hemisphere)−(Contralateral hemisphere)].
In both models, total infarct volume was determined by integrating the
measured areas and distances over thesections. To validate the sections
in the MCAO mice with missing lesion demarcation on CV staining,
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 8
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
neuronal loss was measured with the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL)
method (TUNEL Apoptosis Detection Kit, Millipore). All sections were
analyzed independently by two central investigators (G.L. and A.L.),
both of whom were blinded with respect to the treatment groups; the
mean of these two measurements was used for subsequent analyses. In
addition, the original CV-stained slides were returned to the respective
originating center for further validation. Interrater reliability between
the two central investigators and the individual participating centers
was measured and is shown in fig. S1.
Analytical exclusion criteria: The following criteria were used to exclude
samples from the analysis: (i) missing biological samples due to
the death of an animal before the study’s end point (day 4 for fMCAO
and day 7 for cMCAO;n= 23 mice excluded); (ii) overt mechanical damage
or disruption when preparing the brain sections, rendering the sample
unusable (n= 2 mice excluded); (iii) no ischemic brain lesion detectable in
the MCAO group (detected as demarcation on CV staining or no neuronal
apoptosis measured using TUNEL staining) (n = 27 mice excluded);
(iv)demarcationofanischemiclesiononCV-stainedsectionsinshamoperated
mice (n = 2 mice excluded); and (v) Neuroscore <8 points
24 hours after fMCAO (n= 6 mice excluded). The individual animals that
were excluded on the basis of the aforementioned criteria were also excluded
from the analysis of behavioral data sets and physiological parameters.
Immunofluorescence
We performed immunofluorescence staining for CD45 to identify leukocytes
that had infiltrated the brain. Coronal sections (12 mmthick)
were prepared at the level of the anterior commissure and dried at room
temperature for 1 hour. After rinsing in PBS (pH 7.4), the slides were
fixed with acetone at−20°C, rinsed in PBS, and incubated in blocking
buffer (BB) containing 0.1% Triton, 0.05% Tween 20, 10% fetal calf serum
, and 1% bovine serum albumin (w/v) in PBS at room temperature
for 1 hour. The slides were then incubated overnight at 4°C in anti-
CD45 antibody (1:100, clone 104-2, Abcam) in BB. The slides were then
rinsed in PBS and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature in Alexa
Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:100, Invitrogen). Finally, the
slides were rinsed in PBS, counterstained for 2 min with DAPI (1:4000,
Invitrogen), and mounted using Fluoromount medium (Sigma). The
slides were analyzed using an epifluorescence microscope (Axiovert
200M, Zeiss). CD45-positive cells were counted in one 12-mmsection
per brain at the position of the anterior commissure (about 0.1 mm rostral
to bregma). The infarct core was identified with corresponding
CV-stained sections, and this area was excluded from the localization
analysis and quantification of CD45-positive cells. For the cMCAO
model, the location of each CD45-positive cell was marked on a topographic
map according to the mouse brain atlas, yielding a cumulative
localization map of leukocyte invasion for each treatment group.
Statistical analysis
This study was designed as a prospective, multicenter, randomized
controlled trial of experimental ischemic stroke induced in mice via
two distinct models. The above-mentioned operational and analytical
exclusion criteria were applied. If a mouse met one or more of the exclusion
criteria, data and samples were excluded from all analyses. Sufficient
normal distribution of all data sets was verified by checking
histograms (unimodal distribution) and skewness (|skewness| <1).
Physiological parameters and cerebral leukocyte counts were analyzed
by ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple-comparison test (GraphPad
Prism 6.0). The characteristics of the samples obtained from the individual
centers (Table 1) were tested with Fisher’sexacttest,thec2test, or
ANOVA (where indicated), and mortality was analyzed by comparing
the survival curves with the log-rank (that is, Mantel-Cox) test (GraphPad
Prism 6.0). Infarct volume and behavioral deficits were tested using a
linear mixed-effects model to account for heterogeneity between centers
(SPSS version 22, IBM). We used random intercept models with treatment
group as the independent variable and infarct volume as the
dependent variable. ES estimates (standardized mean difference) were
calculated using inverse-variance weighting in a random-effects model
using RevMan version 5.3; RevMan 5.3 was also used to create the forest
plot in Fig. 2C. Correlation analysis for infarct volume and behavioral
deficits was performed using linear regression (GraphPad Prism). Concordance
analysis for interrater reliability was done using the Bland-
Altman method (GraphPad Prism) and calculation of ICCs (SPSS).
A two-sided significance level ofa= 0.05 for both primary hypotheses
was applied. P values for secondary hypotheses should be interpreted
cautiously as exploratory analyses. No adjustment for duality
of the two stroke models was applied. An overview of means and 95%
CI is available for all primary and secondary end points in table S2.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/7/299/299ra121/DC1
Fig. S1. Analyses for interrater concordance.
Fig. S2. Behavioral tests before and after cMCAO.
Fig. S3. Composite Neuroscore for functional deficits after fMCAO.
Fig. S4. Mortality after cMCAO and fMCAO.
Fig. S5. Physiological parameter analysis after cMCAO and fMCAO.
Fig. S6. Study protocol.
Fig. S7. The ARRIVE guidelines checklist.
Table S1. Study costs (in euro).
Table S2. fMCAO and cMCAO means and CIs.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. G. A. Donnan, M. Fisher, M. Macleod, S. M. Davis, Stroke. Lancet 371, 1612–1623 (2008).
2. Á. Chamorro, A. Meisel, A. M. Planas, X. Urra, D. van de Beek, R. Veltkamp, The immunology
of acute stroke. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 8, 401–410 (2012).
3. W. Hacke, M. Kaste, E. Bluhmki, M. Brozman, A. Dávalos, D. Guidetti, V. Larrue, K. R. Lees, Z. Medeghri,
T. Machnig, D. Schneider, R. von Kummer, N. Wahlgren, D. Toni; ECASS Investigators, Thrombolysis
with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic stroke. N. Engl. J. Med. 359, 1317–1329 (2008).
4. E. C. Jauch, J. L. Saver, H. P. Adams Jr., A. Bruno, J. J. Connors, B. M. Demaerschalk, P. Khatri,
P.W.McMullanJr.,A.I.Qureshi,K.Rosenfield,P.A.Scott,D.R.Summers,D.Z.Wang,
M. Wintermark, H. Yonas; American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular
Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease, Council on Clinical Cardiology, Guidelines for the
early management of patients with acute ischemic stroke: A guideline for healthcare professionals
from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 44, 870–947 (2013).
5. V. E. O’Collins, M. R. Macleod, G. A. Donnan, L. L. Horky, B. H. van der Worp, D. W. Howells,
1,026 experimental treatments in acute stroke. Ann. Neurol. 59, 467–477 (2006).
6. C. Iadecola, J. Anrather, Stroke research at a crossroad: Asking the brain for directions. Nat.
Neurosci. 14, 1363–1368 (2011).
7. M. A. Moskowitz, Brain protection: Maybe yes, maybe no. Stroke 41, S85–S86 (2010).
8. J. A. Zivin, M. Fisher, U. DeGirolami, C. C. Hemenway, J. A. Stashak, Tissue plasminogen activator
reduces neurological damage after cerebral embolism. Science 230,1289 –1292 (1985).
9. K. A. Hossmann, The two pathophysiologies of focal brain ischemia: Implications for
translational stroke research. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32, 1310–1316 (2012).
10. M. McNutt, Journals unite for reproducibility. Science 346, 679 (2014).
11. C. Kilkenny, W. J. Browne, I. C. Cuthill, M. Emerson, D. G. Altman, Improving bioscience research
reporting: The ARRIVE guidelines for reporting animal research. PLOS Biol. 8, e1000412 (2010).
12. D. J. Lefer, R. Bolli, Development of an NIH consortium for preclinicAl AssESsment of CARdioprotective
therapies (CAESAR): A paradigm shift in studies of infarct size limitation. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol.
Ther. 16, 332–339 (2011).
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 9
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1351010297)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
13. U. Dirnagl, A. Hakim, M. Macleod, M. Fisher, D. Howells, S. M. Alan, G. Steinberg, A. Planas,
J. Boltze, S. Savitz, C. Iadecola, S. Meairs, A concerted appeal for international cooperation
in preclinical stroke research. Stroke 44, 1754–1760 (2013).
14. P. M. Bath, M. R. Macleod, A. R. Green, Emulating multicentre clinical stroke trials: A new
paradigm for studying novel interventions in experimental models of stroke. Int. J. Stroke
4, 471–479 (2009).
15. J. Kimmelman, J. S. Mogil, U. Dirnagl, Distinguishing between exploratory and confirmatory
preclinical research will improve translation. PLOS Biol. 12, e1001863 (2014).
16. Q. Wang, X. N. Tang, M. A. Yenari, The inflammatory response in stroke. J. Neuroimmunol.
184,53 –68 (2006).
17. B. Engelhardt, L. Sorokin, The blood–brain and the blood–cerebrospinal fluid barriers:
Function and dysfunction. Semin. Immunopathol. 31, 497–511 (2009).
18. B. Engelhardt, R. M. Ransohoff, The ins and outs of T-lymphocyte trafficking to the CNS:
Anatomical sites and molecular mechanisms. Trends Immunol. 26, 485–495 (2005).
19. R. Rudick, C. Polman, D. Clifford, D. Miller, L. Steinman, Natalizumab: Bench to bedside and
beyond. JAMA Neurol. 70, 172–182 (2013).
20. A. Liesz, W. Zhou, É. Mracskó, S. Karcher, H. Bauer, S. Schwarting, L. Sun, D. Bruder, S. Stegemann,
A. Cerwenka, C. Sommer, A. H. Dalpke, R. Veltkamp, Inhibition of lymphocyte trafficking shields
the brain against deleterious neuroinflammation after stroke. Brain 134, 704–720 (2011).
21. K. Becker, D. Kindrick, J. Relton, J. Harlan, R. Winn, Antibody to the a4 integrin decreases
infarct size in transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 32, 206–211 (2001).
22. J. K. Relton, K. E. Sloan, E. M. Frew, E. T. Whalley, S. P. Adams, R. R. Lobb, Inhibition of a4
integrin protects against transient focal cerebral ischemia in normotensive and hypertensive
rats. Stroke 32, 199–205 (2001).
23. J. Neumann, M. Riek-Burchardt, J. Herz, T. R. Doeppner, R. König, H. Hütten, E. Etemire, L. Männ,
A. Klingberg, T. Fischer, M. W. Görtler, H. J. Heinze, P. Reichardt, B. Schraven, D. M. Hermann,
K. G. Reymann, M. Gunzer, Very-late-antigen-4 (VLA-4)-mediated brain invasion by neutrophils
leads to interactions with microglia, increased ischemic injury and impaired behavior in
experimental stroke. Acta Neuropathol. 129,259 –277 (2015).
24. F. Langhauser, P. Kraft, E. Göb, J. Leinweber, M. K. Schuhmann, K. Lorenz, M. Gelderblom,
S. Bittner, S. G. Meuth, H. Wiendl, T. Magnus, C. Kleinschnitz, Blocking of a4 integrin does
not protect from acute ischemic stroke in mice. Stroke 45,1799 –1806 (2014).
25. S. T. Carmichael, Rodent models of focal stroke: Size, mechanism, and purpose. NeuroRx 2,
396–409 (2005).
26. W. Zhou, A. Liesz, H. Bauer, C. Sommer, B. Lahrmann, N. Valous, N. Grabe, R. Veltkamp,
Postischemic brain infiltration of leukocyte subpopulations differs among murine permanent
and transient focal cerebral ischemia models. Brain Pathol. 23,34 –44 (2013).
27. F. Prinz, T. Schlange, K. Asadullah, Believe it or not: How much can we rely on published
data on potential drug targets? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10, 712 (2011).
28. C. G. Begley, L. M. Ellis, Drug development: Raise standards for preclinical cancer research.
Nature 483, 531–533 (2012).
29. S. Perrin, Preclinical research: Make mouse studies work. Nature 507, 423–425 (2014).
30. G. N. Duda, D. W. Grainger, M. L. Frisk, L. Bruckner-Tuderman, A. Carr, U. Dirnagl, K. M. Einhäupl,
S.Gottschalk,E.Gruskin,C.Huber,C.H.June,D.J.Mooney,E.T.Rietschel,G.Schütte,
W. Seeger, M. M. Stevens, R. Urban, A. Veldman, G. Wess, H. D. Volk, Changing the mindset in
life sciences toward translation: A consensus. Sci. Transl. Med. 6, 264cm12 (2014).
31. M. Endres, B. Engelhardt, J. Koistinaho, O. Lindvall, S. Meairs, J. P. Mohr, A. Planas, N. Rothwell,
M. Schwaninger, M. E. Schwab, D. Vivien, T. Wieloch, U. Dirnagl, Improving outcome after
stroke: Overcoming the translational roadblock. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 25,268 –278 (2008).
32. S. R. Bornstein, J. Licinio, Improving the efficacy of translational medicine by optimally
integrating health care, academia and industry. Nat. Med. 17, 1567–1569 (2011).
33. U. Dirnagl, M. Fisher, International, multicenter randomized preclinical trials in translational
stroke research: It’s time to act. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32, 933–935 (2012).
34. J. P. Ioannidis, S. Greenland, M. A. Hlatky, M. J. Khoury, M. R. Macleod, D. Moher, K. F. Schulz,
R. Tibshirani, Increasing value and reducing waste in research design, conduct, and analysis.
Lancet 383,166 –175 (2014).
35. J. P. Ioannidis, Why most published research findings are false. PLOS Med. 2,e124(2005).
36. N. A. Crossley, E. Sena, J. Goehler, J. Horn, B. van der Worp, P. M. Bath, M. Macleod, U. Dirnagl,
Empirical evidence of bias in the design of experimental stroke studies: A metaepidemiologic
approach. Stroke 39,929 –934 (2008).
37. D. W. Howells, E. S. Sena, M. R. Macleod, Bringing rigour to translational medicine. Nat. Rev.
Neurol. 10,37 –43 (2014).
38. U. Dirnagl, Bench to bedside: The quest for quality in experimental stroke research. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 26, 1465–1478 (2006).
39. CAMARADES (2014).
40. K. K. Tsilidis, O. A. Panagiotou, E. S. Sena, E. Aretouli, E. Evangelou, D. W. Howells, R. Al-Shahi Salman,
M. R. Macleod, J. P. Ioannidis, Evaluation of excess significance bias in animal studies of neurological
diseases. PLOS Biol. 11, e1001609 (2013).
41. K. S. Button, J. P. Ioannidis, C. Mokrysz, B. A. Nosek, J. Flint, E. S. Robinson, M. R. Munafò,
Power failure: Why small sample size undermines the reliability of neuroscience. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 14, 365–376 (2013).
42. Enlimomab Acute Stroke Trial Investigators, Use of anti-ICAM-1 therapy in ischemic stroke:
Results of the Enlimomab Acute Stroke Trial. Neurology 57, 1428–1434 (2001).
43. C. Kleinschnitz, N. Schwab, P. Kraft, I. Hagedorn, A. Dreykluft, T. Schwarz, M. Austinat, B. Nieswandt,
H. Wiendl, G. Stoll, Early detrimental T-cell effects in experimental cerebral ischemia are neither
related to adaptive immunity nor thrombus formation. Blood 115, 3835–3842 (2010).
44. T. Shichita, Y. Sugiyama, H. Ooboshi, H. Sugimori, R. Nakagawa, I. Takada, T. Iwaki, Y. Okada, M. Iida,
D. J. Cua, Y. Iwakura, A. Yoshimura, Pivotal role of cerebral interleukin-17–producinggdT cells in the
delayed phase of ischemic brain injury. Nat. Med. 15,946 –950 (2009).
45. A. E. Baird, The forgotten lymphocyte: Immunity and stroke. Circulation 113, 2035–2036 (2006).
46. G. Yilmaz, T. V. Arumugam, K. Y. Stokes, D. N. Granger, Role of T lymphocytes and interferon-g
in ischemic stroke. Circulation 113,2105 –2112 (2006).
47.  J.Seok,H.S.Warren,A.G.Cuenca,M.N.Mindrinos,H.V.Baker,W.Xu,D.R.Richards,
G. P. McDonald-Smith, H. Gao, L. Hennessy, C. C. Finnerty, C. M. López, S. Honari, E. E. Moore,
J. P. Minei, J. Cuschieri, P. E. Bankey, J. L. Johnson, J. Sperry, A. B. Nathens, T. R. Billiar, M. A. West,
M. G. Jeschke, M. B. Klein, R. L. Gamelli, N. S. Gibran, B. H. Brownstein, C. Miller-Graziano,
S.E.Calvano,P.H.Mason,J.P.Cobb,L.G.Rahme,S.F.Lowry,R.V.Maier,L.L.Moldawer,
D. N. Herndon, R. W. Davis, W. Xiao, R. G. Tompkins; Inflammation and Host Response to
Injury, Large Scale Collaborative Research Program, Genomic responses in mouse models
poorly mimic human inflammatory diseases.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.110,3507 –3512 (2013).
48. J. Mestas, C. C. Hughes, Of mice and not men: Differences between mouse and human
immunology. J. Immunol. 172, 2731–2738 (2004).
49. W. R. Schabitz, U. Dirnagl, Are we ready to translate T-cell transmigration in stroke? Stroke
45, 1610–1611 (2014).
50. H. X. Chu, H. A. Kim, S. Lee, J. P. Moore, C. T. Chan, A. Vinh, M. Gelderblom, T. V. Arumugam,
B. R. Broughton, G. R. Drummond, C. G. Sobey, Immune cell infiltration in malignant middle
cerebral artery infarction: Comparison with transient cerebral ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 34, 450–459 (2014).
51. M. Balkaya, J. M. Kröber, A. Rex, M. Endres, Assessing post-stroke behavior in mouse
models of focal ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33, 330–338 (2013).
52. D. W. Howells, E. S. Sena, V. O’Collins, M. R. Macleod, Improving the efficiency of the development
of drugs for stroke. Int. J. Stroke 7, 371–377 (2012).
53. G. Llovera, S. Roth, N. Plesnila, R. Veltkamp, A. Liesz, Modeling stroke in mice: Permanent
coagulation of the distal middle cerebral artery. J. Vis. Exp. e51729 (2014).
54. B. J. Jones, D. J. Roberts, The quantitative measurement of motor inco-ordination in naive
mice using an accelerating rotarod. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 20, 302–304 (1968).
55. V. Bouet, M. Boulouard, J. Toutain, D. Divoux, M. Bernaudin, P. Schumann-Bard, T. Freret,
The adhesive removal test: A sensitive method to assess sensorimotor deficits in mice. Nat.
Protoc. 4, 1560–1564 (2009).
56. F. Orsini, P. Villa, S. Parrella, R. Zangari, E. R. Zanier, R. Gesuete, M. Stravalaci, S. Fumagalli, R. Ottria,
J. J. Reina, A. Paladini, E. Micotti, R. Ribeiro-Viana, J. Rojo, V. I. Pavlov, G. L. Stahl, A. Bernardi,
M. Gobbi, M. G. De Simoni, Targeting mannose-binding lectin confers long-lasting protection
with a surprisingly wide therapeutic window in cerebral ischemia. Circulation 126, 1484–1494
(2012).
Acknowledgments: We thank F. Marchesi and D. Olivari for their skilled technical assistance.Funding:
This work was supported by the excellence cluster of the German research foundation “Munich Cluster
for Systems Neurology (SyNergy)”to A.L. and N.P. and the Daimler and Benz Foundation (32-05/12) to
A.L.; grants from the Spanish Ministry of Economy (MINECO; SAF2011-30492 and SAF2014-56279) to A.M.P.;
grants from the INSERM (French National Institute for Health and MedicalResearch), the University of
Caen Basse-Normandie, and the GIS IBiSA to D.V.; the Italian Ministry of Health Young Investigators Award
#GR-2008-1136044 to E.R.Z.; and grants from Bundesministerium für Bildung, Wissenschaft, Forschung
und Technologie (BMBF) (01EO0801, Center for Stroke Research Berlin) and the Hermann and Lilly
Schilling Foundation to U.D. Author contributions: A.L. initiated this trial; A.L., U.D., A.M.P., N.P., M.-G.D.S.,
and D.V. designed the study protocol, supervised the study, and reviewed original data sets; G.L. performed
the central analysis of all biological samples and data sets; V.A., C.F., M.F.-F., B.H., K.H., G.L., U.M.,
C.O., H.P., C.P., A.R., S.R., A.S.-P., and E.R.Z. performed experiments; U.G. performed central statistical analysis
; and U.D., A.L., G.L., A.M.P., N.P., M.-G.D.S., and D.V. wrote the manuscript.Competing interests:The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: The full
data set obtained from this study is publicly available at the figshare repository (http://dx.doi.org/
10.6084/m9.figshare.1289824).
Submitted 24 February 2015
Accepted 23 June 2015
Published 5 August 2015
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa9853
Citation: G. Llovera, K. Hofmann, S. Roth, A. Salas-Pérdomo, M. Ferrer-Ferrer, C. Perego, E. R. Zanier,
U. Mamrak, A. Rex, H. Party, V. Agin, C. Fauchon, C. Orset, B. Haelewyn, M.-G. De Simoni, U. Dirnagl,
U. Grittner, A. M. Planas, N. Plesnila, D. Vivien, A. Liesz, Results of a preclinical randomized controlled
multicenter trial (pRCT): Anti-CD49d treatment for acute brain ischemia.Sci. Transl. Med.7, 299ra121
(2015).
RESEARCH  ARTICLE
www.ScienceTranslationalMedicine.org 5 August 2015 Vol 7 Issue 299 299ra121 10
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1582894580)
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/7/299/299ra121
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2015/08/03/7.299.299ra121.DC1
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/154/154ra133.full
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/156/156ps20.full
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/257/257re7.full
[Link]
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/permissions.dtl
[Link]
http://stm.sciencemag.org/
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaa9853]
 (299), 299ra121. [doi: 7 Science Translational Medicine 
Denis Vivien and Arthur Liesz (August 5, 2015) 
Ulrich Dirnagl, Ulrike Grittner, Anna M. Planas, Nikolaus Plesnila,
Fauchon, Cyrille Orset, Benoît Haelewyn, Maria-Grazia De Simoni, 
Uta Mamrak, Andre Rex, Hélène Party, Véronique Agin, Claudine
Salas-Pérdomo, Maura Ferrer-Ferrer, Carlo Perego, Elisa R. Zanier, 
Gemma Llovera, Kerstin Hofmann, Stefan Roth, Angelica
(pRCT): Anti-CD49d treatment for acute brain ischemia
Results of a preclinical randomized controlled multicenter trial
Editor's Summary
to translational research.
lessons learned from their experience for further application of preclinical randomized controlled trials
effect in the other model, in which the animal suffered a larger injury. The authors outline the many 
both leukocyte invasion and infarct volume after a small cortical stroke but that it did not have any
six-center, preclinical, randomized controlled trial in mice show that the antibody significantly reduced 
which inhibits leukocyte migration into the brain, in two mouse models of stroke. Data from their
randomized, controlled clinical trial to a preclinical investigation. They tested an antibody to CD49d, 
. have applied the principles of the gold-standard et al clinical trial reliability. Now, Llovera 
have improved -- designed to ensure valid conclusions for formal drug approval -- These refinements
Over the last few decades, clinical trial design and analysis have become increasingly stringent.
Tested, just like a human
This information is current as of January 10, 2017. 
The following resources related to this article are available online at http://stm.sciencemag.org. 
Article Tools
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/7/299/299ra121
article tools: 
Visit the online version of this article to access the personalization and
Materials
Supplemental
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2015/08/03/7.299.299ra121.DC1
"Supplementary Materials"
Related Content
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/6/257/257re7.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/156/156ps20.full
http://stm.sciencemag.org/content/scitransmed/4/154/154ra133.full
's sites: Science The editors suggest related resources on 
Permissions
http://www.sciencemag.org/about/permissions.dtl
Obtain information about reproducing this article: 
 is a registered trademark of AAAS. Medicine
Science Translational Association for the Advancement of Science; all rights reserved. The title 
Science, 1200 New York Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20005. Copyright 2017 by the American
weekly, except the last week in December, by the American Association for the Advancement of 
 (print ISSN 1946-6234; online ISSN 1946-6242) is published Science Translational Medicine
 on January 10, 2017 http://stm.sciencemag.org/ Downloaded from 
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1231522689)
