MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 11: 3279-3284, 2015

Novel gradient echo sequence‑based amide proton
transfer magnetic resonance imaging in
hyperacute cerebral infarction
DEXIAO HUANG, SHENKAI LI, ZHUOZHI DAI, ZHIWEI SHEN, GEN YAN and RENHUA WU
Department of Medical Imaging, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Medical College of Shantou University,
Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China
Received March 13, 2014; Accepted November 25, 2014
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3165
Abstract. In the progression of ischemia, pH is important and
is essential in elucidating the association between metabolic
disruption, lactate formation, acidosis and tissue damage.
Chemical exchange‑dependent saturation transfer (CEST)
imaging can be used to detect tissue pH and, in particular, a
specific form of CEST magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
termed amide proton transfer (APT) MRI, which is sensitive
to pH and can detect ischemic lesions, even prior to diffusion
abnormalities. The critical parameter governing the ability of
CEST to detect pH is the sequence. In the present study, a novel
strategy was used, based on the gradient echo sequence (GRE),
which involved the insertion of a magnetization transfer pulse
in each repetition time (TR) and minimizing the TR for in vivo
APT imaging. The proposed GRE‑APT MRI method was
initially verified using a tissue‑like pH phantom and optimized
MRI parameters for APT imaging. In order to assess the range
of acute cerebral infarction, rats (n=4) were subjected to
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and MRI scanning
at 7 telsa (T). Hyperacute ischemic tissue damage was characterized using multiparametric imaging techniques, including
diffusion, APT and T2‑Weighted MRI. By using a magnetization transfer pulse and minimizing TR, GRE‑APT provided
high spatial resolution and a homogeneous signal, with clearly
distinguished cerebral anatomy. The GRE‑APT and diffusion
MRI were significantly correlated with lactate content and
the area of cerebral infarction in the APT and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps matched consistently during the
hyperacute period. In addition, compared with the infarction
area observed on the ADC MRI map, the APT map contained

Correspondence to: Professor Renhua Wu, Department of Medical

Imaging, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Medical College of
Shantou University, 22 Xin Lin Road, Shantou, Guangdong 515041,
P.R. China
E‑mail: rhwu@stu.edu.cn

Key words: hyperacute ischemia, amide proton transfer, chemical
exchange saturation transfer, pH, stroke

tissue, which had not yet been irreversibly damaged. Therefore,
GRE‑APT MRI waa able to detect ischemic lactic acidosis
with sensitivity and spatiotemporal resolution, suggesting the
potential use of pH MRI as a surrogate imaging marker of
impaired tissue metabolism for the diagnosis and prognosis of
hyperacute stroke.
Introduction
Ischemic stroke is a severe disease, which often results in
mortality or disability. Previous studies on ischemic stroke
have demonstrated that thrombolytic treatment increased
the survival rate and reduced disability in stroke patients (1).
However, early intervention, which stimulates the reperfusion
of ischemic penumbra is essential for effective therapeutic
outcomes following ischemic stroke  (1,2). Therefore, the
availability of non‑invasive imaging technologies, which are
able to rapidly and specifically evaluate ischemic penumbra,
are required for the progression of therapeutic research into
acute stroke. The penumbra has been previously defined as a
large area of metabolically‑impaired perfusion deficit, which
is able to retain cellular polarization (3,4). In the last 20 years,
perfusion‑weighted imaging (PWI) and diffusion‑weighted
imaging (DWI) in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
have become the most well‑established imaging techniques
for detecting regions of reduced blood flow and cytotoxic
edema, respectively (5,6). Furthermore, PWI/DWI mismatch
is considered to represent ischemic tissue, which has not yet
undergone severe tissue damage and has been used surgically to
define the ischemic penumbra (7‑9). However, ischemic tissue
damage is complex and multifactorial and PWI/DWI mismatch
provides only an approximation of the penumbra (10,11). In
addition, the diagnostic accuracy of PWI/DWI mismatch
remains controversial. Therefore, novel imaging techniques
are required to augment existing penumbral imaging, provide
greater insight into disease pathophysiology and assist in
guiding treatment decisions.
Ischemic stroke induces a complex cascade of metabolic
disruption in the cerebral tissue, which alters oxygen and
glucose metabolism, tissue acidosis, adenosine triphosphate
depletion and, ultimately, cerebral infarction (12‑15). During
ischemia, anaerobic metabolism and the formation of lactate

3280

HUANG et al: GRADIENT ECHO-AMIDE PROTEIN TRANSFER MRI IN HYPERACUTE CEREBRAL INFARCTION

lead to a decreased pH in the ischemic area. The disruption
of metabolic processes may then be further exacerbated by
hypoperfusion and the reduced buffering capacity of bicarbonate at an acidic pH, which may result in further tissue
acidification (16,17). As energy metabolism is essential for cell
viability and is disrupted at levels of blood flow that are higher
than those that cause infarction, monitoring tissue metabolism
may offer additional insights into early ischemia prior to irreversible damage (18).
As the chemical exchange between amide protons and
bulk tissue water is pH‑dependent, amide proton chemical
exchange saturation transfer (CEST) MRI is able to assess
tissue pH in vivo (19‑23). In particular, a specific form of CEST
MRI, termed amide proton transfer (APT) MRI, has been
identified as sensitive to pH and can detect ischemic lesions
prior to diffusion abnormalities (2,23‑27). However, the sensitivity of CEST MRI requires enhanced due to the weak CEST
effects (28‑35). The sequence and optimization of parameters
are the key features of the CEST experiments to focus on in
the improvement of CEST sensitivity. The present study used
a novel strategy based on the gradient echo sequence (GRE)
combined with magnetic transfer and an in vivo rat acute
cerebral infarction model was used to detect the ischemic
penumbra using GRE‑APT MRI.
Materials and methods
Phantom preparation. A multi‑pH CEST gel phantom
composed of creatine and low gelling point (LGP) agarose
(Sigma‑Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was prepared, as
previously described (20). In brief, 1% agarose was added to
phosphate‑buffered saline (PBS; Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK). The
phantom was microwave‑heated to boiling and then cooled for
~25 mins in a water bath set at 50˚C (Cole‑Palmer, Vernon
Hills, IL, USA). Creatine (Sigma‑Aldrich) was then added to
the gel solution to final concentrations of 50, 100 and 200 mM,
followed by serial titration to pH 7.0 (EuTech Instruments,
Ayer Raja, Singapore). The solutions were transferred into
separate 10 ml centrifuge tubes for each creatinine concentration, which were then sealed and inserted into a phantom
holder (63 mm Swift Cradle; Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa
Clara, CA, USA). A central tube filled with 1% agarose‑gel in
the absence of creatine was used as a background control.
Acute stroke animal model. The study was approved by the
ethics committee of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Shantou
University Medical College, Guangdong, China. The protocol
was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee. Adult male Sprague‑Dawley (SD) rats (n=4) aged
7‑8 weeks (190‑210 g) were obtained from Shantou University
Medical College Laboratory Animal Center (Shantou, China)
and kept in a 10/14 h light/dark cycle at 22‑26˚C with access
to 30‑40g rat diet and 60‑70 ml water per day. The rats underwent imaging within 0.5‑3 h, and then again 24 h following
permanent filament middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO),
while remaining under ~1.5% isoflurane‑induced anesthesia
(Shandong Keyuan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Jinan, China),
as previously described (2). The heart rate and blood oxygen
partial pressure of the rats were monitored online using a
real‑time Nonin Pulse Oximeter 8600 (Nonin Medical, Inc.,

Plymouth, MN, USA). Standard permanent MCAO was induced
by inserting a 4‑0 nylon suture (Monosof 4‑0; Tyco Healthcare,
Zaltbommel, Netherlands) into the lumen of the internal carotid
artery in order to block the origin of the middle cerebral artery.
Following MRI using an Agilent 7.0 T animal MRI scanner
(Agilent Technologies, Inc.) during the period of acute ischemia
between 0.5 and 3 h, the animals were revived and provided
with free access to food and water. The same anesthesia procedure was then repeated for a 24 h post MCAO follow‑up MRI.
T 2 ‑weighted hyperintensity, which has previously been
confirmed as a reliable approach (33), was used to quantify the
levels of infarction by comparing the abnormal MR signal from
the MCAO side to that of the normal brain tissue.
MRI parameters. Using an Agilent 7.0 T animal MRI scanner
(Agilent Technologies, Inc.), the in vitro scanning parameters,
including repetition time (TR) value, echo time (TE) and flip
angle (FA) values of the gradient echo (GRE); FA value and
duration time (T) of the presaturation pulse and the average
readout direction x phase‑encoding direction (ROxPE), were
assessed to determine the optimal GRE parameter for hyperacute cerebral infarction. All experiments were performed
using an Agilent 7T/160 animal scanner with a volume radiofrequency (RF) coil. The routine imaging parameters were
set as follows: FA, 20˚; TR, minimum 26.6 ms; TE, minimum
2.31  ms; slice thickness, 2  mm; field of view, 60x60  mm;
number of averages, 1 and acquisition bandwidth, 50 kHz.
A GRE sequence with magnetization transfer was used. The
presaturation time was 20 ms and the FA was ~180˚. The total
scan duration changed according to the matrix (frequency
coding number x phase coding number) which determines the
resolution of the MR image. A duration of only 2.6 sec was
required for imaging with a 64x64 mm matrix. All images were
processed using the intrinsic VnmrJ 3.1A workstation (Agilent
Technologies, Inc.) and Matlab, version  7.13 (Mathworks,
Natick, MA, USA).
Method for CEST imaging. CEST imaging was processed using
asymmetric analysis. Three images were acquired, as follows:
A normal T1 image without RF offset (I0); a T1 image with
RF offset at the resonance of the labile protons (Ilib; 3.5 ppm)
and a T1 image with RF offset at the negative resonance point
relative to water (Iref; ‑3.5 ppm). The CEST imaging (ICEST) was
then calculated using the following formula (20):
ICEST=(Iref‑Ilib)/I0
Results
Determination of the Z‑spectrum. The APT MRI method
was initially verified using a tissue‑like pH phantom to optimize the APT imaging parameters at 7.0 T MRI (36). The
Z‑spectrum, obtained through monitoring the tissue‑like pH
phantom, presented a clear CEST effect at ~1.87 ppm (516 Hz
at 7.0 T) (Fig. 1A). In addition, the CEST effect and signal
intensity of the phantom tubes was positively correlated
with creatine concentration (Fig. 1B). The GRE‑APT MRI
measurements were markedly altered in global ischemia. As
shown in Fig. 2, the Z‑spectrum of the SD rats was obtained
in vivo by detecting the tissue water signal at 7.0 T MRI,

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 11: 3279-3284, 2015

3281

A

B

Figure 1. Z‑spectrum obtained by monitoring a tissue‑like pH phantom.
(A) A marked CEST effect was identified at 1.87 ppm (516 Hz at 7.0 T).
(B) CEST effect and signal intensity of phantom tubes were positively correlated with creatine concentration. CEST, chemical exchange‑dependent
saturation transfer.

following optimization of the MRI parameters, including FA,
TR, TE, slice thickness, field of view, number of excitations
and acquisition bandwidth, for sensitizing the proton exchange
of the endogenous proteins/peptides. The maximal change
in Z‑spectral intensity was observed at 3.5 ppm (1,050 Hz
at 7.0 T), which was obtained through processing with a fat
saturated frequency (Fsatfrq) function and corresponded to
specific amide protons representing a composite amide proton
chemical shift. This indicated that tissue pH can be assessed
and imaged using GRE‑APT MRI. A change in the Z‑spectra
was also observed a change at ‑3.5 ppm, where the CEST effect
was 94.4% on the normal side of the cerebrum and increased
to 95.6% on the ischemic side during the hyperacute period.
This was consistent with the hypothesis that endogenous
amide proton exchange occurred primarily due to changes in
intracellular pH (Fig. 2).
APT MRI of normal SD rats. In a pilot APT MRI investigation of normal SD rats (n=3) in vivo, the APT imaging was

Figure 2. A Z‑spectrum was obtained by monitoring the tissue water signals
of Sprague‑Dawley rats using 7.0 T magnetic resonance imaging in vivo. The
maximal change in Z‑spectral intensity was observed at ~3.5 ppm (1,050 Hz
at 7.0 T), which represented a composite amide proton chemical shift. The
NOE indicates the transfer of nuclear spin polarization from one nuclear spin
population to another, via cross‑relaxation. CEST, chemical exchange‑dependent saturation transfer; RF, radiofrequency; APT, amide proton transfer;
NOE, nuclear Overhauser enhancement effect.

calculated as the magnetization transfer ratio (MTR) asymmetry: I ref‑I libl /I0, in which I ref and I lib denote the reference
and labile protons, respectively, with RF applied at ‑3.5 and
3.5 ppm (1,050 Hz at 7.0 T). I0 denotes the scan without RF
irradiation (Fig. 3). Fig. 3A is an MT image obtained with RF
applied at ‑3.5 and 3.5 ppm (1,050 Hz at 7.0 T), and without RF
irradiation. Fig. 3B shows the APT imaging obtained with RF
irradiation and via processing with Vnmr J 3.1A and Matlab
software. This method of imaging provided high spatial resolution and a homogeneous signal, which provided an appropriate
resolution to distinguish the cerebral anatomy. The GRE‑APT
MRI appeared reasonably homogeneous within the cerebrum
and may be applied for the detection of subtle pH lesions in
hyperacute stroke.
APT MRI of SD rats following the induction of MCAO. All four
MCAO rats observed in the present study demonstrated large
deficits across the relatively hypoperfused region serviced by
the right MCA, with corresponding deficits on the APT and
apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps (Fig. 4). However,
no abnormal signals were observed on the T1 or T2‑weighted
images during the hyperacute period between 0.5 and 3.0 h.
Furthermore, the deficits in the APT and ADC maps matched
consistently during the hyperacute period, indicating severe
energy breakdown and concomitant cell depolarization. All
the hypoperfused regions progressed to complete infarction, which was confirmed by a 24 h‑post‑MCAO follow‑up
T2WI. Furthermore, the deficits on the APT and ADC maps
were marginally increased during the hyperacute period. At
24 h‑post‑MCAO, the infarcted areas in the T2‑weighted
images corresponded with those of the hyperacute deficits on
the APT maps. However, GRE‑APT MRI may provide further
insight into infarcted areas compared with ADC MRI. Unlike
the ADC map, there were certain imaging characteristics with

3282

HUANG et al: GRADIENT ECHO-AMIDE PROTEIN TRANSFER MRI IN HYPERACUTE CEREBRAL INFARCTION

Figure 3. pH‑weighted APT magnetic resonance imaging of a normal subject at 7.0 T. (A) MT image obtained with RF applied at ‑3.5 and 3.5 ppm (1,050 Hz at
7.0 T), and without RF irradiation. (B) The APT imaging was obtained with RF irradiation and via processing with Vnmr J 3.1A and Matlab software, which
provide high spatial resolution and a homogeneous signal, and enable resolution of the cerebrum anatomy. APT, amide proton transfer; RF, radio frequency.

Figure 4. DWI and pH‑weighted endogenous APT MRI of a representative hyperacute stroke (between 0.5 h and 3.0 h post‑MCAO) animal. DWI, ADC and
APT MRI images of rats (A‑C) 0.5 h and (D‑F) 3 h post‑MCAO, respectively. Deficits of the APT and ADC maps matched consistently during the hyperacute
period. Unlike the ADC map, the APT map exhibited an undefined deficit boundary and a gradient difference in lesion signal, with marked signal in the center
and weak signal in the periphery during the hyperacute period. APT, amide proton transfer; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MCAO, middle cerebral artery
occulsion; ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; DWI, diffusion‑weighted imaging.

undefined deficit boundaries on the APT map and the gradient
of hypointensity ranged, being marked in the center and weak
in the peripheries during the hyperacute period. This observation may indicate that the infarction area on the ADC map
contained tissue that had not undergone irreversible damage,
as demonstrated in the imaging characteristics of the APT
map.
Discussion
CEST imaging, a novel molecular imaging technology, is able
to non‑invasively characterize the physical and physiological

status of tissues in vivo, including tissue pH, APT, glycogen,
glycosaminoglycan, lipid, enzymes and genes (28,37). The
present study demonstrated that the sensitivity of CEST MRI
was significantly improved by inserting a magnetization
transfer pulse at each TR and by minimizing TR, based on
the GRE sequence. As the effect of the pulses was cumulative, the CEST effect was enhanced and reached a steady
state following multiple pulses. In addition, the present study
verified this strategy using the tissue‑like CEST phantoms at
7.0 T. In the Z‑spectrum, the CEST effect was proportional
to the concentration of the labile protons and the CEST effect
increased with the phase‑encoding number within a certain

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 11: 3279-3284, 2015

range, which suggested that this proposed novel method
may enhance the effectiveness of pH‑weighted APT MRI.
Therefore, pH‑weighted APT/CEST MRI based on a GRE
sequence combined with magnetic transfer was capable of
detecting ischemic lactic acidosis and provided APT imaging
with sensitivity and spatiotemporal resolution, which was
consistent with previous studies (21,26,38). In the present
study, deficits were observed in the APT and ADC maps,
which matched consistently and increased marginally during
the hyperacute period. At 24 h‑post‑MCAO, the infarct area
in the T2‑weighted images corresponded with that of the
APT map deficits observed between 0.5 and 3.0 h. In addition, compared with that of the conventional CEST imaging
sequences (39‑42), the method proposed in the present study
demonstrated certain advantages, including a markedly
reduced scan time, improving the temporal resolution of the
APT imaging and enabling the imaging of patients with only
minimal or no interference with their clinical care. In addition,
the proposed method extended the interval of the saturation
pulses, leading to a highly reduced specific absorption rate
and enabling use of the interval to obtain a signal. Multislice
imaging is also easily obtained. Overall, the method proposed
by the present study may be easily translated in order to obtain
CEST imaging on the majority of clinical MRI machines. The
goal of future studies is to fully develop pH‑weighted APT
MRI and to evaluate its diagnostic use to ultimately augment
the current diagnostic capability of hyperacute stroke.
The optimization of multiple MRI parameters is essential
to improve the evaluation of ischemic tissue metabolism for
predicting tissue outcomes and their response to potential
treatments. Notably, pH‑sensitive MRI may be beneficial
in patients with tissues that are not irreversibly damaged.
Previous animal studies have demonstrated that there may be
a significant CBF/pH/ADC mismatch in acute ischemic stroke
and that pH‑weighted APT lesions may be used to improve
the prediction of tissue outcomes (2). In addition, pH‑weighted
MRI may be able to delineate the PWI/DWI mismatch into
a benign oligemic region and metabolic penumbra. However,
the conventional CEST imaging sequence used for APT MRI
in vivo provides only pH‑weighted information. GRE‑APT
MRI using the modified sequence has been shown to provide
additional insight into areas of infarction compared with ADC
MRI and conventional CEST imaging sequences (39‑42). The
present study revealed APT map imaging characteristics with
undefined deficit boundaries and a hypointensity gradient,
which was more marked at the center and weaker at the
peripheries during the hyperacute period. This indicated that
the infarct area observed on the ADC map contained tissue
which had not yet undergone irreversible damage. Within
this pH‑impaired region, it is likely that the metabolism was
completely interrupted at the center and initially sustained at
the peripheries. This may have been due to anaerobic glycolysis
during the hyperacute period, leading to the accumulation of
lactic acid and a reduction in local tissue pH, as indicated by
the gradient of hypointensity in the APT MRI. The relatively
weak signals in the lesion peripheries compared with those
at the center may represent an area of impaired metabolism,
which remained viable on the APT map, despite its identification as an infarct on the ADC map. These findings may be
extended to the use of pH MRI as a surrogate imaging marker

3283

of impaired tissue metabolism and suggested that pH‑weighted
APT MRI may be used for the clinical diagnosis and determination of prognosis in patients with acute stroke.
The regulation of pH is important in the progression of
disease, therefore, it is essential to elucidate the association
between metabolic disruption, lactate content, acidosis and
tissue damage. Various techniques have been developed for
pH‑weighted APT imaging in vivo, however, improvements
are to provide higher sensitivity, signal‑to‑noise ratio and
concentration independence (43). A pH‑weighted APT MRI
offers a more adaptable approach as exchange sites may be
built into the agent molecules to make them concentration
independent (44). In the present study, APT MRI was used
to identify and characterize lesions in a permanent stroke
model to examine the association between tissue pH, diffusion and lactic acidosis in acute shock. However, APT MRI
may be extended to other diseases, including solid tumors and
disorders of glycogen, glycosaminoglycan, lipid, enzymes and
genes.
In conclusion, the present study characterized heterogeneous ischemic tissue damage using multiparametric MRI of
pH, diffusion and relaxation imaging during the hyperacute
period. A novel method was used, based on the GRE sequence
combined with magnetic transfer and phase encoding, which
demonstrated that pH‑weighted APT provided high spatial
resolution, a homogeneous signal and clearly distinguished
cerebral anatomy. In addition, the pH‑weighted APT and diffusion MRI were significantly correlated with lactate content and
the deficits of the APT and ADC maps matched consistently
during the hyperacute period. The GRE‑APT MRI provided
further insight into the infarction area compared with the
ADC MRI, as reflected in certain lesions on the APT map
exhibiting undefined deficit boundaries and a hypointensity
gradient, which was more marked at the center and weaker at
the peripheries during the hyperacute period. This indicated
the presence of tissue within the penumbra, which had not
yet undergone irreversible damage. Furthermore, the present
study demonstrated that, due to its high sensitivity to tissue
acidification, pH‑weighted APT MRI using the gradient echo
sequence provided surrogate imaging markers of impaired
tissue metabolism. This suggested that pH‑weighted APT
MRI may be used for clinical diagnosis and for determining
prognosis in patients with hyperacute stroke.
References
 1.	Ciccone A, Valvassori L, Nichelatti M, et al: Endovascular treatment
for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 368: 904‑913, 2013.
 2.	Sun PZ, Zhou J, Sun W, Huang J and van Zijl PCM: Detection of
the ischemic penumbra using pH‑weighted MRI. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 27: 1129‑1136, 2007.
 3.	Astrup J: Thresholds of cerebral ischemia. In: Microsurgery for
stroke (Schmiedek P, ed), Berlin: Springer, 16‑21, 1976.
 4.	Hossmann KA: Viability thresholds and the penumbra of focal
ischemia. Ann Neurol 36: 557‑565, 1994.
 5.	Hjort N, Butcher K, Davis SM, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging
criteria for thrombolysis in acute cerebral infarct. Stroke 36:
388‑397, 2005.
 6.	Wu O, Christensen S, Hjort N, et al: Characterizing physiological
heterogeneity of infarction risk in acute human ischaemic stroke
using MRI. Brain 129: 2384‑2393, 2006.
 7.	Warach S: Thrombolysis in stroke beyond three hours: targeting
patients with diffusion and perfusion MRI. Ann Neurol 51:
11‑13, 2002.

3284

HUANG et al: GRADIENT ECHO-AMIDE PROTEIN TRANSFER MRI IN HYPERACUTE CEREBRAL INFARCTION

 8.	Schlaug G, Benfield A, Baird AE, et al: The ischemic penumbra:
Operationally defined by diffusion and perfusion MRI.
Neurology 53: 1528‑1537, 1999.
 9.	Schaefer PW, Ozsunar Y, He J, et al: Assessing tissue viability
with MR diffusion and perfusion imaging. Am J Neuroradiol 24:
436‑443, 2003.
10.	Kidwell CS, Alger JR and Saver JL: Beyond mismatch: evolving
paradigms in imaging the ischemic penumbra with multimodal
magnetic resonance imaging. Stroke 34: 2729‑2735, 2003.
11.	 Sobesky  J,  Weber  OZ, Lehnhardt  F‑G, Hesselmann  V,
Neveling M, Jacobs A and Heiss W‑D: Does the mismatch
match the penumbra? Magnetic resonance imaging and positron
emission tomography in early schemic stroke. Stroke  36:
980‑985, 2005.
12.	Astrup J, Siesjö BK, Symon L, et al: Thresholds in cerebral
ischemia‑the ischemic penumbra. Stroke 12: 723‑725, 1981.
13.	Siesjö BK: Pathophysiology and treatment of focal cerebral
ischemia: Part I: Pathophysiology. J Neurosurg 77: 169‑184,
1992.
14.	Hossmann KA: Viability thresholds and the penumbra of focal
ischemia. Ann Neurol 36: 557‑565, 1994.
15.	An H, Liu Q, Chen Y, Lin W, et al: Evaluation of MR‑Derived
cerebral oxygen metabolic index in experimental hyperoxic
hypercapnia, hypoxia and ischemia. Stroke  40: 2165‑2172,
2009.
16.	Malisza K, Kozlowski P, Peeling J, et al: A review of in vivo 1H
magnetic resonance spectroscopy of cerebral ischemia in rats.
Biochem Cell Biol 76: 487‑496, 1988.
17.	Zauner A, Daugherty WP, Bullock MR, et al: Brain oxygenation
and energy metabolism: part I‑biological function and pathophysiology. Neurosurg 51: 289‑301, 2002.
18.	Siesjӧ BK: Pathophysiology and treatment of focal cerebral
ischemia. Part II: mechanisms of damage and treatment. J
Neurosurg 77: 337‑354, 1992.
19.	Sun PZ, Zhou J, Huang J, et al: Simplified quantitative description
of amide proton transfer (APT) imaging during acute ischemia.
Magn Reson Med 57: 405‑410, 2007.
20.	Sun PZ and Sorensen AG: Imaging pH using the chemical
exchange saturation transfer (CEST) MRI: correction of
concomitant rf irradiation effects to quantify CEST MRI for
chemical exchange rate and pH. Magn Reson Med 60: 390‑397,
2008.
21.	Jokivarsi KT, Gröhn HI, Gröhn OH, et al: Proton transfer ratio,
lactate and intracellular pH in acute cerebral ischemia. Magn
Reson Med 57: 647‑653, 2007.
22.	Ward KM and Balaban RS: Determination of pH using water
protons and chemical exchange dependent saturation transfer
(CEST). Magn Reson Med 44: 799‑802, 2000.
23.	Zhou J, Payen JF, Wilson DA, Traystman RJ and van Zijl PC:
Using the amide proton signals of intracellular proteins and
peptides to detect pH effects in MRI. Nat Med 9: 1085‑1090,
2003.
24.	Sun PZ, Lu J, Wu Y, Xiao G and Wu R: Evaluation of the
dependence of CEST‑EPI measurement on repetition time, RF
irradiation duty cycle and imaging flip angle for enhanced pH
Sensitivity. Phys Med Biol 58: N229‑N240, 2013.
25.	Jokivarsi KT, Gröhn HI, Gröhn OH and Kauppinen RA: Proton
transfer ratio, lactate and intracellular pH in acute cerebral
ischemia. Magn Reson Med 57: 647‑653, 2007.
26.	Sun PZ, Cheung JS, Wang E and Lo EH: Association between
pH‑weighted endogenous amide proton chemical exchange
saturation transfer MRI andtissue lactic acidosis during acute
ischemic stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31: 1743‑1750, 2011.

27.	Sun PZ, Wang Y, Dai Z, Xiao G and Wu R: Quantitative chemical
exchange saturation transfer (qCEST) MRI‑RF spillover
effect‑corrected omega plot for simultaneous determination of
labile proton fraction ratio and exchange rate. Contrast Media
Mol Imaging 9: 268‑275, 2014.
28.	Mougin OE, Coxon RC, Pitiot A and Gowland PA: Magnetization
transfer phenomenon in the human brain at 7T. NeuroImage 49:
272‑281, 2010.
29.	Jones CK, Schlosser MJ, van Zijl PC, Pomper MG, Golay X and
Zhou J: Amide proton transfer imaging of human brain tumors at
3T. Magn Reson Med 56: 585‑592, 2006.
30.	Sun PZ, Benner T, Kumar A and Sorensen AG: An investigation
of optimizing and translating pH‑sensitive pulsed‑chemical
exchange saturation transfer (CEST) imaging to a 3T clinical
scanner. Magn Reson Med 60: 834‑841, 2008.
31.	Sun PZ, Wang Y, Xiao G and Wu R: Simultaneous experimental
determination of labileproton fraction ratio and exchange rate with
irradiation radio frequency power‑dependentquantitative CEST
MRI analysis. Contrast Media Mol Imaging 8: 246‑251, 2013.
32.	Wu R, Liu CM, Liu PK and Sun PZ: Improved measurement of
labile proton concentration‑weighted chemical exchange rate
(kws) with experimental factor‑compensated and T1‑normalized
quantitative chemical exchange saturation transfer (CEST) MRI.
Contrast Media Mol Imaging 7: 384‑389, 2012.
33.	van Dorsten FA, Olah L, Schwindt W, et al: Dynamic changes
of ADC, perfusion and NMR relaxation parameters in transient
focal ischemia of rat brain. Magn Reson Med 47: 97‑104, 2002.
34.	Chen JH, Sambol EB, Decarolis P, O'Connor R, Geha RC,
Wu YV and Singer S: High‑resolution MAS NMR spectroscopy
detection of the spin magnetization exchange by cross‑relaxation
and chemical exchange in intact cell lines and human tissue
specimens. Magn Reson Med 55: 1246‑1256, 2006.
35.	Makela  HI, Kettunen  MI, Gröhn  OH and Kauppinen  RA:
Quantitative T1r and magnetic transfer magnetic resonance
imaging of acute cerebral ischemia in the rat. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 22: 547‑558, 2002.
36.	Dai Z, Ji J, Xiao G, et al: Magnetization transfer prepared gradient
echo MRI for CEST imaging. PLoS One 9: e112219, 2014.
37.	Bar‑Shir A1, Liu G, Greenberg MM, et al: Synthesis of a probe
for monitoring HSV1‑tk reporter gene expression using chemical
exchange saturation transfer MRI. Nat Protoc 8: 2380‑2391, 2013.
38.	Katsura K, Ekholm A, Anders B and Siesjö BK: Extracellular pH
in the brain during ischemia: relationship to the severity of lactic
acidosis. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 11: 597‑599, 1991.
39.	Ward KM and Balaban RS: Determination of pH using water
protons and chemical exchange dependent saturation transfer
(CEST). Magn Reson Med 44: 799‑802, 2000.
40.	Goffeney N, Bulte JW, Duyn J, Bryant LH Jr and van Zijl PC:
Sensitive NMR detection of cationic‑polymer‑based gene
delivery systems using saturation transfer via proton exchange. J
Am Chem Soc 123: 8628‑8629, 2001.
41.	Aime S, Delli CD and Terreno E: Highly sensitive MRI chemical
exchange saturation transfer agents using liposomes. Angew
Chem Int Ed Engl 44: 5513‑5515, 2005.
42.	Sherry AD and Woods M: Chemical exchange saturation transfer
contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging. Annu Rev
Biomed Eng 10: 391‑411, 2008.
43.	van Zijl PC and Yadav NN: Chemical exchange saturation
transfer (CEST): what is in a name and what isn't? Magn Reson
Med 65: 927‑948, 2011.
44.	van Zijl PC, Yadav NN: Chemical exchange saturation transfer
(CEST): what is in a name and what isn't? Magn Reson Med 65:
927‑948, 2011.

