Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351
DOI 10.1007/s12013-014-0204-1

ORIGINAL PAPER

Protective Effects of Nigranoic Acid on Cerebral Ischemia–
Reperfusion Injury and its Mechanism Involving Apoptotic
Signaling Pathway
Tianda Feng • Yunhui Liu • Chao Li
Zhen Li

•

Published online: 29 August 2014
Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract The goal of this study was to assess the
expression of poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) and
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) in the hippocampal CA1
region, and to find out whether nigranoic acid treatment
exhibits protective effects on brain through PARP/AIF
signaling pathway in cerebral ischemia–reperfusion animal
model. Rats were randomly divided into three groups:
Sham-surgery, ischemia–reperfusion, and nigranoic acidtreated. Rat models of middle cerebral artery occlusion
were prepared using a way of thread occlusion. Rats in the
nigranoic acid group were administered with 1 mg/kg
intragastric nigranoic acid 6 and 2 h before brain ischemia,
respectively. Following reperfusion, samples were collected at different time-points (6, 24, and 72 h) and each
group was further divided into three subgroups. Apoptosis
was measured using the terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling method. The
protein expression levels of AIF and PARP were detected
using Western blot and AIF mRNA quantity was evaluated
using the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Apoptosis, levels of AIF and PARP protein expression, and
levels of AIF mRNA expression were significantly
increased in the ischemia–reperfusion group compared
with the sham-surgery group. However, apoptosis and the
expression levels of AIF protein, PARP protein, and AIF
mRNA at different time-points were significantly
decreased in the nigranoic acid-treated group compared

T. Feng (&)  Y. Liu  C. Li  Z. Li
Department of Neurosurgery, Shengjing Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province,
People’s Republic of China
e-mail: drtiandafeng@163.com

with the model group. We can judge that nigranoic acid has
a strong protective effect on rat cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury, and acts by downregulating nerve cell
apoptosis by preventing the overactivation of PARP and
AIF nuclear translocation.
Keywords Poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) 
Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF)  Nigranoic acid
treatment  PARP/AIF signaling pathway

Introduction
Plant active components are characterized by many different structures and activities on multiple targets, which
have made them important sources of various pharmacological functions [1]. Previous study revealed that nigranoic acid inhibited both HIV-1 protease and integrase [1].
Nigranoic acid is a triterpenoid separated from Schisandra
chinensis. S. chinensis has a long history of use as a
famous traditional Chinese medicine [2]. The plants of
genus Schisandra, especially Schisandra neglecta, Schisandra rubriflora, and Schisandra sphaerandra are used in
the same way as S. chinensis in the folk medicine to treat
insomnia and fatigue, to increase intelligence, and as a
tranquilizing agent [2]. Many studies showed that lignans
were the major active components of the genus Schisandra, whereas the bioactivity of abundant triterpenoids in
the genus Schisandra, has not been examined yet in
cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury [2]. Researchers
found that nigranoic acid-induced Ca(2?) influx in a timeand concentration-dependent manner, which was significantly attenuated in Ca(2?)-free media [2]. Nigranoic acid
promoted the intracellular NO production which depended
on increasing cytoplasmic Ca(2?) level [2]. Moreover,

123

346

nigranoic acid stimulated activation of ERK1/2 through
Ca(2?)CaMKII pathway [2]. In addition, researchers
found that nigranoic acid increased the expression of
BDNF and c-fos mRNA [2].These results suggest that nigranoic acid is able to promote NO production and stimulate phosphorylation of ERK1/2 through Ca(2?) influx,
further impacting the expression of BDNF and c-fos,
which provides evidence for the effects of nigranoic acid
that may be a benefit to enhance mental and intellectual
functions especially in cerebral ischemia–reperfusion
injury [2].
Apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF) is associated with nerve
cell death [3–7]. The excessive activation of poly ADPribose polymerase (PARP) sends the nuclear signal to the
mitochondrion, triggering AIF release from the mitochondrion to the cell nucleus with chromatin condensation and
DNA fragments [3]. Nigranoic acid has protective effects
on cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury and the protective
effects are associated with PARP inhibition like other
agents described before [3].
The main apoptosis-mediated signaling pathways
include the caspase-8-mediated death receptor pathway, the
caspase-9-mediated mitochondrial pathway, and the caspase-12-mediated endoplasmic reticulum stress pathway
[3, 8–11]. However, non-caspase-mediated apoptotic
pathways also exist, including the poly ADP-ribose polymerase PARP/AIF-mediated apoptotic pathway [3]. The
PARP/AIF-mediated apoptotic pathway is an important
pathway that is present in numerous eukaryotic organisms
[3, 12–15]. In this study, the effects of nigranoic acid on
the PARP/AIF-mediated apoptotic pathway in a rat model
of cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury were investigated,
providing an experimental basis for the prevention and
treatment of cerebrovascular disease.

Materials and Methods

Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351

Grouping and Model Preparation Process
The rats were randomly divided into three groups: Shamsurgery, ischemia–reperfusion, and nigranoic acid-treated.
Rat models of right middle cerebral artery occlusion were
prepared using the thread occlusion method [3]. The blood
flow was restored 2 h after ischemia. Rats that exhibited
Horner’s sign, adduction and flexion of the left forelimb,
and that had a tendency to fall to the left or crawl in a
counterclockwise direction [3]. For the sham-surgery
group, the thread was inserted into the right middle cerebral artery and then immediately removed [3]. For the nigranoic acid group, 1 mg/kg intragastric nigranoic acid was
administered 6 and 2 h before brain ischemia, respectively.
Samples were collected at different time-points (6, 24, and
72 h) after reperfusion, and each group was further divided
into three subgroups.
Brain Samples Process
At the different time-points after reperfusion (6, 24, and
72 h), five rats were taken from each subgroup. The brain
was removed from each rat following decapitation and
divided into four equal parts (A, B, C, and D) from the
frontal region to the occipital region. Part C was dehydrated
with alcohol, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at a
thickness of 5 lm for immunohistochemical staining. Further, ten rats from each subgroup were sacrificed at different
time-points (6, 24, and 72 h) after reperfusion, and the
hippocampus of each rat was placed in liquid nitrogen. The
hippocampi of five of the rats were used for Western blot
analysis, while the hippocampi of the remaining five rats
were used for reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), as described before [3].
Analysis of Nerve Cell Apoptosis Using the Terminal
Deoxynucleotidyl-Transferase-Mediated Dutp Nick
End Labeling (TUNEL)

Animal and Reagents Preparation
Sprague–Dawley rats, weighing between 200 and 300 g,
were purchased from the Laboratory Animal Center, Beijing, China. Nigranoic acid was purchased from Aladdin,
China. Rabbit anti-mouse AIF polyclonal antibody was
purchased from Boster, China. Antibody against Histone
H1 was purchased from Abcam and antibody against PARP
was purchased from Cell signal technology. Mouse antiapoptotic reagent was purchased from Invitrogen. The
immunohistochemical staining kit was purchased from
Wuhan Boster. The AIF and b-actin primers were synthesized by Invitrogen, and the total RNA extraction kit was
purchased from Boster. All study methods were approved
by the Ethics Committee of our Hospital.

123

Nerve cell apoptosis was detected using a TUNEL kit, as
described before [3]. One CA1 hippocampal slice was
randomly selected from each rat, and five fields were then
randomly selected from the CA1 hippocampal slice. The
number of TUNEL-positive cells was counted in the five
fields. Since there were five rats in each subgroup, the
average number of TUNEL-positive cells in 20 fields was
calculated, as described before [3].
Western Blot Analysis
Cell lysis solution was added to the samples and nuclei
were extracted from the cells using the differential centrifugation method, as described before [3]. Nuclear lysates

Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351

347

were added before centrifugation in order to extract
nucleoprotein, as described before [3]. Western blotting
was performed according to a previously described method
(6). The electrophoresis pattern was analyzed using a gel
imaging analysis system (BioRad). The absorbance of AIF
and PARP was detected and histone H1 was used as an
internal control; AIF and PARP protein expression was
calculated relative to the control, histone H1, as described
before [3].
RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted using the Trizol method, as
described before [3]. Total RNA underwent reverse transcription for the preparation of cDNA templates. PCR
amplification was performed using 2 ll cDNA, and b-actin
was used as an internal control. AIF primer sequences were
as follows: Forward, 50 -CCCCGATGTTGGCTATGA-30
and reverse, 50 -TCCTGACTGCTCTGTGGC-30 , with an
amplified fragment of 115 base pairs (bp). b-actin primer
sequences were as follows: Forward, 50 -CACCAACTGG
GACGACAT-30 and reverse, 50 -ACAGCCTGGATAGCA
ACG-30 , with an amplified fragment of 189 bp, as described before [3]. The PCR conditions were as follows: Predenaturing at 94 °C for 5 min, denaturing at 94 °C for
30 s, annealing at 54 °C for 30 s, and elongation at 72 °C
for 5 min, as described before [3]. PCR products were then
analyzed using 30 g/l agarose gel electrophoresis. Image
scanning was performed using BioRad. The level of AIF
mRNA was calculated according to the gray-level value, as
described before [3].

Fig. 1 TUNEL-positive cells in the CA1 region of the hippocampus
at different time-points in each groupTUNEL: terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling. Each value
indicates mean ± SEM. *P \ 0.05, compared with sham group.
#P \ 0.05, compared with model group

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 13.0 software. Data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. A Student’s
t test was used for the comparison between two samples
and one-way ANOVA was used for the comparison of
multiple samples. P \ 0.05 was considered to be a statistically significant difference.

Results
Effect of Nigranoic Acid Pre-Treatment on Nerve Cell
Apoptosis
In the sham-surgery group, only a few apoptotic cells were
observed at the different time-points and no statistical
difference was found in the number of apoptotic cells
among the different time-points (P [ 0.05). In the ischemia–reperfusion group, the number of apoptotic cells was
markedly increased 24 h after reperfusion and decreased

Fig. 2 Terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP nick
end positive cells in the hippocampus at 24 h after reperfusion in each
group. Each value indicates mean ± SEM. *P \ 0.05, compared with
sham group. #P \ 0.05, compared with model group

72 h after reperfusion compared with the 6 h time-point.
However, compared with the sham-surgery group, the
apoptotic rate in the ischemia–reperfusion group was significantly increased at all time-points (P \ 0.05). Compared with the ischemia–reperfusion group, the apoptotic
rate was significantly decreased in the nigranoic acid group
at all time-points (P \ 0.05). For the ischemia–reperfusion
and nigranoic acid groups, the apoptotic rate was highest
after 24 h (P \ 0.05) (Fig. 1).
At the 24 h time-point, few TUNEL-positive cells were
observed in the sham-surgery group. The number of

123

348

Fig. 3 a AIF protein expression in the CA1 region of the hippocampus at different time-points in each group; b PARP protein expression
in the CA1 region of the hippocampus at different time-points in each
group. AIF: Apoptosis-inducing factor protein; PARP: Poly ADP-

Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351

ribose polymerase protein. Each value indicates mean ± SEM.
*P \ 0.05, compared with sham group. #P \ 0.05, compared with
model group

TUNEL-positive cells observed in the ischemia–reperfusion group was markedly increased in comparison with the
sham-surgery group, and the number of TUNEL-positive
cells observed in the nigranoic acid group was markedly
decreased compared with the ischemia–reperfusion group
(Fig. 2).
Effects of Nigranoic Acid Treatment on AIF Nuclear
Translocation and PARP Expression
The results of the Western blot analysis indicated that, in
the sham-surgery group, there was no PARP and AIF
nuclear translocation; however, in the ischemia–reperfusion group, PARP and AIF nuclear translocation occurred
6 h after reperfusion, was markedly increased 24 h after
reperfusion and then markedly decreased after 72 h as
described before [3]. Compared with the ischemia–reperfusion group, PARP and AIF nuclear translocation was
significantly decreased in the nigranoic acid group at all
time-points (P \ 0.05). In the ischemia–reperfusion and
nigranoic acid groups, PARP and AIF nuclear translocation
at 24 h was the highest among the different time-points
(P \ 0.05) (Fig. 3a, b).
Effect of Nigranoic Acid Treatment on AIF mRNA
Expression Levels
In the sham-surgery group, there was little expression of
AIF mRNA at all time-points as described before [3]. In the
ischemia–reperfusion group, AIF mRNA expression was
observed 6 h after reperfusion, and was markedly increased

123

Fig. 4 Apoptosis-inducing factor mRNA expression in the CA1
region of the hippocampus at different time-points in each group.AIF:
Apoptosis-inducing factor protein. Each value indicates mean ± SEM. *P \ 0.05, compared with sham group. #P \ 0.05, compared
with model group

24 h after reperfusion, prior to being reduced again 72 h
after reperfusion, as described before [3]. Compared with
the sham-surgery group, a significant difference was
observed in AIF mRNA expression in the ischemia–
reperfusion group at all time-points (P \ 0.05) as described before [3]. Compared with the ischemia–reperfusion
group, AIF mRNA expression was significantly decreased
in the nigranoic acid group at all time-points (P \ 0.05). In

Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351

the ischemia–reperfusion and nigranoic acid-treated
groups, AIF mRNA expression was highest at 24 h after
reperfusion (P \ 0.05) (Fig. 4).

Discussion
Plant active components are characterized by many different structures and activities on multiple targets, which
have made them important sources of various pharmacological functions [1]. Previous study revealed that nigranoic acid inhibited both HIV-1 protease and integrase [1].
Nigranoic acid is a triterpenoid separated from S.chinensis.
S. chinensis has a long history of use as a famous traditional Chinese medicine [2]. The plants of genus Schisandra, especially Schisandra neglecta, S. rubriflora, and
S. sphaerandra are used in the same way as S. chinensis in
the folk medicine to treat insomnia and fatigue, to increase
intelligence, and as a tranquilizing agent [2]. Many studies
showed that lignans were the major active components of
the genus Schisandra, whereas the bioactivity of abundant
triterpenoids in genus Schisandra, has not been examined
yet in cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury [2]. Researchers found that nigranoic acid induced Ca(2?) influx in a
time- and concentration-dependent manner, which was
significantly attenuated in Ca(2?)-free media [2]. Nigranoic acid promoted the intracellular NO production which
depended on increasing cytoplasmic Ca(2?) level [2].
Moreover, nigranoic acid stimulated activation of ERK
1/2 through Ca(2?) CaMKII pathway [2]. In addition,
researchers found that nigranoic acid increased the
expression of BDNF and c-fos mRNA [2]. These results
suggest that nigranoic acid is able to promote NO production and stimulate phosphorylation of ERK1/2 through
Ca(2?) influx, further impacting the expression of BDNF
and c-fos, which provides evidence for the effects of nigranoic acid that may be a benefit to enhance mental and
intellectual functions especially in cerebral ischemia–
reperfusion injury [2].
The present study demonstrated that, in the ischemia–
reperfusion group, the number of apoptotic cells was
increased 24 h after reperfusion compared with the 6 h
time-point as described before [3]. A significant difference
was observed in the apoptotic rate in the ischemia–reperfusion group at all time-points compared with the shamsurgery group as described before [3]. However, the
apoptotic rate was significantly decreased in the nigranoic
acid group at all time-points compared with the ischemia–
reperfusion group. In the ischemia–reperfusion and nigranoic acid groups, the apoptotic rate at 24 h was the highest
among the different time-points. The results demonstrated
that nigranoic acid was able to inhibit apoptosis caused
by cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury; however, the

349

mechanism underlying the action of nigranoic acid was not
clear. In order to investigate this further, the PARP/AIF
apoptotic pathway was studied. PARP, a type of ribozyme,
identifies and repairs DNA single-strand breaks in order to
maintain genome integrity, and has beneficial and harmful
effects on cell injury and repair [3, 16–20]. In mild
ischemia, nerve cells survive as a result of PARP repairing
damaged DNA; however, in severe ischemia, there is significant DNA damage, which causes the excessive activation of PARP, leading to the consumption of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD), the formation of NAD? and
the consumption of ATP [3, 4, 21–24]. Energy depletion
leads to cell damage, apoptosis, or necrosis [3]. In this
study, the effects of nigranoic acid on PARP expression
were observed 6, 24, and 72 h after cerebral ischemia–
reperfusion. The results indicated that cerebral ischemia–
reperfusion injury activates PARP expression, since PARP
expression was markedly increased 24 h after cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion injury, and that nigranoic acid is
capable of decreasing PARP expression. The results suggest that the anti-apoptotic effect of nigranoic acid is
associated with the down-regulation of PARP expression in
cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury.
PARP is capable of inducing changes in mitochondrial
membrane permeability, leading to the release of AIF. The
excessive activation of PARP located in the mitochondria
directly causes mitochondrial injury and the release of proapoptotic proteins, leading to AIF nuclear translocation [3,
25–29]. Apoptotic signals cause the excessive activation of
PARP which results in AIF release from the mitochondrion
to the cell nucleus [3]. The excessive activation of PARP
consumes NAD?, leading to energy depletion [3, 30–32].
In the present study, the effect of nigranoic acid on AIF
protein expression in cerebral ischemia–reperfusion was
observed. The results showed that AIF expression in the
ischemia–reperfusion group was increased 24 h after
reperfusion compared to that at the 6 h time-point, prior to
decreasing again 72 h after reperfusion as described before
[3]. This may be due to the fact that AIF in the mitochondria has a protective role in early reperfusion; with the
prolongation of reperfusion, AIF was released from the
mitochondria and mitochondrial integrity was damaged [3,
30–32]. This result suggested that, in order to reduce AIF
nuclear translocation, drug intervention should be adopted
within 24 h after reperfusion. Compared with the ischemia–reperfusion group, AIF expression was significantly
decreased in the nigranoic acid group, demonstrating that
nigranoic acid was able to inhibit AIF nuclear translocation
as described before [3]. The results also indicated that AIF
mRNA expression was reduced in the sham-surgery group
compared with the ischemia–reperfusion and nigranoic
acid groups. In the ischemia–reperfusion group, AIF
mRNA expression was observed 6 h after reperfusion,

123

350

reaching a peak 24 h after reperfusion and then decreasing
again after 72 h as described before [3]. This suggests that
apoptotic signals stimulate AIF transcription [3]. The
dynamic changes in AIF mRNA expression were consistent
with those in nerve cell apoptosis, suggesting that AIF gene
transcription is involved in apoptosis [3]. Compared with
the ischemia–reperfusion group, AIF mRNA expression
was significantly decreased in the nigranoic acid group at
all time-points, suggesting that nigranoic acid is capable of
inhibiting AIF expression at the transcriptional level, and
then inhibiting apoptosis to exert protective effects on the
brain.
In conclusion, in a rat model of cerebral ischemia–
reperfusion, apoptotic cells, increased expression of PARP,
NAD depletion, and AIF nuclear translocation were
observed. Nigranoic acid was found to inhibit apoptosis,
the excessive activity of PARP, NAD depletion, and AIF
nuclear translocation, suggesting that the anti-apoptotic
effects of nigranoic acid may be associated with the inhibition of excessive PARP activation and AIF mRNA
expression, as well as AIF nuclear translocation.

Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

References
17.
1. Peng, Z. G., Xu, L. J., Ye, W. C., et al. (2010). Effective components against HIV-1 replicative enzymes isolated from plants.
Yao Xue Xue Bao, 45, 235–240.
2. Yuan, X. X., Yang, L. P., Yang, Z. L., et al. (2014). Effect of
nigranoic acid on Ca(2)(?) influx and its downstream signal
mechanism in NGF-differentiated PC12 cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 153, 725–731.
3. Ba, X. H., Cai, L. P., & Han, W. (2014). Effect of cilostazol
pretreatment on the PARP/AIF-mediated apoptotic pathway in rat
cerebral ischemia-reperfusion models. Experimental Therapeutic
Medicine, 7, 1209–1214.
4. Fabian, R. H., & Kent, T. A. (2012). Hyperglycemia accentuates
persistent ‘‘functional uncoupling’’ of cerebral microvascular
nitric oxide and superoxide following focal ischemia/reperfusion
in rats. Translational Stroke Research, 3, 482–490.
5. Wen, P. Y., Yang, F. Z., Wang, F., et al. (2012). Study on regulation of tanshinone II(A) on GFAP and ATPase and PDI of
cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury in rats. Zhong Yao Cai, 35,
1628–1632.
6. Kumari, S., Anderson, L., Farmer, S., et al. (2012). Hyperglycemia alters mitochondrial fission and fusion proteins in mice
subjected to cerebral ischemia and reperfusion. Translational
Stroke Research, 3, 296–304.
7. Urbanski, H. F., Kohama, S. G., West, G. A., et al. (2012).
Changes in spontaneous activity assessed by accelerometry correlate with extent of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in the
nonhuman primate. Translational Stroke Research, 3, 442–451.
8. Ahmad, A., Khan, M. M., Raza, S. S., et al. (2012). Ocimum
sanctum attenuates oxidative damage and neurological deficits
following focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats.
Neurological Sciences, 33, 1239–1247.
9. Bruning, C. A., Prigol, M., Luchese, C., et al. (2012). Protective
effect of diphenyl diselenide on ischemia and reperfusioninduced cerebral injury: involvement of oxidative stress and pro-

123

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

inflammatory cytokines. Neurochemical Research, 37, 2249–
2258.
Buch, P., Patel, V., Ranpariya, V., et al. (2012). Neuroprotective
activity of Cymbopogon martinii against cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion-induced oxidative stress in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 142, 35–40.
Chen, A., Lin, Z., Lan, L., et al. (2012). Electroacupuncture at the
Quchi and Zusanli acupoints exerts neuroprotective role in
cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injured rats via activation of the
PI3 K/Akt pathway. International Journal of Molecular Medicine, 30, 791–796.
Chen, S. H., Sun, H., Xu, H., et al. (2012). Effects of acupuncture
of ‘‘Baihui’’(GV 20) and ‘‘Zusanli’’(ST 36) on expression of
cerebral IL-1beta and TNF-alpha proteins in cerebral ischemia
reperfusion injury rats. Zhen Ci Yan Jiu, 37, 470–475.
Chen, Y., Wu, X., Yu, S., et al. (2012). Neuroprotective capabilities of Tanshinone IIA against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
injury via anti-apoptotic pathway in rats. Biological &/and
Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 35, 164–170.
Chen, Y., Wu, X., Yu, S., et al. (2012). Neuroprotection of tanshinone IIA against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury through
inhibition of macrophage migration inhibitory factor in rats. PLoS
ONE, 7, e40165.
Chong, Y., Wang, T., Wang, W., et al. (2012). Down-regulation
of P-glycoprotein expression contributes to an increase in
Danshensu accumulation in the cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
brain. Mol Med Rep, 5, 812–816.
Chu, K., Yin, B., Wang, J., et al. (2012). Inhibition of P2X7
receptor ameliorates transient global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury via modulating inflammatory responses in the rat
hippocampus. Journal of Neuroinflammation, 9, 69.
Cui, D., Wang, L., Qi, A., et al. (2012). Propofol prevents
autophagic cell death following oxygen and glucose deprivation
in PC12 cells and cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats.
PLoS ONE, 7, e35324.
Culman, J., Nguyen-Ngoc, M., Glatz, T., et al. (2012). Treatment
of rats with pioglitazone in the reperfusion phase of focal cerebral
ischemia: a preclinical stroke trial. Experimental Neurology, 238,
243–253.
Dai, Q. X., Wang, L. L., & Chao, J. (2012). Effects of injecting
adenosine A1 receptor agonist into baihui (GV20) on the cerebral
cortex in ischemia/reperfusion injury model rats. Zhongguo
Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi, 32, 390–393.
Di Domenico, F., Casalena, G., Jia, J., et al. (2012). Sex differences in brain proteomes of neuron-specific STAT3-null mice
after cerebral ischemia/reperfusion. Journal of Neurochemistry,
121, 680–692.
Fan, T., Jiang, W. L., Zhu, J., et al. (2012). Arctigenin protects
focal cerebral ischemia-reperfusion rats through inhibiting neuroinflammation. Biological &/and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 35,
2004–2009.
Gaur, V., & Kumar, A. (2012). Effect of nonselective and selective
COX-2 inhibitors on memory dysfunction, glutathione system, and
tumor necrosis factor alpha level against cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury. Drug and Chemical Toxicology, 35, 218–224.
Gong, W. H., Zheng, W. X., Wang, J., et al. (2012). Coexistence
of hyperlipidemia and acute cerebral ischemia/reperfusion induces severe liver damage in a rat model. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 18, 4934–4943.
Gu, J. H., Ge, J. B., Li, M., et al. (2012). Inhibition of NF-kappaB
activation is associated with anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic
effects of Ginkgolide B in a mouse model of cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion injury. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 47, 652–660.
Gu, Y., Zheng, G., Xu, M., et al. (2012). Caveolin-1 regulates
nitric oxide-mediated matrix metalloproteinases activity and

Cell Biochem Biophys (2015) 71:345–351

26.

27.

28.

29.

blood-brain barrier permeability in focal cerebral ischemia and
reperfusion injury. Journal of Neurochemistry, 120, 147–156.
Guo, C., Tong, L., Xi, M., et al. (2012). Neuroprotective effect of
calycosin on cerebral ischemia and reperfusion injury in rats.
Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 144, 768–774.
Guo, Y., & Chen, Z. W. (2012). Effect of total flavones of
Rhododendra simsii on the activation of ERK induced by cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion in rats. Zhong Yao Cai, 35, 1108–1111.
Han, J. Q., Yu, K. Y., & He, M. (2012). Effects of puerarin on the
neurocyte apoptosis and p-Akt (Ser473) expressions in rats with
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie
He Za Zhi, 32, 1069–1072.
He, F., Qu, F., & Song, F. (2012). Aspirin upregulates the
expression of neuregulin 1 and survivin after focal cerebral

351
ischemia/reperfusion in rats. Experimental Therapeutic Medicine,
3, 613–616.
30. Hu, J., Chai, Y., Wang, Y., et al. (2012). PI3 K p55gamma
promoter activity enhancement is involved in the anti-apoptotic
effect of berberine against cerebral ischemia-reperfusion. European Journal of Pharmacology, 674, 132–142.
31. Kovalska, M., Kovalska, L., Pavlikova, M., et al. (2012). Intracellular signaling MAPK pathway after cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury. Neurochemical Research, 37, 1568–1577.
32. Kuang, G., He, Q., Zhang, Y., et al. (2012). Modulation of preactivation of ppar-beta on memory and learning dysfunction and
inflammatory response in the hippocampus in rats exposed to
global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion. PPAR Research, 2012,
209794.

123

