ORIGINAL ARTICLE

In Vivo Two-photon Fluorescence Microscopy Reveals Disturbed
Cerebral Capillary Blood Flow and Increased Susceptibility to
Ischemic Insults in Diabetic Mice
Ji-Yun Huang,1 Li-Tao Li,1,2 Huan Wang,1 Shuang-Shuang Liu,3 Ying-Mei Lu,4 Mei-Hua Liao,1 Rong-Rong Tao,1
Ling-Juan Hong,1 Kohji Fukunaga,5 Zhong Chen,6 Christopher S. Wilcox,7 En Yin Lai8 & Feng Han1
1 Institute of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Biochemical Pharmaceutics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2 Department of Neurology, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, China
3 The Imaging Center, Core Facilities of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
4 School of Medicine, Zhejiang University City College, Hangzhou, China
5 Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan
6 Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
7 Hypertension, Kidney and Vascular Research Center, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C., USA
8 Department of Physiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China

Keywords
Capillary; Cerebral blood flow; Diabetes;
Hyperglycemia; Ischemia; Two-photon laserscanning microscopy.
Correspondence
Professor Feng Han, Institute of
Pharmacology, Toxicology and Biochemical
Pharmaceutics, Zhejiang University, 866 YuHang-Tang Road, Hangzhou 310058, China.
Tel.: +86-571-8820-8402;
Fax: +86-571-8820-8402;
E-mail: changhuahan@zju.edu.cn
Received 2 January 2014; revision 16 March
2014; accepted 16 March 2014

SUMMARY
Aims: Diabetes mellitus increases the risk of stroke, but the mechanisms are unclear. The
present study tested the hypothesis that diabetes mellitus disturbs the brain microcirculation and increases the susceptibility to cerebral damage in a middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) model of ischemia. Methods: Diabetes was induced by streptozocin in mice
expressing green fluorescent protein in endothelial cells (Tie2-GFP mice). Four weeks later,
they were subjected to transient (20 min) MCAO. In vivo blood flow was measured by twophoton laser-scanning microscopy (TPLSM) in cerebral arteries, veins, and capillaries.
Results: There was a significant decrease in red blood cell (RBC) velocity in capillaries in
diabetic mice as assessed by TPLSM, yet the regional cerebral blood flow, as assessed by laser
Doppler flowmetry, was maintained. Brain capillary flow developed turbulence after MCAO
only in diabetic mice. These mice sustained increased neurological deficits after MCAO
which were accompanied by an exaggerated degradation of tight junction proteins and
blunted CaMKII phosphorylation in cerebral tissues indicating disruption of the blood–brain
barrier and disturbed cognitive potential. Conclusion: Diabetic mice are more susceptible
to disturbances of cerebral capillary blood flow which may predispose them to neurovascular defects following ischemia.

doi: 10.1111/cns.12268
The first two authors contributed equally to
this work

Introduction
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a common condition that leads over
time to the development of macro- or microvascular complications manifested in the brain as ischemic stroke or cognitive
defects [1–3].
Recent studies have reported that chronic hyperglycemia per se
is directly detrimental to the brain function [4]. Hyperglycemia
may cause the accumulation of toxic reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and advanced glycation end-products (AGEs) accumulating
in the brain during hyperglycemia and disturbing cerebral function [5–7]. However, present techniques have not been adequate
to explore whether hyperglycemia increases the susceptibility to

816

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

cerebral disturbances caused by defective regulation of the microcirculation. Spatially averaged cerebral blood flow can be assessed
by laser Doppler flowmetry, but this is inadequate to evaluate the
microcirculation. Therefore, we have adopted intravital twophoton laser-scanning microscopy (TPLSM) to study cerebral
blood flow in individual microvessels and capillaries [8] which
can be at depths of 500–1000 lm into the brain tissue [9]. This
has permitted the dynamic measurements of cerebral microvascular function in living mice.
Diabetes mellitus not only damages microvascular function but
also induces blood–brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction perhaps by
generation of ROS [10]. Therefore, we investigated the effects of
DM on cerebral microcirculation over ischemia using intravital

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

J.-Y. Huang et al.

TPLSM and correlated with this functional outcome to validate
this method for the study of dynamic changes of brain capillary
blood flow. The expression of degraded tight junction proteins
and CaMKII indexed damage to the blood–brain barrier and to
cognitive function, respectively. These results demonstrated that
disturbed cerebral capillary blood flow and disrupted BBB worsened the outcome of cerebral ischemia in diabetic mice.

Materials and methods

Diabetes Exaggerate Microvascular Insult

midline [12]. The area to be observed is periinfarcted zone in
MCAO mice. The dura was removed and a metal frame of diameter 10.0 mm with a removable cover glass lid (diameter 6.0 mm)
was glued to the skull to cover the craniotomy window. The space
between the exposed brain surface and the cover glass was filled
with 1.5% (w/v) low melting point agarose in an artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) [13]. A bolus of 5 mg/kg Texas Red dextran
(70 kDa, Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) in
0.9% NaCl was injected into the tail vein before TPLSM imaging
to outline the blood vessels.

Reagents
All chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical Co.
(St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise noted.

Mouse Strains and Induction of Diabetes
Tie2-GFP (STOCK Tg [TIE2GFP] 287Sato/J, Bar Harbor, ME,
USA) mice were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory (Bar
Harbor, ME) to provide ready identification of cerebral microvessels. Adult male C57BL/6J wild-type (WT) mice were also
used in this study for Western blot studying. All mice were
housed under 12-h light/dark cycle and had access to food and
water ad libitum. All animal procedures were performed in
accordance with the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals” (NIH publication 86-23, 1996). The appropriate guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were also
approved by the Committee for Animal Experiments of Zhejiang
University in China. Diabetes was induced by a single injection
of freshly prepared streptozocin (STZ, 150 mg/kg; intraperitoneal; Sigma-Aldrich), whereas control mice were injected only
with vehicle (citrate buffer). Before diabetes induction, the animals were weighed and fasted for 12 h. The concentration of
blood glucose was repeatedly monitored by test reagent strips
(Accu-Chek Performa, Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) every
week after STZ injection. Only mice with glucose levels
>11.1 mmol/L were considered diabetic.

Transient Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion in
Mice
Preparation for the transient ischemia/reperfusion middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) model in mice was carried out as previously described [11]. For this model, 20 min of ischemia was followed by reperfusion. Mice were randomly assigned to four
groups: control, diabetes, MCAO, and diabetes + MCAO. Tie2GFP mice were used for TPLSM imaging to identify blood vessels.
The rectal temperature was monitored throughout the surgery
and was maintained at 37  0.5°C with a heating blanket. Neurological scores were determined 24 h after MCAO as described
[11].

Preparation for In Vivo Imaging
After anesthetizing the mice with an intraperitoneal injection of
chloral hydrate (400 mg/kg body weight), cerebral blood vessels
were imaged through a craniotomy window centered at stereotactic coordinates 2.5 mm caudal to bregma and 2.5 mm lateral to

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Laser Doppler Flowmetry
Measurement of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was performed with a laser Doppler flowmeter (Periflux System 5010;
Perimed, Jarfalla, Sweden) [14].The laser was transmitted
through a flexible fiber-optic probe affixed to the skull at about
2.5 mm caudal to bregma and 2.5 mm lateral to midline (proximally the center of the craniotomy window). The cerebral regional blood flow was equated with the absolute RBC flux.

Vessel Imaging and Analysis
We use an Olympus Fluoview1000 two-photon microscope
(BX61W1-FV1000, Olympus, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) with an excitation source of a Spectra-Physics MaiTai HP DeepSee femtosecond
Ti:Sa laser. To acquire images (either stacks or single focal planes)
from GFP-positive vessels, a long working distance (2 mm) waterimmersion objective (925, NA 1.05) was used for line scan measurements. The images were taken at 12-bit depth with resolution
of 1024 9 1024 pixels. We chose a scanning rate of 10 ls/pixel
and 2000 lines in total to follow the velocity of RBCs. The average
RBC velocity speed has been reported [8,15]. In vivo vessel diameters were measured manually using ImageJ [16]. RBC velocity
and flux were calculated with an automated image-processing
algorithm using MATLAB software (The MathWorks Inc., Natick,
Massachusetts) [8,15].

Western blot Analysis
Brain cortex of penumbra region was used in Western blot, which
matched the region under two-photon observation. Samples containing equivalent amounts of extracted protein were loaded onto
10% gel for sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) [11]. Membranes were blotted using the following primary antibodies: spectrin, phospho-GluR1 (Ser831;
Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), ZO-1 (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA,
USA), phospho-Thr286-CaMKII, phospho-Ser603-synapsin I
(ThermoScientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and b-actin (SigmaAldrich).

Statistical Analysis
The data are presented as mean  SEM. Statistical significance
was determined using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s test for multigroup comparisons. And unpaired
t-test was performed when determining the neurological deficit.
P < 0.05 indicated statistically significant differences.

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

817

Diabetes Exaggerate Microvascular Insult

J.-Y. Huang et al.

Results
Diabetes Increases Susceptibility to
Disturbances of Blood Flow After Brain Ischemia
Four weeks after STZ injection, the blood glucose concentrations
of diabetic mice were significantly higher (22.07  0.88 mmol/L;

(A)

(B)

n = 34) than in the controls (5.21  0.26 mmol/L; n = 26). The
ischemia caused by the MCAO was similar in control and diabetic mice using a laser Doppler flowmetry (Figure 1A). We measured the rCBF in the ipsilateral brain hemisphere in each group
of mice. No differences in the basal rCBF were observed between
control and diabetic mice. However, diabetic mice exhibited an

(E)

(C)

(F)

(D)

(G)

Figure 1 Diabetes increases susceptibility to ischemic insults. (A) Changes in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in control (Con) and diabetic (DM) mice
after middle cerebral arterial occlusion (MCAO) using a laser Doppler flowmeter for measurements. The values read from the flowmeter directly and
expressed as mean  SEM (n = 6-8), **P < 0.01; versus control mice; #P < 0.05 versus diabetes + MCAO mice. (B) In vivo imaging of blood flow by twophoton laser-scanning microscopy (TPLSM) through a cranial window. (C) TPLSM in conjunction with labeling of the blood plasma with Texas Red dextran
is used for mapping the angioarchitecture as well as quantify the transport of individual red blood cell (RBC) in arteries and veins. Bar = 100 lm. (D) The
changes in velocity of RBC plotted against diameter in artery (red) and vein (green) in control, diabetic, MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO mice were detected
using TPLSM. Bar graphs display velocity of artery (E) and vein (F) in control (Con), diabetic (DM), MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO (DM + MCAO) mice. The
data are expressed as the mean  SEM (n = 6–8), *P < 0.05; ***P < 0.001 versus control mice; ##P < 0.01; ###P < 0.001 versus DM+MCAO mice. (G)
Changes in volume flux (lL/second) in artery and vein in control, diabetic, MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO mice.

818

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

J.-Y. Huang et al.

approximately 50% greater reduction in rCBF following MCAO
(Figure 1A).
Two-photon laser-scanning microscopy in conjunction with
labeling of the blood plasma with Texas Red dextran was used
to map the angioarchitecture [8,15,17,18] and to quantify the
transit of individual RBCs (Figure 1B) by TPLSM as previously
described (Figure S1, Movie S1) [19]. The expression of GFP
by endothelial cells enabled the visualization of the blood vessel walls. We categorized cortical vessels located within a
depth of 100–200 lm from the surface by their topology, vessel wall morphology, diameter, and RBC flow direction (Figure 1B,C; Figures S1 and S2) to identify distinct blood vessel
(Figure 1C, Movie S1). To quantify center line RBC velocity
and the direction of blood flow in individual vessel, a line
scan method was established by scanning single vessels and
extracting the average speed over this period (Figure S2–S4).
We also measured the cerebrovascular blood flow in veins
and arteries by this line scan method. Bar graphs display marginal means, and scatter plots display the different patterns of
distribution for vessels characterized by their diameters and
average RBC velocities in different experimental groups (Figure 1D). Unexpectedly, diabetic mice had no significant
changes in RBC velocity in arteries (Figure 1E), but had a
decreased blood velocity in veins (Figure 1F), implying that
the veins were dilated or arteries were constricted. A decline
in blood velocity in both arteries and veins was observed in
diabetic mice after MCAO (Figure 1E, F; Movie S2–S5). The
oxygen and nutrient carrying capacities of a blood vessel are
proportional to their RBC and fluid flux [20], but no difference in nutrient carrying capacity was detected as the RBC
volume flux (lL/second) was similar in arteries and veins in
all groups (Figure 1G).

Diabetes Increases Susceptibility to Cerebral
Capillary RBCs Velocity Disturbances in Brain
Ischemia
The cerebral microcirculation is closely coupled to normal brain
metabolism and function. Although hyperglycemia can injure
brain capillaries [1,3], it is unclear whether brain capillary flow
is sufficient to meet the energy demands of the parenchyma
during diabetes. Thus, RBC velocities were measured by intravital TPLSM after MCAO to examine whether induced ischemia
altered cerebral capillary blood flow. Figure 2A and B provides
representative tracings of vessel wall morphology and RBC
velocity in brain capillaries. Bar graphs of marginal means with
individual scatter plots indicated that the RBC velocity in capillaries of diabetic mice was decreased (0.93  0.11 mm/second,
Figure 2C, D) and decreased further in the diabetic mice after
MCAO (0.62  0.07 mm/second, Figure 2C, D). Data on RBC
velocity and vessel diameter were used to calculate the RBC
flux in a given vessel to provide an index of the vascular oxygen and nutrient carrying capacity of the blood vessel [21].
Whereas MCAO did not change volume flux of RBCs (in lL/s)
in arteries or veins, there was a decrease in capillary RBC volume flux and this was exacerbated by diabetes (Figure 2E). We
did not detect a change in the shape or diameter of RBCs to
explain these findings (Figure S5).

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Diabetes Exaggerate Microvascular Insult

Two-Photon Imaging of Cortical Surface
Microvessels Reveals Turbulent Brain Capillary
Flow in Diabetic Mice
Blood flow turbulence increases flow resistance and slows blood
flow in the circulation and can predispose the vessel wall to remodeling. The RBCs patterns in vessels from control and diabetic mice
maintained a unidirectional flow (Figure 3A-a, A-b; B-a, B-b).
Unexpectedly, the pattern of blood flow in MCAO developed a sinuous character (Figure 3C-a, C-b), with turbulence detected in
brain capillary flow in diabetic mice after MCAO (Figure 3D-a, Db). The direction of blood flow after MCAO in control mice changed
in an “in-line” pattern, but in diabetic mice, it became sinusoidal.
The “back-and-forth” pattern of flow after MCAO in normal mice
should provide a reasonable supply of oxygen and nutrients. In
contrast, the more extreme sinuous patterns after MCAO in diabetic mice led to episodes of blood flow standstill. Such a pattern of
severely disturbed flow after the combination of ischemia and
hyperglycemia may be detrimental to cerebral function or survival.
The capillary blood flow becomes very severely disrupted with turbulence developing only in this diabetic group of mice after MCAO.

Diabetes Potentiates Neurovascular Damage in
Brain Ischemia
Neurological degeneration is associated with disturbed microcirculation in the brain, which may be potentiated by diabetes [22].
Therefore, neurological scores were determined after MCAO to
quantify the neurological functions 24 h after induction of ischemia (Figure 4A). More severe neurological deficits were observed
after MCAO in diabetic mice. Neurological damage was further
quantified by immunoblotting for the expression of a 150-kDa
spectrin breakdown product. A significant increase in spectrin
breakdown was observed after MCAO only in diabetic mice (Figure 4B). Preservation of an intact BBB depends on normal function of tight junction proteins [7]. There was extensive
degradation of zona occludens (ZO-1) and occludin after MCAO
in diabetic mice (Figure 4B).
Multifunctional CaMKII has been used to assess cognition [23].
It phosphorylates a variety of substrates such as synapsin I and
GluRI [23]. Although CaMKII (Thr 286), synapsin I (Ser603), and
GluR1 (Ser831) phosphorylation were preserved after MCAO in
control mice, there was a significant decrease in phospho-CaMKII
and its substrates after MCAO in diabetic mice (Figure 4C).

Discussion
This study has demonstrated that the improved spatial and temporal resolution of quantifying blood flow using intravital TPLSM in
mice was clearly more sensitive than laser Doppler flowmetry. It
permitted the quantification of RBC velocity in capillary blood
flow and demonstrated that the disturbed pattern of cerebral capillary blood flow in diabetes was associated with a worsening of
neurovascular damage after brain ischemia.
The use of TPLSM in Tie2-GFP mice enabled the individual
assessment of cerebral blood flow in arteries, veins, and capillaries.
We confirm the results of Knudsen that, overall, cerebral blood
flow is maintained in diabetes [24]. However, despite unchanged

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

819

Diabetes Exaggerate Microvascular Insult

J.-Y. Huang et al.

(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

RBC volume flux in arteries or veins after MCAO, diabetic mice
had markedly abnormal capillary blood flow following MCAO.
The turbulent capillary blood flow detected after MCAO in diabetic mice is potentially damaging to the endothelium [20,21] and
may worsen cerebral microvascular perfusion after ischemia.
Disturbances in BBB function are seen in diabetic animals [7].
Diabetes increased the degradation of tight junction proteins after
MCAO indicating impaired cerebral endothelial function. This may
have contributed to the defects in BBB function and to the worsened
cognitive outcomes. We confirm the reports [5,6,10] that hyperglycemia worsened loss of cerebral function after ischemia, as assessed
from a decrease in phospho-CaMKII (Thr286) and its substrates.

820

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

Figure 2 Diabetes increases disturbances in
cerebral capillary red blood cells (RBCs)
velocity in brain ischemia. (A) Two-photon
laser-scanning microscopy (TPLSM) in
conjunction with labeling of the blood plasma
with Texas Red dextran used for mapping the
angioarchitecture of capillaries in control,
diabetic, middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO), and diabetic + MCAO mice.
Bar = 100 lm. (B) Line scan data of the blood
flow pattern in capillaries of control, diabetic,
MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO mice. (C) The
changes in RBC velocity versus diameter in
capillary in control, diabetic, MCAO, and
diabetic + MCAO mice using TPLSM. (D) Bar
graphs display RBC velocity in capillaries in
diabetic, MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO mice.
(E) Volume flux changes in capillaries in
control, diabetic, MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO
mice. The data are expressed as mean  SEM
(n = 6–8), *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01;
***P < 0.001 versus control mice;
###
P < 0.001 versus diabetic + MCAO mice.

A transient 20 min MCAO 4 weeks after induction of
diabetes was selected to ensure survival of the mice [7,25].
Simultaneous measurements of capillary blood flow, calcium
imaging, and blood gas analysis should throw further light on
neurovascular dynamics in chronic hyperglycemia. However,
this study has identified disturbed capillary blood flow as a
therapeutic target to lessen stroke and cognitive decline in
diabetes.
In summary, the present study using intravital TPLSM has
demonstrated that disturbances of cerebral capillary blood flow
in diabetes are associated with exaggerated neurovascular and
probably cognitive defects after ischemia.

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

J.-Y. Huang et al.

Diabetes Exaggerate Microvascular Insult

(A)
a

b

(B)
a

b

(C)
a

b

(D)
a

b

Figure 3 Two-photon imaging of cortical surface microvessels reveals turbulent brain capillary flow in diabetic mice. (A) In control mice, the RBCs keep
moving in one direction and no reverse are observed. The dark streaks running from upper left to lower right reflect the normal direction of brain capillary
flow in control mice. (B) The pattern of RBCs moving was recorded in diabetic mice. (C) The reversed direction of brain capillary flow in middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) mice. It demonstrated that the direction of blood flow changes in a “straightforward” pattern that the reverse flow occurs
paroxysmally. (D) Turbulent brain capillary flow was observed in diabetic + MCAO mice. Different with MCAO mice, a “sinuous” pattern was observed in
diabetic + MCAO group, which seems to be more severe and leads to cessation of blood flow supply in a certain time period. Bar = 100 lm.

(A)

(C)

(B)

Figure 4 Diabetes increases susceptibility to
neurovascular damage in brain ischemia. (A)
Neurological scores were determined in middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and
diabetic + MCAO mice. The data are expressed
as mean  SEM (n = 6–8), **P < 0.01 versus
MCAO mice. (B) Immunoblot analysis of
spectrin, ZO-1, and occludin in brain cortex of
control, diabetic, MCAO, and diabetic + MCAO
mice. The bar graphs indicate the ratio of OD
for indicated proteins. (C) Immunoblot analysis
of the phosphorylation of CaMKII (Thr286),
synapsin I (Ser603), and GluR1 (Ser831) in brain
cortex of control, diabetic, MCAO, and
diabetic + MCAO mice. The bar graphs
indicate the ratio of OD for indicated proteins.

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

821

Diabetes Exaggerate Microvascular Insult

J.-Y. Huang et al.

Sources of Funding

Conflict of Interest

This study was funded in part by National Natural Science
Foundations of China (81120108023, 81202533) and NIH Grants
(DK-49870; DK-36079; HL-68686).

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

10. Liu C, Wu J, Zou MH. Activation of AMP-activated

1. Brismar T, Maurex L, Cooray G, et al. Predictors of

microcirculation on synaptic structure and

dysfunction of brain microvascular endothelial cell

sensory-evoked hemodynamic responses in vivo. PLoS Biol

cognitive impairment in type 1 diabetes.

tight-junction dynamics. Free Radic Biol Med

Psychoneuroendocrino 2007;32:1041–1051.

2012;53:1213–1221.

2. Jones DT. Neural networks, cognition, and diabetes:

phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B pathway

3. Ryan CM, Geckle MO, Orchard TJ. Cognitive efficiency

by a vanadyl compound mediates its neuroprotective
effect in mouse brain ischemia. Neuroscience

declines over time in adults with Type 1 diabetes: Effects
of micro- and macrovascular complications. Diabetologia
2003;46:940–948.

2007;148:221–229.
Resident endothelial cells surrounding damaged arterial

The impact of type 1 diabetes on brain development and

endothelium reendothelialize the lesion. Arterioscler

function. Nat Clin Pract Neurol 2006;2:78–86.

Thromb Vasc Biol 2010;30:1725–1732.

5. Goldin A, Beckman JA, Schmidt AM, Creager MA.

Limitations of collateral flow after occlusion of a single
cortical penetrating arteriole. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2010;30:1914–1927.
20. Shih AY, Friedman B, Drew PJ, Tsai PS, Lyden PD,
Kleinfeld D. Active dilation of penetrating arterioles

12. Itoh Y, Toriumi H, Yamada S, Hoshino H, Suzuki N.

4. Northam EA, Rankins D, Cameron FJ. Therapy insight:

2007;5:e119.
19. Nishimura N, Rosidi NL, Iadecola C, Schaffer CB.

11. Shioda N, Ishigami T, Han F, et al. Activation of

What is the connection? Diabetes 2012;61:1653–1655.

18. Zhang S, Murphy TH. Imaging the impact of cortical

protein kinase alleviates high-glucose-induced

13. Moriguchi S, Oomura Y, Shioda N, et al. Ca2 + /

restores red blood cell flux to penumbral neocortex
after focal stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2009;29:738–
751.
21. Long DS, Smith ML, Pries AR, Ley K, Damiano ER.
Microviscometry reveals reduced blood viscosity and

Advanced glycation end products: Sparking the

calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II and protein

altered shear rate and shear stress profiles in microvessels

development of diabetic vascular injury. Circulation

kinase C activities mediate extracellular glucose-regulated

after hemodilution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

2006;114:597–605.

hippocampal synaptic efficacy. Mol Cell Neurosci

6. Jakobsen J, Nedergaard M, Aarslew-Jensen M, Diemer NH.
Regional brain glucose metabolism and blood flow in

2004;101:10060–10065.
22. Huber JD, VanGilder RL, Houser KA.

2011;46:101–107.
14. Fan YY, Hu WW, Dai HB, et al. Activation of the central

Streptozotocin-induced diabetes progressively increases

streptozocin-induced diabetic rats. Diabetes 1990;39:

histaminergic system is involved in hypoxia-induced

437–440.

stroke tolerance in adult mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab

in rats. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2006;291:H2660–

2011;31:305–314.

H2668.

7. Kamada H, Yu F, Nito C, Chan PH. Influence of
hyperglycemia on oxidative stress and matrix

15. Kleinfeld D, Mitra PP, Helmchen F, Denk W. Fluctuations

metalloproteinase-9 activation after focal cerebral

and stimulus-induced changes in blood flow observed in

ischemia/reperfusion in rats: Relation to blood-brain

individual capillaries in layers 2 through 4 of rat

barrier dysfunction. Stroke 2007;38:

neocortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95:

1044–1049.
8. Schaffer CB, Friedman B, Nishimura N, et al.

15741–15746.
meningeal blood vessel diameter in vivo with a plug-in for

reveals a robust redistribution in blood flow after vascular

ImageJ. Microvasc Res 2010;80:258–266.
17. Hirase H, Creso J, Buzsaki G. Capillary level imaging of

9. Helmchen F, Denk W. Deep tissue two-photon
microscopy. Nat Methods 2005;2:932–940.

and memory. Neurosci Res 2000;38:3–17.
24. Knudsen GM, Gobel U, Paulson OB, Kuschinsky W.
flow in untreated short-term and long-term
streptozotocin diabetes. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
1991;11:361–365.
25. Luitse MJ, Biessels GJ, Rutten GE, Kappelle LJ. Diabetes,
hyperglycaemia, and acute ischaemic stroke. Lancet Neurol

foci. Neuroscience 2004;128:209–216.

2012;11:261–271.

The following supplementary material is available for this article:

Figure S1. The 3D view of architecture of cerebral vessels by
TPLSM.
Figure S2. Choosing scanning rate.
Figure S3. Line scan method to quantify the flow speed of RBCs.
Figure S4. Determination of blood flow direction.

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 816–822

kinase II activity in hippocampal long-term potentiation

local cerebral blood flow in bicuculline-induced epileptic

Supporting Information

822

23. Fukunaga K, Miyamoto E. A working model of CaM

Regional density of perfused capillaries and cerebral blood

16. Fischer MJ, Uchida S, Messlinger K. Measurement of

Two-photon imaging of cortical surface microvessels
occlusion. PLoS Biol 2006;4:e22.

blood-brain barrier permeability in specific brain regions

Figure S5. Representative images of RBCs morphology by
Wright-Giemsa staining.
Movie S1. Movie to show the 3-dimensional reconstruction of
arteries, veins and capillaries.
Movie S2. Time-lapse of blood flow in control mice.
Movie S3. Time-lapse of blood flow in diabetic mice.
Movie S4. Time-lapse of blood flow in MCAO mice.
Movie S5. Time-lapse of blood flow in diabetci+MCAO mice.

ª 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

