Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jchemneu

Differential expression of the calcium-sensing receptor in the ischemic
and border zones after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats
Jeong Sook Noh a, Ha-Jin Pak a, Yoo-Jin Shin a, Tae-Ryong Riew a, Joo-Hee Park a,
Young Wha Moon b, Mun-Yong Lee a,*
a

Department of Anatomy, Catholic Neuroscience Institute, Cell Death Disease Research Center, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea,
137-701 Seoul, South Korea
Department of Natural Sciences, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, 137-701, Seoul, South Korea

b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Article history:
Received 30 January 2015
Received in revised form 20 April 2015
Accepted 15 May 2015
Available online 23 May 2015

G-protein-coupled calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) has been recently recognized as an important
modulator of diverse cellular functions, beyond the regulation of systemic calcium homeostasis. To
identify whether CaSR is involved in the pathophysiology of stroke, we studied the spatiotemporal
regulation of CaSR protein expression in rats undergoing transient focal cerebral ischemia, which was
induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion. We observed very weak or negligible immunoreactivity for
CaSR in the striatum of sham-operated rats, as well as in the contralateral striatum of ischemic rats after
reperfusion. However, CaSR expression was induced in the ischemic and border zones of the lesion in
ischemic rats. Six hours post-reperfusion there was an upregulation of CaSR in the ischemic zone, which
seemed to decrease after seven days. This upregulation preferentially affected some neurons and cells
associated with blood vessels, particularly endothelial cells and pericytes. In contrast, CaSR expression in
the peri-infarct region was prominent three days after reperfusion, and with the exception of some
neurons, it was mostly located in reactive astrocytes, up to day 14 after ischemia. On the other hand,
activated microglia/macrophages in both the ischemic and border zones were devoid of speciﬁc labeling
for CaSR at any time point after reperfusion, despite their massive inﬁltration in both regions. Our results
show heterogeneity in CaSR-positive cells within the ischemic and border zones, suggesting that CaSR
expression is regulated in response to the altered extracellular ionic environment caused by ischemic
injury. Thus, CaSR may have a multifunctional role in the pathophysiology of ischemic stroke, possibly in
vascular remodeling and astrogliosis.
ß 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Pericytes
Receptors, calcium-sensing
Reactive astrocytes
Corpus striatum
Stroke
Endothelial cells
Microglia
Vascular remodeling

Introduction
Calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR), which is coupled to Gprotein, was initially associated with the maintenance of calcium
homeostasis by regulating the secretion of the parathyroid
hormone (Brown et al., 1993; Brown and MacLeod, 2001).
However, the identiﬁcation of calcium as an external ligand has
generated a special interest in the function of CaSR, unrelated to
systemic calcium homeostasis (see as reviews Conigrave and
Ward, 2013; Smajilovic and Tfelt-Hansen, 2007; Ward et al., 2012).
Particularly, cumulative evidence has shown that CaSR is involved
in modulating wide-ranging aspects of cellular function in the
central nervous system, by sensing changes in the extracellular
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +82 2 2258 7261; fax: +82 2 536 3110.
E-mail address: munylee@catholic.ac.kr (M.-Y. Lee).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jchemneu.2015.05.001
0891-0618/ß 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Ca2+ levels (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010; Bouschet and Henley,
2005). CaSR is present in almost all brain areas, with high
expression in the subfornical organ, olfactory bulb, and hypothalamus, suggesting a role for CaSR in region-speciﬁc neuronal
functions (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010; Bouschet and Henley,
2005; Chen et al., 2010; Mudo et al., 2009; Ruat and Traiffort, 2013;
Yano et al., 2004). In addition, expression of CaSR in nerve
terminals suggests its involvement in synaptic plasticity and
neurotransmission, while its presence in glial cells (i.e., oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, and microglia), suggests a role for CaSR in
local ionic homeostasis in the brain (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2010;
Bouschet and Henley, 2005; Ruat and Traiffort, 2013). However,
the role of CaSR in glia and neurons remains unclear.
There have been several reports regarding the regulation of CaSR
expression in a variety of pathological conditions, including epileptic
seizures (Mudo et al., 2009), Alzheimer’s disease (Armato et al.,

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

2012; Chiarini et al., 2009; Conley et al., 2009; Dal Pra et al., 2014),
and traumatic brain injury (Kim et al., 2013). In addition, Kim et al.
(2011, 2013) showed that after traumatic and ischemic brain injury,
CaSR overexpression and concurrent down-regulation of metabotropic g-aminobutyric acid receptor (GABABR) occurred before
apparent neurodegeneration, suggesting that alteration of CaSR
expression contributes to brain injury. Considering that calcium
overload due to an excitotoxic mechanism contributes to neuronal
injury induced by cerebral ischemia (Candelario-Jalil, 2009; Mehta
et al., 2013), the induction of CaSR in the ischemic brain is of great
interest. However, the temporal regulation and identiﬁcation of the
precise cell phenotypes expressing CaSR in the ischemic brain
remain to be established.
In the present study, we determined the spatiotemporal
expression pattern of CaSR in response to a disruption of ionic
homeostasis caused by ischemic injury. For this purpose, we used a
rat model of focal cerebral ischemia-reperfusion, induced by the
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Our results clearly
showed that CaSR expression in the ischemic zone (which is
destined for tissue destruction) presented a different pattern than
in the peri-infarct border zone (which has the potential for full
recovery). Thus, we focused our attention on identifying the
phenotypes of CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic and border zones
using double-labeling techniques for various cell type-speciﬁc
markers.
Materials and methods
Animal preparation
All experimental procedures were conducted in accordance
with the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, the Guide for the Care and
Use of Laboratory Animals, and the Guidelines and Policies for
Rodent Survival Surgery, and were approved by the IACUC
(Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee) in the College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea (Approval Number:
CUMC-2014-0006-01).
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (250–300 g) were used in this
study. Transient focal ischemia was induced by the intraluminal
thread method described previously (Longa et al., 1989). Brieﬂy,
the right external carotid artery was ligated with a 4-0 silk suture,
and a 3-0 rounded tip nylon suture was introduced into the right
common carotid artery. The suture was advanced through the
internal carotid artery to occlude the MCA. Reperfusion was
performed by withdrawing the surgical suture from the common
carotid artery after 60-min ischemia. Interruption of blood ﬂow
distal to ligation and the restoration of blood ﬂow in the right
common carotid artery, external carotid artery, and internal
carotid artery were conﬁrmed under a dissecting microscope. Body
temperatures (measured rectally) were maintained at 37.5  0.3 8C
with a heating lamp during and after ischemia. Sham-operated rats
underwent the same experimental procedure except that the MCA
was not occluded. In this model, ischemia for 60 min consistently
resulted in a large infarct conﬁned to the territory of the right MCA,
whereas no morphological ischemic injury was detected in the
territory of the left MCA.
Animals were allowed to live for 6 h, or 3, 7, or 14 days after
reperfusion. At each of the four time points following reperfusion,
animals (n = 5 per time point for ischemic group; n = 3 per time
point for the sham-operated group) were deeply anesthetized with
16.9% urethane (10 mL/kg i.p.) and sacriﬁced by transcardial
perfusion with a ﬁxative containing 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer (PB, pH 7.4). In addition, at 3 (n = 7) and 7 (n = 7)
days following MCA occlusion (MCAO), ischemic animals were
killed for quantitative analysis. For western blot analysis, rats from
4 groups (sham controls, experimental rats 6 h, or 3, 7, or 14 days

41

after reperfusion (n = 5 per group) were killed by decapitation
under anesthesia (16.9% urethane; 10 mL/kg i.p.). The cortical and
striatal tissues from the ipsilateral (ischemic) and contralateral
hemispheres were carefully dissected under stereoscopic microscope and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Brain samples
were stored at 70 8C until further processing.
To evaluate tissue injury in animals subjected to 1 h MCAO, rats
(n = 3) were deeply anesthetized with 16.9% urethane (10 mL/kg
i.p.) at 3 days after reperfusion. Following decapitation, brains
were quickly removed and were sliced at 1-mm thickness. Brain
slices were incubated at 37 8C for 30 min in a 2% solution of 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA).
Histochemistry and immunohistochemistry
To simultaneously detect apoptotic cells and the CaSR protein, we
performed immunostaining for CaSR and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining. Free-ﬂoating
sections (25-mm thick) were incubated at 37 8C for 60 min with
biotinylated 20 -deoxyuridine-50 -triphosphate (dUTP), according to
the manufacturer’s protocol (Roche Diagnostics Corporation,
Indianapolis, IN, USA). The sections were then immunostained with
monoclonal mouse anti-CaSR antibody (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:100),
followed by 1-hr incubation with ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)conjugated donkey anti-mouse antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch,
West Grove, PA, USA; 1:50) for CaSR staining and Cy3-conjugated
streptavidin (Jackson ImmunoResearch; 1:1500) for the TUNEL
method. The speciﬁcity of immunoreactivity was conﬁrmed by the
absence of immunohistochemical reaction in sections from which
primary or secondary antibodies were omitted. Counterstaining of
cell nuclei was carried out with DAPI (40 ,6-diamidino-20 -phenyindole, Roche, Mannheim, Germany; 1:1000) for 10 min. Slides were
viewed with a confocal microscope (LSM 700; Carl Zeiss Co. Ltd.,
Oberkochen, Germany) equipped with four lasers (Diode 405, Argon
488, HeNe 543, HeNe 633). Images were converted to the TIFF
format, and contrast levels were adjusted using Adobe Photoshop v.
7.0 (Adobe System, San Jose, CA, USA).
Immunohistochemistry and double labeling
For double-immunoﬂuorescence histochemistry, sections were
incubated at 4 8C overnight with a mixture of monoclonal mouse
anti-CaSR antibody (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:100) and one of following
antibodies: polyclonal rabbit antibody to glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP; Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA; 1:1500), ionized
calcium-binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1; Wako Pure Chemical
Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan; 1:500), NG2 chondroitin sulfate
proteoglycan (NG2; Millipore; 1:500), laminin (Sigma-Aldrich;
1:100), von Willebrand factor (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:200), Ki67 (Novocastra Laboratories Ltd., Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK; 1:1000), and
biotin-conjugated mouse monoclonal anti-neuronal nuclei (NeuN;
Millipore; 1:500). Antibody staining was visualized using the
following secondary antibodies: Cy3-conjugated donkey antimouse (Jackson ImmunoResearch; 1:2000), Alexa Fluor 488 goat
anti-mouse (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA; 1:300), Alexa Fluor
488 goat anti-rabbit (Molecular Probes; 1:300), and Cy3-conjugated
streptavidin (Jackson ImmunoResearch; 1:1500). Control sections
were prepared as described above. Counterstaining of cell nuclei was
carried out by incubating the sections with DAPI for 10 min. Slides
were viewed with a confocal microscope.
Cell counting
To count the number of CaSR-positive cells and CaSR/GFAP
or CaSR/NeuN double-labeled cells in the border zone at days 3 and

42

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

7 after reperfusion, three coronal sections per animal (n = 7 per
time point), cut at 100-mm intervals, were obtained from the
invariable region between bregma levels 0.7 mm and 1.20 mm
dorsal (Paxinos and Watson, 2006). Three areas (160  160 mm per
ﬁeld) along the outside borders adjacent to the ischemic zone of
each section were chosen and captured at 400 magniﬁcation
using a confocal laser microscope. CaSR-positive cells were scored
when their nuclei could be clearly seen, and among them, cells
clearly showing NeuN-positive nuclei or GFAP-positive processes
were counted, separately. Statistical signiﬁcance was assessed by
unpaired t test, in which P < 0.05 was accepted as signiﬁcant. All
values are given as means and SEM.
Western blot analysis
For the immunoblot analysis, protein was isolated from the
ipsilateral or contralateral hemispheres using boiling lysis buffer
(1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 1.0 mM sodium orthovanadate,
10 mM Tris, pH 7.4). Equal amounts (20 mg) of total protein were
separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (10%) and
transferred to PVDF membrane. Immunostaining of the blots was
performed using monoclonal mouse anti-CaSR antibody (SigmaAldrich; 3 mg/mL) and anti-b-actin (Sigma-Aldrich; 1:10000).
Membranes were then incubated with peroxidase-coupled secondary antibodies (Millipore; 1:1000) for 1 h at room temperature.
Blots were developed using the Amersham ECL prime western
blotting detection reagent (GE healthcare. Little Chalfont, UK).
Densitometric analysis was performed using the Eagle Eye TMII
Still Video System (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). Statistical
signiﬁcance was determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA)
followed by Dunnett’s t test; P < 0.05 was regarded as signiﬁcant.
Results
CaSR expression is induced in the ischemic hemisphere after MCAO
The mortality rate of MCAO rats was 25.4%, and all shamoperated rats survived after the operation. TTC staining in rats
killed on day 3 after 1-h MCAO revealed a prominent and
comparable ischemic zone conﬁned to the ipsilateral MCA territory
including the majority of the striatum and cerebral cortex (Fig. 1A).
To examine the induction of CaSR protein expression after
transient MCAO, we performed western blot analysis with protein
extracted from the ischemic or non-ischemic hemisphere (Fig. 1B
and C). Immunoblotting revealed that a band of about 130 kDa
corresponding to the CaSR protein was clearly induced in the
ipsilateral hemisphere. The intensity of CaSR protein expression
signiﬁcantly increased at 6 h and peaked at 3 days in the ischemic
hemisphere compared with the contralateral control hemisphere.
Thereafter, the expression level declined, although the enhanced
expression was maintained until at least day 14, which was the
latest time point examined.
CaSR expression is induced in the ischemic zone 6 h after reperfusion
Immunoﬂuorescence labeling revealed a substantial increase in
CaSR labeling in the ischemic brain, including the parietaltemporal cortex and striatum, as early as 6 h after reperfusion
(Fig. 2A). However, no prominent positive proﬁles were identiﬁed
in the corresponding contralateral (i.e., non-ischemic) areas
(Fig. 2A), or in the striatum of sham-operated rats (data not
shown). Double labeling for CaSR and TUNEL revealed an overlapping regional distribution conﬁned to the ischemic zone,
resulting in a clear demarcation of the ischemic and peri-infarct
border zones at this time point (Fig. 2B). As shown at higher
magniﬁcation (Fig. 2C,D), CaSR expression was induced in some

Fig. 1. Temporal regulation of CaSR protein expression after ischemic injury.
(A) Representative brain slice stained by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC)
3 days after MCAO. TTC staining showed a sharp border between undamaged (red
colored) and infarcted tissue (pale). Asterisks indicate the ischemic zone, and its
border is demarcated by a broken line. (B) Representative results of western blot
analysis for CaSR protein expression in the ipsilateral (i) and contralateral (c)
hemisphere extracts from sham controls and rats killed at 6 h, 3, 7, and 14 days after
reperfusion. Note that a band of about 130 kDa corresponding to CaSR protein was
clearly induced in the ipsilateral ischemic hemisphere. (C) Quantiﬁcation of CaSR
protein expression. Data were obtained by densitometry and were normalized
using b-actin as the loading control. Results are expressed in relative optical density
and represent means  SEM. The intensity of CaSR protein expression signiﬁcantly
increased at 6 h, peaked at 3 days, and declined thereafter, but the enhanced
expression was maintained until at least day 14. # P < 0.05 compared to the
contralateral hemispheres at the same time point; * P < 0.05 compared to the
ipsilateral hemispheres of the sham controls.

TUNEL-positive cells, but most CaSR-positive cells were devoid of
TUNEL staining, and vice versa. In the ischemic zone, some CaSRpositive cells presented fusiform or spindle-shaped cell bodies
with processes; these were NeuN-positive neurons; however, most
neurons did not express CaSR (Fig. 2E and F). In addition, nearly all
neurons in the contralateral non-ischemic striatum were devoid of
CaSR labeling (Fig. 2G). CaSR labeling was located in the cytoplasm
but was not observed in the nucleus (Fig. 2C–F).
CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic zone were located in close
vicinity to blood vessels, including capillaries and vessels of larger
diameter labeled with laminin, which is localized in the basal
lamina of blood vessels (Eriksdotter-Nilsson et al., 1986) (Fig. 3A–
C). Double labeling with CaSR and the endothelial cell marker von
Willebrand factor revealed an overlapping expression within
vascular structures (Fig. 3D–F). Observation of the double-stained
sections at higher magniﬁcation revealed that CaSR expression was
induced in most endothelial cells (Fig. 3G–I). However, double
labeling for CaSR and GFAP or Iba1 showed no signiﬁcant
immunoreactivity for CaSR in astrocytes or microglia in the
ischemic zone, despite the evident glial responses at this time
point (Fig. 3J,K,M and N). In contrast, in the corresponding
contralateral (i.e., non-ischemic) areas of the brain, where GFAP

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

43

Fig. 2. Localization of CaSR expression and its relation with the cell death marker TUNEL in the ischemic zone of the striatum 6 h after ischemic injury.
(A) There was a remarkable increase in CaSR immunoreactivity in the ischemic region, but neither in the peri-infarct nor in the contralateral (i.e., non-ischemic) region. The
ischemic region is indicated by asterisks, and its border is demarcated by a broken line. (B) Double-labeling for CaSR and TUNEL showing that OPN and TUNEL staining was
restricted to the infarcted tissue (left side of the broken line). (C, D) Higher magniﬁcation views of the ischemic region (boxed areas in B). Note that some CaSR-positive cells
were dying cells (arrowheads in C), but most TUNEL-positive cells were not positive for CaSR, or vice versa. (E–G) Double-labeling for CaSR and NeuN in the ischemic region (E,
F) and in the contralateral (non-ischemic) striatum (G). A subset of neurons in the ischemic region (arrowheads in E and F) showed CaSR expression. Note that no signiﬁcant
staining for CaSR was detected in neurons in the contralateral striatum. Cell nuclei are stained with DAPI. Abbreviations: cc, corpus callosum; LV, lateral ventricle. Scale
bars = 500 mm in A; 200 mm in B; 50 mm in C–G.

44

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

Fig. 3. Characterization of CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic zone six hr after reperfusion.
(A–C) Double-labeling for CaSR and laminin showing that CaSR expression was localized to, or in close vicinity to, laminin-positive blood vessels. (B, C) Higher-magniﬁcation
views of the boxed area in A. (D–I) Double-labeling for CaSR and von Willebrand factor (vWF) endothelial cell marker showing that CaSR-positive cells frequently coexpressed
vWF. (G–I) Higher-magniﬁcation views of the boxed area in D–F, respectively. (J–O) Double-labeling for CaSR and GFAP (K, L), or Iba1 (N, O) in the ischemic region (J, K, M, N)
and in the contralateral striatum (L, O). Note that CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic region were negative for astroglial and microglial markers. Note also that no speciﬁc
staining for CaSR was detected in the contralateral striatum, where GFAP and IBa1 staining were very weak or negligible. Cell nuclei are stained with DAPI. Scale
bars = 100 mm in A, D–F, J–L; 50 mm in B, C, G–I, M–O.

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

45

and Iba1 staining were very weak or negligible, no speciﬁc staining
for CaSR was detected (Fig. 3L and O).

only a few neurons presented CaSR immunoreactivity at this time
point (data not shown).

Differential expression of CaSR in the ischemic and border zones at 3
and 7 days after reperfusion

Discussion

On day 3 after the induction of stroke, CaSR immunoreactivity
increased preferentially in the peri-infarct border zone, which was
clearly demarcated from the ischemic zone by the absence of
TUNEL-positive cells (Fig. 4A). In the ischemic zone, however,
CaSR-positive cells seemed to be less prominent compared to those
at 6 h, and dying or dead cells were devoid of immunolabeling for
CaSR (Fig. 4A,B). Double labeling with CaSR and laminin revealed
that the CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic zone were still
associated with vasculature (Fig. 4C and D), although the
microvessels had become fragmented and were disintegrated
compared with those at 6 h, as has been observed previously
(Burggraf et al., 2008; Li et al., 2012). CaSR expression was colocalized in part with von Willebrand factor-positive endothelial
cells (Fig. 4E–G). In addition, some CaSR-positive cells were
positive for NG2, a marker for microvascular pericytes (Dore-Duffy,
2003) (Fig. 4H–J), or for Ki67, which labels cells at all phases of the
cell cycle (Gerdes et al., 1983) (Fig. 4K–M).
We further characterized CaSR-positive cells in the border zone
by colabeling with several markers. Double labeling for CaSR and
NeuN revealed that only some neurons were positive for CaSR
(Fig. 5A and B). In addition, double labeling for CaSR and GFAP
indicated that the majority of CaSR-positive cells in the border
zone were reactive astrocytes, while the ischemic zone was
virtually devoid of GFAP immunoreactivity (Fig. 5C–F). We also
performed double immunoﬂuorescence labeling for CaSR and Iba1.
Almost no colocalization for CaSR and Iba1 was detected in both
the ischemic and border zones, where large, round, amoeboid-like
brain macrophages, and activated stellate microglial cells with
thick and short processes were observed, respectively (Fig. 5G–J).
This pattern of labeling was maintained 7 days after reperfusion, but there was a decrease in the intensity of CaSR
immunoreactivity in the ischemic zone (Fig. 6A). In the periinfarct zone, a subset of neurons also showed CaSR immunoreactivity (Fig. 6A–D), but most CaSR-positive cells were reactive
astrocytes (Fig. 6E–G). On the contrary, Iba1-positive microglia/
macrophages were devoid of speciﬁc labeling for CaSR (Fig. 6H–J).
To determine the relative proportion of CaSR-positive astrocytes or neurons in the border zone, phenotype-speciﬁc markerpositive cells expressing CaSR were counted at 3 and 7 days after
reperfusion. The increase in the number of CaSR-positive cells in
the border zone was observed between 3 and 7 days after
reperfusion, but the proportion of phenotype-speciﬁc markerpositive cells was similar in both groups (Fig. 6K and L). CaSRpositive cells that co-expressed GFAP were abundant in the border
zone; at 3 and 7 days, 62.7% and 61.4% of all CaSR-positive cells
were astrocytes, respectively (Fig. 6K). By contrast, neurons
comprised 23.6% and 21.1% of all CaSR-positive cells at 3 and 7
days, respectively (Fig. 6L). These results indicated that the
majority of CaSR-positive cells in the border zone were reactive
astrocytes, although a subset of neurons were labeled.
CaSR expression and astrogliosis in the peri-infarct border zone 14
days after reperfusion
On day 14, CaSR immunoreactivity was still detected in the
border zone, particularly in areas immediately adjacent to the
ischemic zone. Virtually all CaSR labeling was located in GFAPpositive astrocytes (Fig. 7A–E). In contrast, Iba1-positive microglia/
macrophages within the ischemic and border zones were still
devoid of speciﬁc CaSR immunoreactivity (Fig. 7F–J). In addition,

Our study shows the expression proﬁle and cellular distribution
of CaSR in the rat brain after transient focal cerebral ischemia. Very
weak or negligible immunoreactivity for CaSR was observed in the
corpus striatum of sham-operated rats, as well as in the
contralateral non-ischemic striatum after reperfusion. CaSR
expression was induced in both the ischemic and border zones
but showed different patterns in these two regions. CaSR
expression in the ischemic zone was induced preferentially in
vessel-associated cells and in some neurons six hr after reperfusion. This was followed by a gradual and sustained induction of
CaSR in reactive astrocytes located in the border zone of the postischemic brain (3–14 days after reperfusion). CaSR labeling was
observed only in the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic expression of CaSR
has been previously shown in several types of cells with enhanced
CaSR expression (Xi et al., 2010; Xing et al., 2010), and intracellular
trafﬁcking and localization of CaSR has been reported as essential
regulators of CaSR functions (Bouschet and Henley, 2005; Bouschet
et al., 2008). Thus, it seems possible that the cytoplasmic
localization of CaSR in the present study reﬂects a functional
status of CaSR activation. In addition, further studies are needed to
obtain detailed and precise information on the subcellular
localization of the CaSR protein in the ischemic brain.
Our study revealed an overlapping regional distribution of CaSR
labeling and TUNEL staining in the ischemic zone, particularly in
the early ischemic period. This ﬁnding is interesting in view of
previous reports showing that ischemia/reperfusion markedly
increased the expression of CaSR, and that an increase in
intracellular calcium mediated by CaSR played an important role
in apoptosis (Xing et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2011). In addition, Kim
et al. (2014) recently demonstrated that ischemic injury leads to
CaSR overexpression and GABABR1 downregulation in injured
neurons, suggesting a novel ischemia-induced injury cascade
involving CaSR. However, our study showed that CaSR was induced
only in a small fraction of lethally damaged or dead cells (and not in
astrocytes and most other neurons), both of which were destined
for cell death (Chen and Swanson, 2003). In addition, in our study
three days after reperfusion, CaSR immunoreactivity was preferentially observed in healthy astroglial cells and in some neurons in
the border zone, where no signiﬁcant TUNEL staining was
observed. Interestingly, Mudo et al. (2009) have suggested a
potential role for CaSR in repairing processes after brain injury.
Thus, it is not likely that induction of CaSR expression is
accompanied by cell death, and our data suggest a phenotypic
and functional heterogeneity of CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic
and border zones.
Induction of CaSR within vessel-like structures in the ischemic
zone was evident within 6 h after reperfusion and was still
prominent at 3 days but appeared to decrease over time. Most
vessel-associated CaSR-positive cells showed co-expression with
von Willebrand factor, indicating that, at least a proportion of,
these cells were endothelial cells. This idea is supported by the fact
that CaSR is functionally expressed on cells of the vascular wall
(including endothelial cells), smooth muscle cells, and adventitial
cells (Smajilovic et al., 2006; Weston et al., 2011; Ziegelstein et al.,
2006). CaSR expression in both large and small blood vessels
highlights its importance in the regulation of vascular tone and
peripheral resistance, since an increase of CaSR expression
contributes to vascular remodeling and hypertension induced by
hypoxia (Li et al., 2011; Molostvov et al., 2009; Peng et al., 2014). In
addition, the rapid induction of CaSR in blood vessels of the
ischemic zone reported here coincides with the period of active

46

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

Fig. 4. Characterization of CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic zone 3 days after reperfusion. (A) Double-labeling for CaSR and TUNEL showing that a number of CaSR-positive
cells appeared in the border zone adjacent to the ischemic region. Ischemic region is indicated by asterisks, and its border are demarcated by a broken line. (B) Higher
magniﬁcation view of the ischemic region (boxed areas in (A)). Note that CaSR-positive cells, which were closely associated with blood vessel, were negative for TUNEL. Note
also that dying (or dead) neurons did not show CaSR immunoreactivity. (C, D) Double-labeling for CaSR and laminin showing that CaSR expression was associated with blood
vessel proﬁles. (E–G) Double-labeling for CaSR and von Willebrand factor (vWF) in the ischemic region. Note that CaSR-positive cells frequently exhibited vWF
immunoreactivity (arrowheads in E–G). (H–J) Double-labeling for CaSR and NG2 in the ischemic region. Note that CaSR staining in the ischemic region co-localized in part
with NG2-positive pericytes (arrowheads in H–J). (K–M) Double-labeling for CaSR and Ki67 showing that most CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic region were positive for
Ki67. (L, M) Higher magniﬁcation views of the boxed area in K. Cell nuclei are stained with DAPI. Scale bars = 100 mm in A, C, D, K; 50 mm in B, E–J, L, M.

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

47

Fig. 5. Characterization of CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic and border zones 3 days after reperfusion. (A) Double-labeling for CaSR and NeuN showing the absence of
neurons in the ischemic region (asterisks). The broken line indicates the border between the ischemic and border zones. (B) Higher magniﬁcation view of the border zone
(boxed area in A) showing that CaSR immunoreactivity was present only in some neurons (arrowheads). (C) Double-labeling for CaSR and GFAP showing that GFAP
immunoreactivity is absent from the ischemic region. (D–F) Higher magniﬁcation views of the border zone (boxed area in C) showing that most CaSR-positive cells were
GFAP-positive astrocytes. (G) Double-labeling for CaSR and Iba1. (H–J) Higher magniﬁcation views of the boxed areas in G. Note that Iba1-positive microglia/macrophages
in both the ischemic region (H), and peri-infarct region (I, J) were devoid of CaSR expression. Cell nuclei are stained with DAPI. Scale bars = 100 mm in A, C, G; 50 mm in B,
D–F, H–J.

vascular remodeling after focal cerebral ischemia (Abumiya et al.,
1999; del Zoppo and Mabuchi, 2003; del Zoppo et al., 2011). Thus,
CaSR induction within the perivascular compartment of the
ischemic zone may contribute to vascular remodeling after stroke.

However, it should be noted that CaSR staining on the vascular
structures appeared to decrease over the time of reperfusion, with
concomitant loss of von Willebrand factor staining. Considering
that blood vessels degenerate and endothelial cells in the ischemic

48

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

Fig. 6. Characterization of CaSR-positive cells in the border zone 7 days after ischemic injury. (A) Low-magniﬁcation view of double-labeling for CaSR and NeuN showing the
absence of neurons in the ischemic zone (asterisks). The broken line indicates the border between the ischemic and the border zone. (B–D) Higher magniﬁcation views of the
border zone (boxed area in (A)) showing that only a subset of neurons (arrows) was positive for CaSR. (D) Orthogonal view of confocal z-stack. (E–G) Double-labeling for CaSR
and GFAP. Note that almost all CaSR-positive cells in the border zone were reactive astrocytes. Arrows in E–G indicate a CaSR-positive astrocyte shown by orthogonal view of
confocal z-stack (G). (H–J) Double-labeling for CaSR and Iba1 showing that microglia/macrophages were devoid of speciﬁc CaSR staining. Cell nuclei are stained with DAPI. (K,
L) Absolute numbers of CaSR single-labeled cells and CaSR/GFAP (K) or CaSR/NeuN (L) double-labeled cells in the border zone at days 3 and 7 after reperfusion. The data are
expressed as the mean  SEM. * P < 0.05; ** p < 0.01 versus 3 days. Scale bars = 100 mm for A; 50 mm for B–J.

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

49

Fig. 7. Characterization of CaSR-positive cells in the peri-infarct border zone 14 days after ischemic injury. (A–E) Double-labeling for CaSR and GFAP. Note that CaSR
immunoreactivity was observed in almost all reactive astrocytes in the border zone adjacent to the ischemic zone (asterisks). (C–E) Higher magniﬁcation views of the boxed
areas in A and B. (F–J) Double-labeling for CaSR and Iba1 showing that neither amoeboid-like brain macrophages in the ischemic zone (asterisks in F and G), nor activated
stellate microglial cells in the border zone presented CaSR immunolabeling. (H–J) Higher magniﬁcation views of the boxed areas in F and G. Cell nuclei are stained with DAPI.
Scale bars = 100 mm in A, B, F, G; 50 mm in C–E, H–J.

core undergo cell death after focal cerebral ischemia (Burggraf
et al., 2008; Li et al., 2012), it is likely that the change of CaSR
expression simply reﬂects the alteration of vascular integrity
during ischemia.
In addition, some CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic zone
coexpressed NG2, a marker of microvascular pericytes (DoreDuffy, 2003), and exhibited proliferative activity, suggesting that a
subset of CaSR-positive cells in the ischemic zone showed a
pericyte-like phenotype. However, speciﬁc immunochemical
markers for pericytes are lacking (Fisher, 2009), and NG2
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan has been reported to be
expressed in diverse cells including oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells, multipotent stem cells, and macrophage/monocyte lineage
(Hill and Nishiyama, 2014; Matsumoto et al., 2008). In addition, the
presence of CaSR-positive cells in perivascular regions appeared to
correlate temporally and spatially with the presence of neural

stem/progenitor cells potentially originating from perivascular
cells/microvascular pericytes (Nakagomi et al., 2011; Nakagomi
et al., 2009; Nakano-Doi et al., 2010). Thus, we cannot exclude the
possibility that the CaSR/NG2 double-labeled cells within the
perivascular compartment may represent a pool of perivascular
stem/progenitor cells. Considering the previous ﬁndings and our
observations, we speculate that CaSR induction in the ischemic
zone might be associated with speciﬁc, yet unknown, functions
associated with vasculature in the ischemic brain.
In the peri-infarct zone, reactive astrocytes were the predominant population of CaSR-positive cells. We did not observe
expression of CaSR in astroglia either in the sham-operated
striatum, or in the contralateral striatum of the ischemic rat.
CaSR expression in astrocytes located in the peri-infarct region
was evident three days after reperfusion, and this expression was
maintained at least up to day 14, when CaSR labeling was

50

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51

prominent in hypertrophic reactive astrocytes conﬁned to regions
adjacent to the ischemic zone. This temporal pattern of CaSR
expression overlaps with the initiation of astroglial activation,
which precedes astroglial hypertrophy in the peri-infarct region.
Interestingly, astrocytes in the ischemic zone did not show
speciﬁc labeling for CaSR six hr after ischemia, despite the evident
increase in GFAP immunoreactivity (see Fig. 2H). Considering that
in the ischemic zone, astrocytes are irreversibly damaged (Chen
and Swanson, 2003) and rapid aquaporin 4 loss occurs in
perivascular astrocytic end-feet (Friedman et al., 2009), the
increased GFAP immunoreactivity may not necessarily be
followed by an increased expression of in CaSR, but, rather, CaSR
expression might be upregulated during reactive astrocytosis in
the less-damaged peri-infarct region. In addition to astrocytes,
some, but not most, neurons were CaSR-positive cells. It is unclear
why CaSR expression is induced in a subset of neurons in the
border zone, and thus, characterization of these neurons using
neurotransmitters or calcium-binding proteins is needed to
further elucidate the functional signiﬁcance of neuronal CaSR
expression.
However, in contrast to our ﬁndings, Mudo et al. (2009)
reported the expression of CaSR mRNA in neurons and oligodendrocytes (but not in astrocytes and microglia), in normal animals
and in those with kainate-induced seizures. In addition, Kim et al.
(2011) demonstrated the induction of CaSR in hippocampal
neurons, but not in astrocytes and microglia/macrophages, after
global forebrain ischemia. These ﬁndings are in accord with our
results showing that activated microglia/macrophages were
devoid of any speciﬁc labeling for CaSR in both the ischemic
and border zones. However, their results differ from ours in that we
found CaSR immunolabeling in reactive astrocytes. Although the
reasons for this discrepancy are unclear, this could be due to the
use of different experimental models, the speciﬁc brain area
studied, or the assessment of mRNA versus protein expression. In
addition, in our study, we did not speciﬁcally assess for
colocalization of CaSR and oligodendroglial markers. However,
except for some neurons, the majority of CaSR-positive cells in the
border zone were astrocytes with a reactive phenotype, indicating
that the induced expression of CaSR was glia-subtype speciﬁc (i.e.,
astroglial). In addition, our ﬁndings are in accordance with
previous studies demonstrating that CaSR is functionally
expressed in human astrocytes and astrocytoma cell lines
(Bouschet and Henley, 2005; Chattopadhyay et al., 2000; Yano
et al., 2004). Furthermore, several studies have suggested that Ca2+
signaling stimulated by amyloid-beta peptide through CaSR in
astrocytes plays a role in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease
(Armato et al., 2012; Chiarini et al., 2009; Dal Pra et al., 2014; Ward
et al., 2012). It is therefore likely that the induction of CaSR
expression is related to the astroglial reaction in the ischemic
stroke. Although our data provides evidence that CaSR may be
involved in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke, the present study
has limitations since it used transient models restricted to
relatively short time windows, in order to avoid risks of fatal
edema and hemorrhage (see as reviews Bahjat et al., 2013; Fisher
et al., 2009; Macrae, 2011).
Recent studies suggest that CaSR cannot only be activated by
extracellular calcium but also by various stimuli, such as
polyvalent cations, pH, and ionic strength (Riccardi et al., 2009;
Sun and Murphy, 2010; Tyler Miller, 2013). Astrocytes contribute
to cell survival in the ischemic penumbra during stroke, where
astrocytes are involved in a number of activities that profoundly
inﬂuence tissue viability during ischemia, including glutamate
homeostasis, ion homeostasis (i.e., buffering of extracellular
potassium), water balance, and cerebral blood ﬂow regulation
(Chen and Swanson, 2003; Kimelberg and Nedergaard, 2010; Zhao
and Rempe, 2010). Thus, the enhanced expression of CaSR in

reactive astrocytes in the border zone suggests that CaSR is
upregulated in response to an altered extracellular ionic environment caused by ischemic injury, in an attempt to support and
maintain neuronal viability. In support of this, it has been shown
that CaSR in human astrocytes and astrocytoma cell lines could
participate in local ionic homeostasis within the brain (Armato
et al., 2012; Chattopadhyay et al., 2000; Yano et al., 2004). On the
other hand, a subsequent CaSR activation in reactive astrocytes
could signal astrocytes to form the glial scar, as suggested by
Bouschet and Henley (2005). However, the precise role of astroglial
CaSR induction in response to ischemic insults remains to be
determined.
Conclusions
Our results indicate a phenotypic and functional heterogeneity
of CaSR-positive cells, suggesting a multifunctional role for CaSR in
the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke, possibly in the vascular
remodeling and astrogliosis as response to ischemic injury.
Author’s contributions
All authors have contributed signiﬁcantly to the research and
the article preparation:
Jeong Sook Noh and Ha-Jin Pak contributed to the treatment of
the experimental animals, immunohistochemistry, histochemistry, and cell counting.
Yoo-Jin Shin, Tae-Ryong Riew, and Joo-Hee Park worked on the
immunohistochemistry, histochemistry, and photography.
Young Wha Moon worked on the immunoblot assays.MunYong Lee worked on the design of the study, data analysis, and ﬁnal
manuscript preparation.
Ethical statement
All experimental procedures were conducted under and
approved by the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, the Guide for
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, and the Guidelines and
Policies for Rodent Survival Surgery provided by the IACUC
(Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee) in the College of
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea.
Conﬂict of interest statement
The authors have no conﬂict of interest including any ﬁnancial,
personal, or other relationships with other people or organizations
that could inappropriately inﬂuence, or be perceived to inﬂuence
this work.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program
through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded
by the Ministry of Science, ICT and future Planning (NRF2014R1A2A1A11050246).
References
Abumiya, T., Lucero, J., Heo, J.H., Tagaya, M., Koziol, J.A., Copeland, B.R., del Zoppo,
G.J., 1999. Activated microvessels express vascular endothelial growth factor
and integrin alpha(v)beta3 during focal cerebral ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 19, 1038–1050.
Armato, U., Bonaﬁni, C., Chakravarthy, B., Pacchiana, R., Chiarini, A., Whitﬁeld, J.F.,
Dal Pra, I., 2012. The calcium-sensing receptor: a novel Alzheimer’s disease
crucial target? J. Neurol. Sci. 322, 137–140.
Bahjat, F.R., Gesuete, R., Stenzel-Poore, M.P., 2013. Steps to translate preconditioning from basic research to the clinic. Transl. Stroke Res. 4, 89–103.

J.S. Noh et al. / Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy 66–67 (2015) 40–51
Bandyopadhyay, S., Tfelt-Hansen, J., Chattopadhyay, N., 2010. Diverse roles of
extracellular calcium-sensing receptor in the central nervous system. J. Neurosci. Res. 88, 2073–2082.
Bouschet, T., Henley, J.M., 2005. Calcium as an extracellular signalling molecule:
perspectives on the calcium sensing receptor in the brain. C. R. Biol. 328,
691–700.
Bouschet, T., Martin, S., Henley, J.M., 2008. Regulation of calcium-sensing-receptor
trafﬁcking and cell-surface expression by GPCRs and RAMPs. Trends Pharmacol.
Sci. 29, 633–639.
Brown, E.M., Gamba, G., Riccardi, D., Lombardi, M., Butters, R., Kifor, O., Sun, A.,
Hediger, M.A., Lytton, J., Hebert, S.C., 1993. Cloning and characterization of an
extracellular Ca(2+)-sensing receptor from bovine parathyroid. Nature 366,
575–580.
Brown, E.M., MacLeod, R.J., 2001. Extracellular calcium sensing and extracellular
calcium signaling. Physiol. Rev. 81, 239–297.
Burggraf, D., Trinkl, A., Burk, J., Martens, H.K., Dichgans, M., Hamann, G.F., 2008.
Vascular integrin immunoreactivity is selectively lost on capillaries during rat
focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion. Brain Res. 1189, 189–197.
Candelario-Jalil, E., 2009. Injury and repair mechanisms in ischemic stroke: considerations for the development of novel neurotherapeutics. Curr. Opin. Investig. Drugs 10, 644–654.
Chattopadhyay, N., Evliyaoglu, C., Heese, O., Carroll, R., Sanders, J., Black, P., Brown,
E.M., 2000. Regulation of secretion of PTHrP by Ca(2+)-sensing receptor in
human astrocytes, astrocytomas, and meningiomas. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol.
279, C691–C699.
Chen, W., Bergsman, J.B., Wang, X., Gilkey, G., Pierpoint, C.R., Daniel, E.A., Awumey,
E.M., Dauban, P., Dodd, R.H., Ruat, M., Smith, S.M., 2010. Presynaptic external
calcium signaling involves the calcium-sensing receptor in neocortical nerve
terminals. PLoS ONE 5, e8563.
Chen, Y., Swanson, R.A., 2003. Astrocytes and brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 23, 137–149.
Chiarini, A., Dal Pra, I., Marconi, M., Chakravarthy, B., Whitﬁeld, J.F., Armato, U.,
2009. Calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) in human brain’s pathophysiology: roles
in late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD). Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 10, 317–326.
Conigrave, A.D., Ward, D.T., 2013. Calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR): pharmacological properties and signaling pathways. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab.
27, 315–331.
Conley, Y.P., Mukherjee, A., Kammerer, C., DeKosky, S.T., Kamboh, M.I., Finegold,
D.N., Ferrell, R.E., 2009. Evidence supporting a role for the calcium-sensing
receptor in Alzheimer disease. Am. J. Med. Genet. B: Neuropsychiatr. Genet.
150b, 703–709.
Dal Pra, I., Armato, U., Chiofﬁ, F., Pacchiana, R., Whitﬁeld, J.F., Chakravarthy, B., Gui, L.,
Chiarini, A., 2014. The Abeta peptides-activated calcium-sensing receptor stimulates the production and secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor-A by
normoxic adult human cortical astrocytes. Neuromolecular Med. 16, 645–657.
del Zoppo, G.J., Mabuchi, T., 2003. Cerebral microvessel responses to focal ischemia.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 23, 879–894.
del Zoppo, G.J., Sharp, F.R., Heiss, W.D., Albers, G.W., 2011. Heterogeneity in the
penumbra. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 1836–1851.
Dore-Duffy, P., 2003. Isolation and characterization of cerebral microvascular
pericytes. Methods Mol. Med. 89, 375–382.
Eriksdotter-Nilsson, M., Bjorklund, H., Olson, L., 1986. Laminin immunohistochemistry: a simple method to visualize and quantitate vascular structures in the
mammalian brain. J. Neurosci. Methods 17, 275–286.
Fisher, M., 2009. Pericyte signaling in the neurovascular unit. Stroke 40, S13–S15.
Fisher, M., Feuerstein, G., Howells, D.W., Hurn, P.D., Kent, T.A., Savitz, S.I., Lo, E.H.,
2009. Update of the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical
recommendations. Stroke 40, 2244–2250.
Friedman, B., Schachtrup, C., Tsai, P.S., Shih, A.Y., Akassoglou, K., Kleinfeld, D., Lyden,
P.D., 2009. Acute vascular disruption and aquaporin 4 loss after stroke. Stroke
40, 2182–2190.
Gerdes, A.M., Kriseman, J., Bishop, S.P., 1983. Changes in myocardial cell size and
number during the development and reversal of hyperthyroidism in neonatal
rats. Lab. Invest. 48, 598–602.
Hill, R.A., Nishiyama, A., 2014. NG2 cells (polydendrocytes): listeners to the neural
network with diverse properties. Glia 62, 1195–1210.
Kim, J.Y., Ho, H., Kim, N., Liu, J., Tu, C.L., Yenari, M.A., Chang, W., 2014. Calciumsensing receptor (CaSR) as a novel target for ischemic neuroprotection. Ann.
Clin. Transl. Neurol. 1, 851–866.
Kim, J.Y., Kim, N., Yenari, M.A., Chang, W., 2011. Mild hypothermia suppresses
calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) induction following forebrain ischemia while
increasing GABA-B receptor 1 (GABA-B-R1) expression. Transl. Stroke Res. 2,
195–201.
Kim, J.Y., Kim, N., Yenari, M.A., Chang, W., 2013. Hypothermia and pharmacological
regimens that prevent overexpression and overactivity of the extracellular
calcium-sensing receptor protect neurons against traumatic brain injury. J.
Neurotrauma 30, 1170–1176.
Kimelberg, H.K., Nedergaard, M., 2010. Functions of astrocytes and their potential as
therapeutic targets. Neurotherapeutics 7, 338–353.
Li, G.W., Xing, W.J., Bai, S.Z., Hao, J.H., Guo, J., Li, H.Z., Li, H.X., Zhang, W.H., Yang, B.F.,
Wu, L.Y., Wang, R., Yang, G.D., Xu, C.Q., 2011. The calcium-sensing receptor
mediates hypoxia-induced proliferation of rat pulmonary artery smooth muscle
cells through MEK1/ERK1,2 and PI3K pathways. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol.
108, 185–193.

51

Li, L., Liu, F., Welser-Alves, J.V., McCullough, L.D., Milner, R., 2012. Upregulation of
ﬁbronectin and the alpha5beta1 and alphavbeta3 integrins on blood vessels
within the cerebral ischemic penumbra. Exp. Neurol. 233, 283–291.
Longa, E.Z., Weinstein, P.R., Carlson, S., Cummins, R., 1989. Reversible middle
cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20, 84–91.
Macrae, I.M., 2011. Preclinical stroke research—advantages and disadvantages of
the most common rodent models of focal ischaemia. Br. J. Pharmacol. 164,
1062–1078.
Matsumoto, H., Kumon, Y., Watanabe, H., Ohnishi, T., Shudou, M., Chuai, M., Imai, Y.,
Takahashi, H., Tanaka, J., 2008. Accumulation of macrophage-like cells expressing NG2 proteoglycan and Iba1 in ischemic core of rat brain after transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 28, 149–163.
Mehta, A., Prabhakar, M., Kumar, P., Deshmukh, R., Sharma, P.L., 2013. Excitotoxicity: bridge to various triggers in neurodegenerative disorders. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 698, 6–18.
Molostvov, G., Bland, R., Zehnder, D., 2009. Expression and role of the calciumsensing receptor in the blood vessel wall. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 10, 282–288.
Mudo, G., Trovato-Salinaro, A., Barresi, V., Belluardo, N., Condorelli, D.F., 2009.
Identiﬁcation of calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) mRNA-expressing cells in
normal and injured rat brain. Brain Res. 1298, 24–36.
Nakagomi, T., Molnar, Z., Nakano-Doi, A., Taguchi, A., Saino, O., Kubo, S., Clausen, M.,
Yoshikawa, H., Nakagomi, N., Matsuyama, T., 2011. Ischemia-induced neural
stem/progenitor cells in the pia mater following cortical infarction. Stem Cells
Dev. 20, 2037–2051.
Nakagomi, T., Taguchi, A., Fujimori, Y., Saino, O., Nakano-Doi, A., Kubo, S., Gotoh, A.,
Soma, T., Yoshikawa, H., Nishizaki, T., Nakagomi, N., Stern, D.M., Matsuyama, T.,
2009. Isolation and characterization of neural stem/progenitor cells from poststroke cerebral cortex in mice. Eur. J. Neurosci. 29, 1842–1852.
Nakano-Doi, A., Nakagomi, T., Fujikawa, M., Nakagomi, N., Kubo, S., Lu, S., Yoshikawa, H., Soma, T., Taguchi, A., Matsuyama, T., 2010. Bone marrow mononuclear
cells promote proliferation of endogenous neural stem cells through vascular
niches after cerebral infarction. Stem Cells 28, 1292–1302.
Paxinos, G., Watson, C., 2006. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, sixth ed.
Academic Press, New York, NY.
Peng, X., Li, H.X., Shao, H.J., Li, G.W., Sun, J., Xi, Y.H., Li, H.Z., Wang, X.Y., Wang, L.N.,
Bai, S.Z., Zhang, W.H., Zhang, L., Yang, G.D., Wu, L.Y., Wang, R., Xu, C.Q., 2014.
Involvement of calcium-sensing receptors in hypoxia-induced vascular remodeling and pulmonary hypertension by promoting phenotypic modulation of
small pulmonary arteries. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 396, 87–98.
Riccardi, D., Finney, B.A., Wilkinson, W.J., Kemp, P.J., 2009. Novel regulatory
aspects of the extracellular Ca2+-sensing receptor, CaR. Pﬂugers Arch. 458,
1007–1022.
Ruat, M., Traiffort, E., 2013. Roles of the calcium sensing receptor in the central
nervous system. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 27, 429–442.
Smajilovic, S., Hansen, J.L., Christoffersen, T.E., Lewin, E., Sheikh, S.P., Terwilliger,
E.F., Brown, E.M., Haunso, S., Tfelt-Hansen, J., 2006. Extracellular calcium
sensing in rat aortic vascular smooth muscle cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 348, 1215–1223.
Smajilovic, S., Tfelt-Hansen, J., 2007. Calcium acts as a ﬁrst messenger through the
calcium-sensing receptor in the cardiovascular system. Cardiovasc. Res. 75,
457–467.
Sun, J., Murphy, E., 2010. Calcium-sensing receptor: a sensor and mediator of
ischemic preconditioning in the heart. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.
299, H1309–H1317.
Tyler Miller, R., 2013. Control of renal calcium, phosphate, electrolyte, and water
excretion by the calcium-sensing receptor. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Endocrinol.
Metab. 27, 345–358.
Ward, B.K., Magno, A.L., Walsh, J.P., Ratajczak, T., 2012. The role of the calciumsensing receptor in human disease. Clin. Biochem. 45, 943–953.
Weston, A.H., Geraghty, A., Egner, I., Edwards, G., 2011. The vascular extracellular
calcium-sensing receptor: an update. Acta Physiol. (Oxf.) 203, 127–137.
Xi, Y.H., Li, H.Z., Zhang, W.H., Wang, L.N., Zhang, L., Lin, Y., Bai, S.Z., Li, H.X., Wu, L.Y.,
Wang, R., Xu, C.Q., 2010. The functional expression of calcium-sensing receptor
in the differentiated THP-1 cells. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 342, 233–240.
Xing, W., Li, G., Xi, Y., Guo, J., Li, H., Li, H., Zhang, W., Zhang, L., Wu, L., Wang, R., Xu, C.,
2010. The functional expression of calcium-sensing receptors in BRL cells and
related signal transduction pathway responsible for intracellular calcium elevation. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 343, 13–19.
Xing, W.J., Kong, F.J., Li, G.W., Qiao, K., Zhang, W.H., Zhang, L., Bai, S.Z., Xi, Y.H., Li,
H.X., Tian, Y., Ren, H., Wu, L.Y., Wang, R., Xu, C.Q., 2011. Calcium-sensing
receptors induce apoptosis during simulated ischaemia-reperfusion in Buffalo
rat liver cells. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 38, 605–612.
Yano, S., Brown, E.M., Chattopadhyay, N., 2004. Calcium-sensing receptor in the
brain. Cell Calcium 35, 257–264.
Zhao, Y., Rempe, D.A., 2010. Targeting astrocytes for stroke therapy. Neurotherapeutics 7, 439–451.
Zheng, H., Liu, J., Liu, C., Lu, F., Zhao, Y., Jin, Z., Ren, H., Leng, X., Jia, J., Hu, G., Dong, S.,
Zhong, X., Li, H., Yang, B., Xu, C., Zhang, W., 2011. Calcium-sensing receptor
activating phosphorylation of PKCdelta translocation on mitochondria to induce cardiomyocyte apoptosis during ischemia/reperfusion. Mol. Cell. Biochem.
358, 335–343.
Ziegelstein, R.C., Xiong, Y., He, C., Hu, Q., 2006. Expression of a functional extracellular calcium-sensing receptor in human aortic endothelial cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 342, 153–163.

