Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Experimental Neurology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yexnr

Regular Article

Dimethyl fumarate attenuates cerebral edema formation by protecting
the blood–brain barrier integrity
Reiner Kunze a,⁎, Andrés Urrutia a, Angelika Hoffmann b, Hui Liu a, Xavier Helluy b, Mirko Pham b,
Stefan Reischl a, Thomas Korff a, Hugo H. Marti a
a
b

Institute of Physiology and Pathophysiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
Department of Neuroradiology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 20 August 2014
Revised 16 January 2015
Accepted 17 February 2015
Available online 25 February 2015
Keywords:
Dimethyl fumarate
Nrf2
Ischemia
Blood–brain barrier
Edema
Stroke

a b s t r a c t
Brain edema is a hallmark of various neuropathologies, but the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood.
We aim to characterize how tissue hypoxia, together with oxidative stress and inﬂammation, leads to capillary
dysfunction and breakdown of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). In a mouse stroke model we show that systemic
treatment with dimethyl fumarate (DMF), an antioxidant drug clinically used for psoriasis and multiple sclerosis,
signiﬁcantly prevented edema formation in vivo. Indeed, DMF stabilized the BBB by preventing disruption of
interendothelial tight junctions and gap formation, and decreased matrix metalloproteinase activity in brain
tissue. In vitro, DMF directly sustained endothelial tight junctions, inhibited inﬂammatory cytokine expression,
and attenuated leukocyte transmigration. We also demonstrate that these effects are mediated via activation
of the redox sensitive transcription factor NF-E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2). DMF activated the Nrf2 pathway as
shown by up-regulation of several Nrf2 target genes in the brain in vivo, as well as in cerebral endothelial cells
and astrocytes in vitro, where DMF also increased protein abundance of nuclear Nrf2. Finally, Nrf2 knockdown
in endothelial cells aggravated subcellular delocalization of tight junction proteins during ischemic conditions,
and attenuated the protective effect exerted by DMF. Overall, our data suggest that DMF protects from cerebral
edema formation during ischemic stroke by targeting interendothelial junctions in an Nrf2-dependent manner,
and provide the basis for a completely new approach to treat brain edema.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Cerebral edema is a major life-threatening complication after stroke.
It gradually develops by formation of ionic edema, vasogenic edema, and
eventually hemorrhagic transformation (Simard et al., 2007). Edema
causes brain swelling, and both – edema and swelling – lead to further
damage of the parenchymal tissue and contribute to delayed neuronal
cell death. The formation of vasogenic edema is due to increased permeability of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). In addition to stroke, a wide
range of neurological disorders including subarachnoid hemorrhage,
epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson's

Abbreviations: AJ, adherens junction; BBB, blood–brain barrier; DMF, dimethyl fumarate; FAE, fumaric acid esters; Gclc, glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit; Gclm,
glutamate-cysteine ligase modiﬁer subunit; HO-1, heme oxygenase-1; Keap-1, kelch-like
erythroid cell-derived protein with CNC homology-associated protein 1; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; MMF, monomethyl fumarate; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase;
Nqo1, NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1; Nrf2, NF-E2 related factor 2; OGD, oxygenglucose deprivation; TJ, tight junction
⁎ Corresponding author at: University of Heidelberg, Institute of Physiology and
Pathophysiology, Im Neuenheimer Feld 326, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Fax: + 49
6221 54 4561.
E-mail address: reiner.kunze@physiologie.uni-heidelberg.de (R. Kunze).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.02.022
0014-4886/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, traumatic brain injury and brain
tumors are associated with BBB dysfunction that substantially contributes
to their pathology (Obermeier et al., 2013; Wunder et al., 2012). The
common consequence of a dysfunctional BBB is increased permeability,
leading not only to extravasation of blood plasma constituents and
vasogenic edema, but also enabling the inﬁltration of circulating immune
cells. These processes collectively promote dysfunction and ﬁnally loss
of neurons (Kaur and Ling, 2008; Obermeier et al., 2013; Sandoval and
Witt, 2008; Wunder et al., 2012). Thus, there exists an urgent need for
potent edema preventing therapies. Unfortunately, the underlying molecular mechanisms are still poorly understood, therefore preventing a
causative approach. Dependent on the disease pathogenesis BBB
hyperpermeability is initially triggered by tissue hypoxia, inﬂammation,
and/or oxidative stress (Coisne and Engelhardt, 2011; Kaur and Ling,
2008; Lehner et al., 2011; Pun et al., 2009; Sandoval and Witt, 2008).
We have previously shown that hypoxia-induced expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a potent permeability factor, causes
vascular leakage (Schoch et al., 2002), and that inhibition of VEGF by
neutralizing antibodies or Avastin® prevents cerebral edema formation
(Bauer et al., 2010; Schoch et al., 2002). However, as VEGF is also a
potent neuroprotective factor (Wang et al., 2005), and able to improve
cognitive function (Plaschke et al., 2008), blocking VEGF action is not

100

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

deemed an ideal approach. In the search for a novel approach we
hypothesize that combined attenuation of inﬂammatory and oxidative
stress could prevent BBB dysfunction efﬁciently, thereby improving
the outcome of various neurological diseases.
Fumaric acid esters (FAE) represent a class of molecules that have
been shown to exhibit both anti-inﬂammatory and anti-oxidative activity
in a variety of tissues and cell types. In vitro, dimethyl fumarate (DMF)
and its primary metabolite monomethyl fumarate (MMF) increased the
survival rate of astrocytes and neurons exposed to oxidative stress conditions (Albrecht et al., 2012; Linker et al., 2011; Scannevin et al., 2012).
Furthermore, DMF preconditioning attenuated the synthesis of the proinﬂammatory mediators in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activated microglia
and astrocytes (Wilms et al., 2010). In a similar way, LPS stimulated
co-cultures of astroglial and microglial cells released less proinﬂammatory factors in the presence of DMF (Wierinckx et al., 2005).
Thus, FAE appear to be very attractive candidates to ameliorate BBB
dysfunction. Moreover, FAE also are already positioned for clinical use,
i.e. for the treatment of psoriasis (Mrowietz et al., 1998, 1999) and
more recently multiple sclerosis (Fox et al., 2012; Gold et al., 2012;
Kappos et al., 2008). DMF was selected as an initial FAE for evaluation
in ischemic cellular protection. Therefore, the present study was
conducted to test the hypothesis that DMF protects against BBB
hyperpermeability and cerebral edema formation. As a prototypic
model for BBB breakdown and cerebral edema formation we used an
in vivo model of acute ischemic stroke.
Materials and methods
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
All experiments were performed using male C57BL/6 mice (8 to
10 weeks old). Animals were maintained at the animal facility of the
University of Heidelberg. All animal procedures were approved by the
local animal welfare committee (Regierungspräsidium Karlsruhe).
Animals were randomly assigned to different treatment groups by an
independent person not involved in surgery, data acquisition and
analysis. The operator was blinded to the treatment status of the
animals. Mice were anesthetized by a mixture containing 2% isoﬂurane,
70% N2O, and remainder O2, and were maintained by reducing the
isoﬂurane concentration to 1.0-1.5%. Core body temperature was maintained at 37 °C throughout surgery by using a feedback-controlled
heating device. A laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry (LDF) probe (Perimed Instruments, Rommerskirchen, Germany) was positioned 1.5 mm posterior and 3 mm lateral from bregma. To induce focal cerebral ischemia a
7–0 silicon rubber-coated nylon monoﬁlament (Doccol Corporation,
Redlands, USA) was introduced in the left internal carotid artery and
pushed toward the left MCA until a drop in regional cerebral blood
ﬂow (rCBF) greater than 70% from baseline was documented by LDF.
The intraluminal suture was left for 60 minutes. Then, animals were
re-anesthetized and the occluding monoﬁlament was withdrawn to
allow reperfusion for up to 24 hours. Subsequently, animals were
sacriﬁced by decapitation, brains were removed and embedded into
Tissue-Tek (Sakura Finetek, Staufen, Germany) for histological analyses.
From each brain, 24 coronal cryosections (10 μm thick each; 0.4 mm
apart) were prepared and submitted to Nissl staining for quantiﬁcation
of infarct and edema size as described previously (Kunze et al., 2012;
Reischl et al., 2014). Brieﬂy, brain slices were digitized, and infarct and
edema volumes were measured by an observer who was blinded to
the treatment conditions using the image analysis software ImageJ
(National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). For biochemical
analyses anaesthetized animals were transcardially perfused with PBS
(2 ml/min) for 5 min, brains were removed, shock frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80 °C until use. Animals that met the following
criteria were excluded from end-point analyses: (i) death within
24 hours after induction of MCAO, and (ii) subarachnoid or intracerebral
hemorrhage (macroscopically assessed during brain sampling). 1 out of

22 DMF treated mice (4.5%) and 2 out of 23 vehicle treated mice (8.7%)
met at least one of the exclusion criteria (1 death in the DMF group and
2 deaths in the vehicle group, respectively).
Dimethylfumarate administration in vivo
DMF (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) was dissolved in DMSO
(26.8 mg/ml) followed by dilution in PBS to a ﬁnal concentration of
1.875 mg/ml. DMF was applied intraperitoneally (injection volume
0.2-0.25 ml) to adult C57BL/6 mice at a dosage of 15 mg/kg body weight
twice a day for 1, 2 or 3 consecutive days. Control mice received
0.2-0.25 ml vehicle solution (7% DMSO in PBS) twice a day for 3 consecutive days through intraperitoneal injection.
Alternatively, DMF was diluted in 0.08% methocel (methylcellulose,
Sigma-Aldrich)/H2O and was applied at a dosage of 15 mg/kg body
weight twice a day via oral gavage for 1, 2 or 3 consecutive days. Control
animals received 100 μl 0.08% methocel/H2O orally twice a day for 3
consecutive days.
Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI was performed with a 9.4 T small animal scanner (Bruker,
Ettlingen, Germany) using a volume resonator for transmission and
an actively-decoupled 4 channel surface coil for reception (both
Bruker). The investigators were blinded to the experimental groups.
Anesthesia was induced per inhalation using 2% isoﬂurane and maintained with 1–1.5% of isoﬂurane. Animals were placed in prone and
ﬁxed position on an animal holder equipped with headlock and
tooth bar to minimize head motion. Body temperature was maintained using tempered water bath and a pressure sensitive balloon
was used to monitor animal breathing. The imaging protocol included
the following sequences: diffusion-weighted imaging (TEeff/TR =
20 ms/3400 ms, slice thickness = 0.7 mm, 30 diffusion sensitized directions with a b-value of 1500 s/mm2, ﬁeld-of-view 12 × 15 mm, matrix
96 × 128, resolution = 125 μm × 117 μm), 2D and 3D T2-weighted
rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement (RARE) imaging (2D:
TEeff/TR = 66 ms/2650 ms, RARE factor = 8, slice thickness 0.5 mm,
13 slices matrix 256 × 256, in plane resolution 78 μm × 78 μm; 3D:
TE/TR = 72.5 ms/1800 ms, matrix 200 × 96 × 120, resolution
100 μm × 104 μm × 100 μm, RARE factor = 32, slice thickness =
0.1 mm), and multislice multispin 2D T2 relaxometry (TE increments
of 8 ms from 8 ms to 136 ms, TR = 3100 ms, slice thickness =
0.5 mm, matrix = 172 × 172, resolution = 116 μm × 116 μm). Image
analysis was performed with the software Amira (Visage Imaging, Inc.,
San Diego, USA). The following 3D region-of-interest volumes were
segmented between 1.7 mm and 2.8 mm from Bregma: whole hemisphere volume ipsilateral to infarct site and infarcted brain volume.
Intraindividual hemispheric swelling was expressed as: volume of
ipsilateral hemisphere 24 hours post-reperfusion divided by volume
of ipsilateral hemisphere at 4 hours post-reperfusion. Furthermore,
values of the apparent-diffusion-coefﬁcient (ADC) and T2 relaxation
time were calculated for the infarct volume at 24 hours postreperfusion.
Cell culture
Isolation of astrocytes from cortices of C57BL/6 neonatal mice (P0)
was performed as described recently (Reischl et al., 2014). Primary
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were isolated and
cultured as reported previously (Korff et al., 2008). Primary astrocytes
and the murine cerebrovascular endothelial cell line bEnd.3
(Montesano et al., 1990) were seeded at 10,000 cells/cm2 in DMEM
containing 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin,
2 mM L-glutamine and 5% or 10% FBS, respectively and cultured at
37 °C in a humidiﬁed incubator (Binder, Tuttlingen, Germany) with 5%
CO2 in air. OGD was performed by culturing cells in an incubator (Binder)

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

ﬂooded with humidiﬁed gas mixture consisting of 5% CO2 and 95% N2
(b1% O2) at 37 °C. Normal culture media was replaced with glucosefree DMEM (Life Technologies) supplemented with ≤0.2% FBS. Cells cultured under control conditions were treated with 1–100 μM DMF (dissolved in DMSO) for ≤ 24 hours. Cells challenged with OGD were
treated with 50 μM DMF during OGD exposure of 6 or 24 hours.

Monocyte transendothelial migration assay
bEnd.3 cells were cultured on transwell inserts (8 μm pore size, 24well format; BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany) to form a conﬂuent
monolayer within 10 days. To stimulate transmigration of 200,000
THP-1 cells (human monocyte cell line) seeded into the upper transwell
chamber, the medium in the lower chamber was supplemented with
30 ng/ml MCP-1. After 18 hours, transmigrated THP-1 cells were collected
from lower chamber and counted by a hemocytometer (Depth
Profondeur, Marienfeld, Germany).

Small interfering RNA transfection
bEnd.3 cells were transfected with 10 nM siRNA against Nrf2 or 10
nM control siRNA for 24 hours using HiPerfect transfection reagent
following the manufacturer’s (Qiagen Hilden, Germany) instructions.

Immunoﬂuorescence analyses
Coronal cryosections (10 μm in thickness) and cell monolayers were
ﬁxed with zinc-based ﬁxative containing 100 mM Tris (pH 7.4), 3 mM
Ca(C2H3O2)2, 25 mM Zn(C2H3O2)2 and 35 mM ZnCl2 for 30 min and
permeabilized with 0.5% saponin in PBS for 15 min. Then, brain slices
and cells were incubated for 30–60 min in blocking buffer consisting
of 10% goat serum (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany) in PBST (0.1%
Tween-20 in PBS) or 1% BSA in PBS, respectively. Subsequently, slices
and cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C with antibodies against
claudin-5 (Life Technologies), Nrf2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Heidelberg, Germany), occludin (Life Technologies), VE-cadherin
(BD Biosciences) or ZO-1 (Life Technologies) followed by incubation
with appropriate Cy2- or Cy3-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Dianova) for 1 hour. All antibodies were diluted in LowCrossBuffer (Candor, Wangen, Germany). Slices and cells were incubated
for 10 min with 0.02% DAPI (Life Technologies) in PBS to stain nuclei.
Stained sections and cells on glass slides were then embedded in
Mowiol mounting medium (Sigma-Aldrich). Fluorescence staining
was recorded using an Olympus BX50 microscope with a Leica DC
500 camera or an Olympus IX81 confocal microscope and camera.
For quantiﬁcation of total ﬂuorescence intensity in stained tissue
sections, images were taken with a 10 × objective lens and converted
to grey scale using the same settings for each antibody staining. The
integrated density within each region of interest for each section was
measured with ImageJ. Measurements were carried out in at least six
sections/animal. The ﬁnal integrated density value for each animal
was calculated as the mean of all section values and expressed as
percentage of the contralateral integrated density. Further images
were taken with a 60 × objective lens, and disruptions (gaps) of the
regular TJ protein localization pattern were counted in at least
three randomly chosen blood vessels localized within the periinfarct region per animal. Images from stained cell monolayer
grown on cover slips were taken with a 40 × objective lens, while
exposure time was kept constant. Disruption of ZO-1 ﬂuorescent
staining along the cell border was quantiﬁed in ﬁve different
randomly chosen microscopic ﬁelds for each condition per experiment, and displayed as number of gaps per single cell. Evaluation of
all read-out parameters was done in a blinded fashion.

101

In situ zymography
In situ gelatinolytic activity was assessed using a commercially available kit (Life Technologies). Coronal cryosections (10 μm in thickness)
were incubated for 1 hour at 37 °C in a humidiﬁed chamber in a reaction
buffer containing the gelatin ﬂuorescein conjugate (50 μg/ml). Cellular
sources of gelatinolytic activity were identiﬁed by immunoﬂuorescence
staining. Sections were embedded in Mowiol mounting medium
(Sigma-Aldrich) and ﬂuorescence staining was recorded using an Olympus BX50 microscope with a Leica DC 500 camera. The examiner was
blinded to the treatment group.
RNA isolation and real-time PCR
RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis via reverse transcription and realtime PCR were carried out as previously described (Reischl et al.,
2014). The housekeeping gene ribosomal protein S12 (Rps12) was
used as control. The following primers (MWG Biotech, Ebersberg,
Germany) were used: E-selectin fwd ACACATCTGGTGGCAATTCA, Eselectin rev TGTTGTTTGGTTCACCTGGA, Gclc fwd AACACAGACCCAACCC
AGAG, Gclc rev TGGCACATTGATGACAACCT, Gclm fwd TGGAGCAGCTGT
ATCAGTGG, Gclm rev AGAGCAGTTCTTTCGGGTCA, Ho-1 fwd CACGCA
TATACCCGCTACCT, Ho-1 rev CCAGAGTGTTCATTCGAGCA, Icam-1 fwd
TTC ACA CTG AAT GCC AGC TC, Icam-1 rev GTC TGC TGA GAC CCC TCT
TG, IL-6 fwd AGTTGCCTTCTTGGGACTGA, IL-6 rev TCCACGATTTCCCAGA
GAAC, Mcp-1 fwd CCCAATGAGTAGGCTGGAGA, Mcp-1 rev TCTGGACC
CATTCCTTCTTG, Nqo1 fwd TTCTCTGGCCGATTCAGAGT, Nqo1 rev GGCT
GCTTGGAGCAAAATAG, Rps12 fwd GAAGCTGCCAAAGCCTTAGA, Rps12
rev AACTGCAACCAACCACCTTC, Nrf2 fwd AAGTGTCAAACAGAACGGCC,
Nrf2 rev CAGGACTCACGGGAACTTCT, Tnf-α fwd CGTCAGCCGATTTGCT
ATCT, Tnf-α rev CGGACTCCGCAAAGTCTAAG, Vcam-1 fwd ACAGACAG
TCCCCTCAATGG, Vcam-1 rev ACCTCCACCTGGGTTCTCTT.
Immunoblotting
Protein extraction from cells, protein gel electrophoresis and subsequent western blotting were performed as described previously
(Reischl et al., 2014).
Statistical analysis
If not stated otherwise, the results are presented as mean ± standard
error of the mean (SEM). Unpaired two-tailed Student's t-test or
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) combined with Bonferroni posttest were applied to determine statistical signiﬁcance. Mann–Whitney
U-test was chosen for statistical analysis of MRI data. Data plotting and
statistical analyses were done in Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, San
Diego, USA).
Results
Systemic DMF pre-treatment diminishes edema formation during ischemic
stroke
Systemic pre-treatment of mice with DMF administered intraperitoneally twice a day for three consecutive days before inducing experimental stroke (Fig. 1A) signiﬁcantly reduced cerebral edema
formation in the acute phase after ischemic stroke (Fig. 1B). By contrast,
global infarct size was not different between vehicle and DMF treated
animals (Fig. 1B). To add auxiliary longitudinal information magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) was performed in DMF and vehicle treated
animals at 4 hours and 24 hours post-reperfusion. Infarct volumes
determined by MRI were not signiﬁcantly different between the two
groups (DMF: 73 ± 9 mm3 vs. vehicle: 79 ± 11 mm3, p = 0.347). However, the ratio of ipsilateral hemispheric volumes between 4 and
24 hours post-reperfusion was signiﬁcantly smaller in the DMF treated

102

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

Fig. 1. DMF reduces the formation of brain edema upon transient cerebral ischemia. (A) 15 mg/kg DMF or an equal volume of vehicle was administered to adult C57BL/6 mice twice a day
for 3 consecutive days via intraperitoneal application route. Subsequently, mice underwent 60 min of MCAO followed by ≤24 hours reperfusion. (B) 24 hours after onset of reperfusion
brains were removed and from each brain, 24 coronal cryosections (10 μm thick each; 0.4 mm apart) were prepared and submitted to cresyl violet staining for quantiﬁcation of infarct and
edema size. Signiﬁcant differences between vehicle and DMF treatment group are determined by unpaired two-tailed t-test and indicated with *** (p b 0.001). N = 6 (per group). MRI was
used to analyze infarct size and brain swelling. (C) shows representative T2 weighted images of mouse brains 4 and 24 hours after onset of reperfusion. (D) Hemispheric swelling was
determined by MRI, and calculated for each animal as volume of ipsilateral hemisphere 24 hours post-reperfusion divided by volume of ipsilateral hemisphere at 4 hours post-reperfusion.
Signiﬁcant differences between vehicle and DMF treatment group are determined by Mann–Whitney U-test and indicated with * (p b 0.05). N = 5 (per group).

group (Fig. 1D) indicating reduced brain swelling/edema in DMF treated
animals. In accordance with decreased brain swelling DMF treated mice
showed reduced ventricular compression and less midline shift (Fig. 1C).
T2 values did not differ signiﬁcantly between the two groups (DMF:
60.2 ± 3 ms vs. vehicle: 60.9 ± 3 ms, p = 0.56). Also the ADC values
did not show a difference between both groups (DMF: 0.39 ± 0.08 vs.
vehicle: 0.40 ± 0.06 [10−3 mm2/s], p = 0.67).

Systemic DMF pre-treatment prevents disruption of interendothelial tight
junctions during ischemic stroke
Tight junctions (TJ) form a circumferential zipper-like seal between
adjacent endothelial cells in cerebral capillaries limiting as ﬁrst-line of
defense the paracellular ﬂux of hydrophilic molecules across the BBB
(Kaur and Ling, 2008; Sandoval and Witt, 2008). At the molecular

Fig. 2. DMF protects TJ proteins in cerebral blood capillaries upon ischemic stroke. 15 mg/kg DMF or an equal volume of vehicle was given to adult C57BL/6 mice twice a day for 3 consecutive days via intraperitoneal application route. Then, mice underwent 60 min of MCAO followed by 24 hours reperfusion. Brains were removed, coronal cryosections were prepared
and immunoﬂuorescent detection of occludin (A) and ZO-1 (B) was performed. Inlays show higher magniﬁcation of immunoﬂuorescent staining. (C) depicts ﬂuorescence intensity measurement for occludin, ZO-1 and claudin-5 within the infarct core region. Disruptions (gaps; denoted by white arrowheads in A and B) of the regular occludin and ZO-1 localization pattern,
respectively, were counted in at least three randomly chosen blood vessels localized within the peri-infarct region per animal. The number of gaps per vessel was calculated and data is
plotted in (D). Signiﬁcant differences between vehicle and DMF treatment groups are determined by unpaired two-tailed t-test and indicated with * (p b 0.05), ** (p b 0.01) or ***
(p b 0.001). N = 4 (per group).

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

103

104

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

level TJ consist of specialized transmembrane proteins such as occludin
and claudin-5 that are anchored to the actin cytoskeleton via the
scaffolding protein Zonula occludens (ZO)-1 (Correale and Villa, 2009;
Kaur and Ling, 2008; Liu et al., 2012; Sandoval and Witt, 2008). During
ischemia-reperfusion injury, disruption of the regular localization
along the cellular borders, increased proteolytic degradation or reduced
expression of TJ proteins occurs and leads to loss of junctional integrity,
increased BBB paracellular permeability and vasogenic edema formation (Kaur and Ling, 2008; Sandoval and Witt, 2008). Our histological
analyses disclosed a reduced protein amount of the TJ proteins occludin,
ZO-1 and claudin-5 within the infarct core (Figs. 2A-C). Ischemiareperfusion injury caused also rearrangement of occludin and ZO-1
resulting in gap formation at the endothelial cell membrane of blood
vessels located in the peri-infarct region (Figs. 2A, B, D). In comparison

to vehicle treated animals, the abundance of occludin and claudin-5
protein within the infarct core of DMF treated mice was signiﬁcantly
increased (Figs. 2A-C). Furthermore, subcellular localization of occludin
and ZO-1 in capillaries of the peri-infarct area was nearly sustained if
the animals were pre-treated with DMF before onset of ischemic stroke
(Figs. 2A, B, D).
Systemic DMF pre-treatment decreases matrix metalloproteinase activity
in brain tissue upon ischemic stroke
Endothelial cells and pericytes are surrounded by the extracellular
matrix (ECM) that promotes anchorage of cells via adhesion receptors
and regulates intercellular communication (Kaur and Ling, 2008;
Sandoval and Witt, 2008). ECM degradation by elevated matrix

Fig. 3. DMF decreases gelatinolytic activity in brain parenchyma after ischemic stroke. 15 mg/kg DMF or an equal volume of vehicle was applied to adult C57BL/6 mice twice a day for 3
consecutive days via intraperitoneal application route. Subsequently, mice underwent 60 min of MCAO followed by 4–24 hours reperfusion. (A) Cryosections were incubated with gelatinFITC substrate to detect gelatinolytic activity in the ipsi- and contralateral hemispheres. Microvessels and neurons were co-stained with the cellular markers Pecam-1 and NeuN, respectively. Scale bar = 50 μm. (B) Number of cells exhibiting gelatinolytic activity in the ipsilateral hemisphere 4 hours and 24 hours after onset of reperfusion were quantiﬁed in six different
randomly chosen microscopic ﬁelds per animal. (C) Apoptotic cells in the ipsilateral hemisphere upon 24 hours reperfusion were detected by TUNEL-assay and counted in ﬁve different
randomly chosen microscopic ﬁelds per animal. Scale bar = 50 μm. Signiﬁcant differences between vehicle and DMF treatment group are determined by unpaired two-tailed t-test and
indicated with ** (p b 0.01) or *** (p b 0.001). N = 4 (per group).

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

metalloproteinase (MMP) activity following ischemia-reperfusion has
been shown to be associated with increased BBB paracellular permeability (Lakhan et al., 2013; Wang and Shuaib, 2007). Thus, we examined gelatinolytic activity in the brain parenchyma of mice suffering
from ischemic stroke by in situ zymography. The total gelatinolytic
activity that is primarily due to MMP-2 and MMP-9 mediated proteolysis was low in the non-ischemic brain tissue of both vehicle and DMF
treated mice, and was dedicated to blood vessels and neurons
(Fig. 3A). In ischemia-affected brain tissue of vehicle treated mice,
MMP activity was strongly increased and exclusively found in nuclei
of neuronal cells (Figs. 3A, B). In comparison, DMF pre-treatment significantly reduced the number of cells showing MMP activity within
the infarcted brain tissue. Cells showing MMP activity were mainly
neurons, but also endothelial cells (Figs. 3A, B). In addition to the
well-known ECM degrading activity of MMPs, recent studies indicate
that cerebral ischemia is associated with increased intranuclear
MMP-2 and − 9 activity in neurons leading to degradation of nuclear
DNA repair proteins and accumulation of oxidative DNA damage (Hill

105

et al., 2012; Yang et al., 2010). Hence, our ﬁndings might imply that
systemically applied DMF attenuates neuronal apoptosis triggered by
ischemic stroke. Accordingly, the number of apoptotic cells, predominantly representing neurons, within the infarcted tissue was signiﬁcantly
lowered in DMF pre-treated animals (Fig. 3C).

Orally applied DMF reduces edema formation and protects interendothelial
TJ following ischemic stroke
Clinical DMF medication is exclusively conducted via the oral
administration route. Hence, we tested if systemic pre-treatment with
DMF applied orally has similar beneﬁcial effects on the BBB integrity
during ischemic stroke. Our in vivo ﬁndings clearly indicate that orally
applied DMF markedly reduced the edema formation, but did not affect
the infarct size in the acute phase after cerebral ischemia (Fig. 4A). The
attenuated edema formation in DMF-treated mice was associated with
a restoration of the TJ protein claudin-5 in blood vessels located within

Fig. 4. Protection of BBB integrity following ischemia-reperfusion injury by DMF is independent of the administration route. 15 mg/kg DMF or an equal volume of vehicle was administered
to adult C57BL/6 mice twice a day for 3 consecutive days via oral gavage. Subsequently, mice underwent 60 min of MCAO followed by 24 hours reperfusion. (A) Quantiﬁcation of infarct and
edema size by cresyl violet staining. N = 6 (per group). (B) Immunoﬂuorescent detection of claudin-5, and (C) ﬂuorescence intensity measurement for claudin-5 within the infarct core
region. N = 3 (per group). Scale bar = 100 μm. Signiﬁcant differences between vehicle and DMF treatment group are determined by unpaired two-tailed t-test and indicated with **
(p b 0.01) or *** (p b 0.001).

106

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

the infarct core (Figs. 4B, C). These results indicate that oral and intraperitoneal administration of DMF lead to comparable protective effects.
DMF sustains subcellular organization of interendothelial junctionassociated proteins during ischemic conditions in vitro by direct effects on
brain microvascular endothelial cells
To further gain insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying
the protection of TJ by DMF observed in mice suffering from ischemic
stroke in vivo, and to determine whether it is mediated through direct
effects on endothelial cells, murine cerebral microvascular bEnd.3 cells
were exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD). In accordance
with our ﬁndings in vivo, ischemic conditions in vitro also caused subcellular delocalization of ZO-1 (Figs. 5A, B). By contrast, rearrangement of
ZO-1 in DMF treated endothelial cells was almost completely prevented
(Figs. 5A, B). The interendothelial adherens junctions (AJ) form a continuous belt localized near the apical end of the junctional cleft, just below

the TJ (Sandoval and Witt, 2008). AJ are composed of transmembrane
cadherins, which are linked to the actin cytoskeleton via catenins, and
are implicated in the localization and stabilization of the TJ (Sandoval
and Witt, 2008). Endothelial cells exposed to ischemic stress exhibited
a strongly reduced protein amount of vascular endothelial (VE)cadherin along the interendothelial junctions (Fig. S1). In DMF treated
endothelial cells, however, the localization of VE-cadherin along the
cellular membrane was partly restored (Fig. S1). Notably, DMF had no
effect on either subcellular localization or expression of both ZO-1 and
VE-cadherin under control conditions (Figs. 5A, B; S1).
The pro-inﬂammatory response upon ischemic stress in endothelial cells is
prevented by DMF
Cellular components of cerebral microvessels located within infarcted
brain tissue strongly produce pro-inﬂammatory mediators that promote
disruption of interendothelial junctions or favor chemotactic recruitment

Fig. 5. DMF prevents subcellular delocalization of ZO-1 in OGD-stressed endothelial cells. Mouse cerebrovascular bEnd.3 cells were exposed to OGD in the absence or presence of 50 μM
DMF for 6 and 24 hours or were treated with 50 μM DMF for 6 hours under basal conditions. (A) Immunoﬂuorescent staining was used to visualize the subcellular localization of ZO-1. Cell
membrane regions not immunoreactive for ZO-1 (gaps; denoted by white arrowheads) were quantiﬁed in ﬁve different randomly chosen microscopic ﬁelds for each condition per experiment and values are plotted in (B). Scale bar = 20 μm. (C) Gene expression was determined by real-time PCR and Western Blot. Values are normalized to Rps12 (RNA) or β-actin (protein)
and expressed as fold change to non-treated cells cultured under basal conditions. Signiﬁcant differences determined by one-way ANOVA combined with Bonferroni post-test are indicated with ** (p b 0.01) or *** (p b 0.001). N = 3.

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111
Table 1
DMF activates the Nrf2 signaling pathway in the central nervous system.
Gene

Ho-1
Gclm
Gclc
Nqo1

DMF treatment
1d

2d

3d

2.52 ± 0.75 ⁎⁎
1.14 ± 0.03
1.68 ± 0.12 ⁎⁎
1.04 ± 0.10

1.62 ± 0.30
1.03 ± 0.18
1.67 ± 0.21 ⁎⁎
1.04 ± 0.20

1.54 ± 0.46
1.12 ± 0.12
1.21 ± 0.35
0.99 ± 0.14

15 mg/kg DMF or an equal volume of vehicle was applied to adult C57BL/6 mice twice a
day for 1, 2 or 3 days via intraperitoneal application route. Nrf2 target gene expression
in brain tissue was analyzed by real-time PCR. Values are normalized to Rps12 and
expressed as fold change (mean ± SD) to vehicle treated animals. Signiﬁcant differences
between vehicle and DMF treatment groups are determined by one-way ANOVA combined with Bonferroni post-test and indicated with ** (p b 0.01). N = 4 (per group).

and adhesion of blood circulating monocytes. The key pro-inﬂammatory
cytokine tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) has been shown to
increase paracellular permeability and promotes redistribution of ZO-1
and VE-cadherin in human brain endothelial cells (Lopez-Ramirez
et al., 2012). Moreover, in response to an ischemic insult MMP-9 expression in cerebral tissue is enhanced and contributes to BBB opening leading to cerebral edema (Lakhan et al., 2013). In accordance, endothelial
cells responded to OGD with an increased TNF-α and MMP-9 expression,
whereas up-regulation of both TNF-α and MMP-9 during ischemic
conditions was almost completely prevented by DMF treatment
(Fig. 5C). Cellular sources for pro-inﬂammatory mediators are not only
endothelial cells, but also peri-vascular astrocytes and neurons. In fact,
primary murine astrocytes exhibited increased expression of TNF-α,
interleukin-6 (IL-6), and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1)
upon exposure to OGD (Fig. S2). DMF treatment signiﬁcantly decreased
ischemia-induced up-regulation of these cytokines and chemokines in
astrocytes (Fig. S2). DMF reduced the expression of TNF-α, IL-6, and
MCP-1 in astrocytes cultured under basal conditions, as well (Fig. S2).
We further evaluated the potential of DMF to suppress transendothelial
migration of blood-derived monocytes. In presence of the chemotactic
stimulus MCP-1 the number of monocytes crossing the endothelial
cell monolayer strongly increased as compared to control conditions
(Fig. S3A, B). MCP-1-induced monocyte transmigration was signiﬁcantly reduced if the endothelial cells were pre-treated with DMF (Fig. S3A).
Moreover, the impairment of monocyte migration was much more pronounced if endothelial cells and monocytes were co-stimulated with
DMF both in the presence and absence of MCP-1 (Fig. S3B). Accordingly,
endothelial cells responded to DMF with down-regulation of leukocyte
adhesion molecules including E-selectin, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1), and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1)
(Fig. S3C).
DMF maintains interendothelial TJ by activation of the antioxidant Nrf2
pathway

107

increased the protein abundance of nuclear Nrf2 (Figs. 6A, B). Furthermore, DMF strongly enhanced expression of the Nrf2 target genes
HO-1, glutamate-cysteine ligase modiﬁer subunit (Gclm), Gclc, and
NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (Nqo1) at the transcriptional
level in endothelial cells (Fig. 6C) and astrocytes (Fig. 6D). The use of
HUVECs as primary endothelial cells from a different species conﬁrmed
our results obtained from the mouse brain endothelial cell line. In
HUVECS DMF markedly increased the protein amount of Nrf2 and
HO-1, and signiﬁcantly up-regulated mRNA expression of HO-1, Gclm,
and Nqo1 (Fig. S5).
In addition, Nrf2 knockdown in endothelial cells signiﬁcantly
enhanced subcellular delocalization of ZO-1 during ischemic conditions
(Fig. 7). In contrast to untransfected cells and cells transfected with control small interfering RNA (siRNA), in Nrf2 deﬁcient endothelial cells
exposed to ischemic stress DMF failed to maintain ZO-1 localization
along the cellular membrane (Figs. 7B, C).
Discussion
Dysfunction of the BBB accompanies a variety of neurodegenerative
diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, and MS
(Obermeier et al., 2013). In addition, progressive breakdown of the
BBB, leading to vasogenic brain edema and even hemorrhages, is a
life-threatening complication after brain injury and cerebral ischemia.
Understanding the underlying mechanisms is therefore highly important in order to develop new therapeutic approaches. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report demonstrating that DMF, the
most potent FAE, is able to prevent BBB hyperpermeability during ischemic stroke if given before onset of ischemia-reperfusion injury. Patients
suffering from stroke or transient ischemic attacks incur an increased
risk of a recurrent stroke within days or weeks of their sentinel event.
Similarly, patients with cardiovascular diseases like intracranial artery
stenosis or atrial ﬁbrillation are at high risk of stroke (Zhao and
Rempe, 2011). Thus, development of new prophylactic therapies initiated before the onset of cerebral ischemia would help to reduce stroke
burden in these high risk patients. Our results provide a basis for treatment of stroke patients suffering from brain edema, as FAE formulation
that contain DMF are already used in the clinic setting. An oral formulation of FAE (Fumaderm®), for example, constitutes a well-established
therapy for psoriasis, a dermatological disorder with immune dysfunction, with a comprehensive safety proﬁle of over 160,000 patient years
(Lee et al., 2012; Mrowietz et al., 1998, 1999; Rostami Yazdi and
Mrowietz, 2008). Furthermore, very recently, BG-12 (Panaclar,
BG00012, FAG-201), an oral second-generation fumaric acid derivative
containing DMF as main ingredient, was successfully tested in phase II
and III studies of MS and shown to decrease the frequency of relapses
and the time to disability progression (Fox et al., 2012; Gold et al.,
2012; Kappos et al., 2008).
DMF stabilizes interendothelial junctions

During ischemia-reperfusion injury activation of the redox sensitive
transcription factor NF-E2 related factor 2 (Nrf2) has been shown to be
protective through up-regulation of mediators with antioxidant activity
(Shah et al., 2007; Shih et al., 2005; Srivastava et al., 2013). Thus, to
elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the beneﬁcial effects
of DMF on the BBB integrity, we tested the potential of DMF to activate
the Nrf2 pathway in the brain in vivo and in cerebral endothelial cells
and astrocytes in vitro. In fact, following DMF treatment expression of
the Nrf2 target genes heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and glutamatecysteine ligase catalytic subunit (Gclc) was signiﬁcantly increased in
cerebral tissue (Table 1). Up-regulation of HO-1 and Gclc mRNA peaked
after one day treatment and declined to basal level after three days of
DMF application (Table 1). In comparison to CNS, magnitude and temporal course of HO-1 up-regulation by DMF in heart tissue was quite
similar suggesting that DMF may efﬁciently cross the BBB (Fig. S4).
Accordingly, in cultured cerebral endothelial cells and astrocytes DMF

The basis for the therapeutic use of drugs in a clinical setting is the
understanding of the underlying mechanisms. Vascular brain edema is
associated with endothelial dysfunction and breakdown of the BBB,
which is reﬂected by rearrangement, reduced expression and degradation of TJ proteins, and gap formation (Simard et al., 2007). We provide
evidence that systemically applied DMF strongly attenuated edema
formation in a model of ischemic stroke by protecting BBB integrity.
DMF prevented degradation of TJ which interconnect adjacent endothelial cells in cerebral microvessels and thereby limit paracellular inﬂux of
blood-borne material into brain parenchyma. Moreover, activity of
MMPs, contributing to BBB hyperpermeability by degrading ECM
components required for endothelial cell anchorage and intercellular
communication to pericytes and astrocytes, was reduced in DMF treated
animals. Our in vitro experiments demonstrate that up-regulation of
MMP-9 in endothelial cells exposed to ischemic stress was decreased

108

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

Fig. 6. DMF activates the Nrf2 signaling pathway in endothelial cells and astrocytes. Mouse cerebrovascular bEnd.3 cells (A) and primary murine astrocytes (B) were treated with 50 μM
DMF for 6 hours. Expression and subcellular localization of Nrf2 was detected by immunoﬂuorescent staining. Scale bar = 20 μm. Endothelial cells (C) and astrocytes (D) were treated with
either 1, 10, 50 or 100 μM DMF for 6 and 24 hours. Nrf2 target gene expression in cells was analyzed by real-time PCR. Values are normalized to Rps12 and expressed as fold change to nontreated cells. Signiﬁcant differences between non-treated and DMF treated cells for each time point are determined by one-way ANOVA combined with Bonferroni post-test and indicated
with * (p b 0.05), ** (p b 0.01) or *** (p b 0.001). N = 3.

in the presence of DMF. Furthermore, DMF sustained amount and subcellular localization of TJ and AJ proteins along the cellular membrane
of brain microvessel cells under ischemic conditions indicating that endothelial cells are a target of DMF. Our ﬁndings are in contrast to a recent paper where both DMF and MMF had no consistent modulatory
effect on the expression of TJ molecules, neither in a human brain microvascular endothelial cell line in vitro nor in an EAE model in vivo
(Benardais et al., 2013). However, immunohistochemical analysis of TJ
protein localization was not provided in that study, and thus, the typical
features of stress-induced alterations of TJ – protein rearrangement and
gap formation – might have been missed. In addition, TJ protein expression levels were mainly determined under control conditions, where
major stress-induced alterations are unlikely to occur. Indeed, when
the authors stimulated the cells with TNF-α, a slight protective effect
of DMF was observed (Benardais et al., 2013), consistent with our

hypothesis that DMF can prevent BBB breakdown during oxidative or
inﬂammatory stress.
We previously showed that brain edema is associated with tissue
hypoxia and ischemia, and can be attenuated by inhibition of VEGF –
the prototypic factor responsible for disruption of vascular barrier function (Weis and Cheresh, 2005) – or MMPs (Bauer et al., 2010; Marti and
Risau, 1998; Schoch et al., 2002). Thus, DMF could target this pathway.
However, brain injury and cerebral ischemia, as in our stroke model,
are in addition to hypoxia typically associated with inﬂammatory processes and oxidative stress (Dirnagl et al., 1999). DMF might therefore
affect inﬂammatory and oxidative stress pathways. Indeed, we demonstrate that DMF activates the redox sensitive transcription factor Nrf2.
This statement is based on our ﬁndings that a) DMF increased nuclear
Nrf2 protein abundance, which b) resulted in activation of Nrf2 target
genes, and that c) DMF protective effects were attenuated in Nrf2

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

109

Fig. 7. Protection of subcellular ZO-1 organization by DMF in OGD-stressed endothelial cells is dependent on Nrf2. (A) Nrf2 expression in mouse cerebrovascular bEnd.3 cells, which were
transfected for 24 hours with 10 nM control siRNA, 10 nM Nrf2-speciﬁc siRNA or treated with transfection reagent (TR) was determined using RT-PCR. Rps12 was used as control. (B) Cells
were transfected with 10 nM control siRNA or 10 nM Nrf2-speciﬁc siRNA for 24 hours followed by exposure to OGD in the absence or presence of 50 μM DMF for 24 hours. Immunoﬂuorescent staining was used to visualize the subcellular localization of ZO-1. Scale bar = 20 μm. (C) Cell membrane regions not immunoreactive for ZO-1 (gaps) were quantiﬁed in four
different randomly chosen microscopic ﬁelds for each condition per experiment. Signiﬁcant differences determined by one-way ANOVA combined with Bonferroni post-test are indicated
with * (p b 0.05) or *** (p b 0.001). N = 3.

deﬁcient cells. Secondly, we show that DMF resulted in attenuation of
pro-inﬂammatory factors, and inhibited leukocyte transmigration,
indicative of altered anti-oxidative and -inﬂammatory pathways in
our stroke model.
DMF attenuates oxidative processes by activation of Nrf2
Elevated free radicals, which accompany tissue hypoxia, oxidative
stress, and inﬂammation, e.g. during ischemic stroke, comprise reactive
oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS). Apart from
the adverse consequences of free radicals, they also activate endogenous protective cellular responses that primarily aim to detoxify free
radicals and repair oxidized molecules. Nrf2 orchestrates endogenous
antioxidant defense against oxidative and nitrosative stress through
up-regulation of phase II detoxifying enzymes and antioxidant stress
proteins (Srivastava et al., 2013). Under physiological conditions, Nrf2
is trapped in the cytoplasm via interaction with kelch-like erythroid
cell-derived protein with CNC homology-associated protein 1 (Keap1),
targeting Nrf2 for proteosomal degradation. Upon oxidative and electrophilic stress, however, reactive cysteine residues in Keap1 are
attacked by oxidants and electrophilic compounds to form intermolecular disulﬁde bonds. Consequently, Keap1 is no longer able to sequester
Nrf2 allowing its translocation to the nucleus and binding of Nrf2 to the
antioxidant response element (ARE) in the promoter of protective
genes such as HO-1, Gclm, Gclc, and Nqo1 (Itoh et al., 2004; Li and
Kong, 2009; Linker et al., 2011; Scannevin et al., 2012; Srivastava et al.,
2013).
Several studies addressed the putative role of Nrf2 for the endogenous antioxidant response during ischemic stroke. Nrf2 and downstream
antioxidant proteins including HO-1, glutathione and thioredoxin have
been shown to become up-regulated within peri-infarct regions of
post-ischemic rodent brains (Dang et al., 2012; Srivastava et al., 2013;
Tanaka et al., 2011). In line with these observations, Nrf2 deﬁciency in
mice aggravated the outcome from ischemic stroke (Shah et al., 2007;
Shih et al., 2005) underlining the importance of the Nrf2 pathway for
the endogenous protective response against oxidative stress. Here, we
demonstrate that systemic treatment of mice with DMF resulted in upregulation of the Nrf2 target genes HO-1 and Gclc in brain parenchyma.
Moreover, DMF enhanced nuclear Nrf2 in cultured endothelial cells and
astrocytes, and consequently increased the expression of cytoprotective

Nrf2 target genes. We also provide evidence that DMF-mediated protection of TJ in ischemia-stressed endothelial cells is dependent on activation of the Nrf2 signaling pathway, thus linking DMF effects on
endothelial barrier to Nrf2 activity.
The exact molecular mechanism leading to FAE-mediated activation
of Nrf2 has not been fully elucidated. Linker et al. reported that MMF
directly causes covalent modiﬁcation of a free cysteine residue in the
Nrf2-binding protein Keap1 (Linker et al., 2011). Similarly, increased
levels of endogenous fumarate in fumarate hydratase deﬁcient cells
have been shown to activate the Nrf2 pathway by succination of redox
sensitive cysteine residues in Keap1 (Adam et al., 2011; Ooi et al., 2011).
DMF inhibits inﬂammatory cytokines and attenuates leukocyte migration
We demonstrate that DMF abrogates up-regulation of proinﬂammatory factors such as TNF-α and MCP-1/CCL2 in endothelial
cells and astrocytes exposed to ischemic conditions. TNF-α has
been shown to increase the paracellular permeability, downregulate claudin-5 transcription, and promote redistribution of
ZO-1 and VE-cadherin in brain endothelial cells (Aslam et al., 2012;
Forster et al., 2008; Lopez-Ramirez et al., 2012). Thus, inﬂammatory
processes clearly contribute to impaired BBB function. Despite maintenance of TJ organization (Fig. 5), in vitro tracer permeability studies
using bEnd.3 cells did not reveal a signiﬁcant effect of DMF (data not
shown). Nevertheless, our in vivo studies strongly suggest that DMF
treatment is sufﬁcient to counteract ischemia-induced vascular
hyperpermeability. In this regard, one might argue that attenuation
of vascular leakage by DMF is at least partly mediated through effects
on astrocytes (e.g. reduction of pro-inﬂammatory cytokine expression/
release). Moreover, our data clearly reveal that DMF treatment was
sufﬁcient to prevent the transendothelial migration of monocytes,
which was accompanied by down-regulation of leukocyte adhesion
molecules in endothelial cells. Our observations are in accordance with
other studies showing that DMF mediated down-regulation of ICAM-1,
VCAM-1, and E-selectin expression in endothelial cells suppresses adhesion of leukocytes (Vandermeeren et al., 1997; Wallbrecht et al., 2011).
Its attenuating effect on activation of pro-inﬂammatory processes upon
ischemic stress could be based on DMF-mediated inhibition of nuclear
translocation of activated NF-κB as shown for several cell types during
pro-inﬂammatory conditions (Gerdes et al., 2007; Loewe et al., 2002;

110

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111

Vandermeeren et al., 2001). It remains elusive whether suppression of
NF-κB signaling is independent or dependent on the activation of the
Nrf2 pathway by DMF.
Alternatively, DMF might target other pathways. Very recently, it
was shown that hydroxycarboxylic acid receptor 2 (HCA2) mediates
DMF’s protective effect in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
(EAE), a mouse model of MS (Chen et al., 2014). DMF particularly
reduced the number of inﬁltrating neutrophils in the disease model in
a HCA2-dependent manner. HCA2 is highly expressed in neutrophils
and likely is involved in the interaction of neutrophils with endothelial
cells. It remains to be established whether HCA2 is signiﬁcantly
expressed in resident cells of the CNS and could contribute to the
DMF-mediated BBB protection, we describe here.
Direct neuroprotective capacity of DMF
Although DMF treatment signiﬁcantly reduced cerebral edema
formation upon acute ischemic stroke, the overall infarct size was not
different by comparing DMF and vehicle treated animals, speaking
against a direct neuroprotective effect of DMF. We have observed this
combination – less edema, but no reduction in infarct size – before.
Using a transient MCAO model in mice with deﬁciency of the regulator
of G-protein signaling 5 (Rgs5) we showed a signiﬁcant reduction in
edema size without protective effect in infarct lesion (Hamzah et al.,
2008). One might speculate that increased vascular permeability
might be beneﬁcial for neuronal survival as it might facilitate access of
blood-borne neuroprotective factors such as erythropoietin into the
brain parenchyma. However, at a certain level of edema formation, its
unfavorable effects on intracranial pressure and oxygen distribution
would abrogate the initial neuroprotective impact. Nevertheless, as
determined by TUNEL assay, we observed signiﬁcantly less apoptotic
neurons in the infarcted area of DMF treated mice, suggesting that
DMF may have a limited capacity to protect neurons during ischemic
conditions. Indeed, there are only few reports investigating direct
effects of FAE on neuronal survival under pathophysiological conditions.
In vitro, DMF and its primary metabolite MMF increased the survival of
neurons exposed to oxidative stress such as H2O2 and glutamate toxicity
(Albrecht et al., 2012; Linker et al., 2011; Scannevin et al., 2012). In EAE
oral application of DMF ameliorated the disease course, improved preservation of myelin, axons, and neurons, and reduced spinal cord inﬂammation (Linker et al., 2011; Schilling et al., 2006). In mouse models of
Huntington's disease, long-term DMF treatment resulted in attenuated
motor impairment, prolonged survival, and preservation of morphologically intact neurons in the striatum and motor cortex (Ellrichmann
et al., 2011). Thus, from these results it might be speculated that DMF
supports neuronal survival in slowly progressing disease and apoptotic
processes, while its potency is limited in necrotic tissue, as typically
found in the infarct core after stroke.
Cytoprotective properties of DMF might well be linked to Nrf2 activation, as enhanced survival of neurons and cardiomycytes following
treatment with DMF in murine models of EAE and cardiac ischemia,
respectively, was shown to be absent in Nrf2 deﬁcient mice (Ashraﬁan
et al., 2012; Linker et al., 2011; Schilling et al., 2006).
Conclusion
Clinically, fumaric acid derivatives like DMF are important for the
therapy of psoriasis and – as suggested by recent phase III studies –
for MS. Our results, generated in a mouse stroke model, now show for
the ﬁrst time that DMF pretreatment is also effective in the prevention
of cerebral edema formation by maintaining endothelial tight junctional
barriers. This protection of the BBB is likely due to increased Nrf2 activity.
Our results provide the basis for a new therapeutic approach to treat
brain edema with a drug that already has a broad safety record in
human patients. Our results also suggest that oral application of DMF –
at least in our mouse model – seems to have a good availability as it is

equally effective as intraperitoneal treatment. We are aware of the limitation of our study, i.e. that it does not fulﬁll the criteria set up for preclinical stroke studies (Fisher et al., 2009). However, the experiments
described here were primarily designed to proof a novel principle
focused on brain edema formation, and thus, pre-clinical veriﬁcation
for stroke is beyond the scope of our study. Furthermore, as BBB dysfunction and cerebral edema are complications associated with many neuropathologies, additional studies in models of other neurological diseases
are also warranted to further explore the therapeutic potential of DMF
to protect BBB integrity.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants from B. Braun-Stiftung (HHM,
RK) and Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2012_A171; RK, HHM) and
Friedrich Fischer Nachlass (University of Heidelberg; RK). The expert
technical assistance of Inge Keller, Maria Harlacher and Manuel Fischer
is gratefully acknowledged. We thank Laura-Inés Böhler for proofreading
the manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.02.022.
References
Adam, J., Hatipoglu, E., O'Flaherty, L., Ternette, N., Sahgal, N., Lockstone, H., Baban, D., Nye,
E., Stamp, G.W., Wolhuter, K., Stevens, M., Fischer, R., Carmeliet, P., Maxwell, P.H.,
Pugh, C.W., Frizzell, N., Soga, T., Kessler, B.M., El-Bahrawy, M., Ratcliffe, P.J., Pollard,
P.J., 2011. Renal cyst formation in Fh1-deﬁcient mice is independent of the Hif/Phd
pathway: roles for fumarate in KEAP1 succination and Nrf2 signaling. Cancer Cell
20, 524–537.
Albrecht, P., Bouchachia, I., Goebels, N., Henke, N., Hofstetter, H.H., Issberner, A., Kovacs, Z.,
Lewerenz, J., Lisak, D., Maher, P., Mausberg, A.K., Quasthoff, K., Zimmermann, C.,
Hartung, H.P., Methner, A., 2012. Effects of dimethyl fumarate on neuroprotection
and immunomodulation. J. Neuroinﬂammation 9, 163.
Ashraﬁan, H., Czibik, G., Bellahcene, M., Aksentijevic, D., Smith, A.C., Mitchell, S.J., Dodd,
M.S., Kirwan, J., Byrne, J.J., Ludwig, C., Isackson, H., Yavari, A., Stottrup, N.B.,
Contractor, H., Cahill, T.J., Sahgal, N., Ball, D.R., Birkler, R.I., Hargreaves, I., Tennant,
D.A., Land, J., Lygate, C.A., Johannsen, M., Kharbanda, R.K., Neubauer, S., Redwood,
C., de Cabo, R., Ahmet, I., Talan, M., Gunther, U.L., Robinson, A.J., Viant, M.R., Pollard,
P.J., Tyler, D.J., Watkins, H., 2012. Fumarate is cardioprotective via activation of the
Nrf2 antioxidant pathway. Cell Metab. 15, 361–371.
Aslam, M., Ahmad, N., Srivastava, R., Hemmer, B., 2012. TNF-alpha induced NFkappaB
signaling and p65 (RelA) overexpression repress Cldn5 promoter in mouse brain endothelial cells. Cytokine 57, 269–275.
Bauer, A.T., Burgers, H.F., Rabie, T., Marti, H.H., 2010. Matrix metalloproteinase-9 mediates
hypoxia-induced vascular leakage in the brain via tight junction rearrangement.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 837–848.
Benardais, K., Pul, R., Singh, V., Skripuletz, T., Lee, D.H., Linker, R.A., Gudi, V., Stangel, M.,
2013. Effects of fumaric acid esters on blood–brain barrier tight junction proteins.
Neurosci. Lett. 555, 165–170.
Chen, H., Assmann, J.C., Krenz, A., Rahman, M., Grimm, M., Karsten, C.M., Kohl, J.,
Offermanns, S., Wettschureck, N., Schwaninger, M., 2014. Hydroxycarboxylic acid
receptor 2 mediates dimethyl fumarate's protective effect in EAE. J. Clin. Invest.
124, 2188–2192.
Coisne, C., Engelhardt, B., 2011. Tight junctions in brain barriers during central nervous
system inﬂammation. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 15, 1285–1303.
Correale, J., Villa, A., 2009. Cellular elements of the blood–brain barrier. Neurochem. Res.
34, 2067–2077.
Dang, J., Brandenburg, L.O., Rosen, C., Fragoulis, A., Kipp, M., Pufe, T., Beyer, C., Wruck, C.J.,
2012. Nrf2 expression by neurons, astroglia, and microglia in the cerebral cortical
penumbra of ischemic rats. J. Mol. Neurosci. 46, 578–584.
Dirnagl, U., Iadecola, C., Moskowitz, M.A., 1999. Pathobiology of ischaemic stroke: an
integrated view. Trends Neurosci. 22, 391–397.
Ellrichmann, G., Petrasch-Parwez, E., Lee, D.H., Reick, C., Arning, L., Saft, C., Gold, R., Linker,
R.A., 2011. Efﬁcacy of fumaric acid esters in the R6/2 and YAC128 models of
Huntington's disease. PLoS ONE 6, e16172.
Fisher, M., Feuerstein, G., Howells, D.W., Hurn, P.D., Kent, T.A., Savitz, S.I., Lo, E.H., 2009.
Update of the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical recommendations. Stroke 40, 2244–2250.
Forster, C., Burek, M., Romero, I.A., Weksler, B., Couraud, P.O., Drenckhahn, D., 2008.
Differential effects of hydrocortisone and TNFalpha on tight junction proteins in an
in vitro model of the human blood–brain barrier. J. Physiol. 586, 1937–1949.
Fox, R.J., Miller, D.H., Phillips, J.T., Hutchinson, M., Havrdova, E., Kita, M., Yang, M.,
Raghupathi, K., Novas, M., Sweetser, M.T., Viglietta, V., Dawson, K.T., 2012. Placebo-

R. Kunze et al. / Experimental Neurology 266 (2015) 99–111
controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 or glatiramer in multiple sclerosis. N. Engl.
J. Med. 367, 1087–1097.
Gerdes, S., Shakery, K., Mrowietz, U., 2007. Dimethylfumarate inhibits nuclear binding of
nuclear factor kappaB but not of nuclear factor of activated T cells and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein beta in activated human T cells. Br. J. Dermatol. 156, 838–842.
Gold, R., Kappos, L., Arnold, D.L., Bar-Or, A., Giovannoni, G., Selmaj, K., Tornatore, C.,
Sweetser, M.T., Yang, M., Sheikh, S.I., Dawson, K.T., 2012. Placebo-controlled phase
3 study of oral BG-12 for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1098–1107.
Hamzah, J., Jugold, M., Kiessling, F., Rigby, P., Manzur, M., Marti, H.H., Rabie, T., Kaden, S.,
Grone, H.J., Hammerling, G.J., Arnold, B., Ganss, R., 2008. Vascular normalization in
Rgs5-deﬁcient tumours promotes immune destruction. Nature 453, 410–414.
Hill, J.W., Poddar, R., Thompson, J.F., Rosenberg, G.A., Yang, Y., 2012. Intranuclear matrix
metalloproteinases promote DNA damage and apoptosis induced by oxygenglucose deprivation in neurons. Neuroscience 220, 277–290.
Itoh, K., Tong, K.I., Yamamoto, M., 2004. Molecular mechanism activating Nrf2-Keap1
pathway in regulation of adaptive response to electrophiles. Free Radic. Biol. Med.
36, 1208–1213.
Kappos, L., Gold, R., Miller, D.H., Macmanus, D.G., Havrdova, E., Limmroth, V., Polman, C.H.,
Schmierer, K., Yousry, T.A., Yang, M., Eraksoy, M., Meluzinova, E., Rektor, I., Dawson,
K.T., Sandrock, A.W., O'Neill, G.N., 2008. Efﬁcacy and safety of oral fumarate in
patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, randomised,
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase IIb study. Lancet 372, 1463–1472.
Kaur, C., Ling, E.A., 2008. Blood brain barrier in hypoxic-ischemic conditions. Curr.
Neurovasc. Res. 5, 71–81.
Korff, T., Braun, J., Pfaff, D., Augustin, H.G., Hecker, M., 2008. Role of ephrinB2 expression in
endothelial cells during arteriogenesis: impact on smooth muscle cell migration and
monocyte recruitment. Blood 112, 73–81.
Kunze, R., Zhou, W., Veltkamp, R., Wielockx, B., Breier, G., Marti, H.H., 2012. Neuronspeciﬁc prolyl-4-hydroxylase domain 2 knockout reduces brain injury after transient
cerebral ischemia. Stroke 43, 2748–2756.
Lakhan, S.E., Kirchgessner, A., Tepper, D., Leonard, A., 2013. Matrix metalloproteinases and
blood–brain barrier disruption in acute ischemic stroke. Front. Neurol. 4, 32.
Lee, D.H., Gold, R., Linker, R.A., 2012. Mechanisms of oxidative damage in multiple sclerosis
and neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic modulation via fumaric acid esters. Int.
J. Mol. Sci. 13, 11783–11803.
Lehner, C., Gehwolf, R., Tempfer, H., Krizbai, I., Hennig, B., Bauer, H.C., Bauer, H., 2011.
Oxidative stress and blood–brain barrier dysfunction under particular consideration
of matrix metalloproteinases. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 15, 1305–1323.
Li, W., Kong, A.N., 2009. Molecular mechanisms of Nrf2-mediated antioxidant response.
Mol. Carcinog. 48, 91–104.
Linker, R.A., Lee, D.H., Ryan, S., van Dam, A.M., Conrad, R., Bista, P., Zeng, W., Hronowsky,
X., Buko, A., Chollate, S., Ellrichmann, G., Bruck, W., Dawson, K., Goelz, S., Wiese, S.,
Scannevin, R.H., Lukashev, M., Gold, R., 2011. Fumaric acid esters exert neuroprotective effects in neuroinﬂammation via activation of the Nrf2 antioxidant pathway.
Brain 134, 678–692.
Liu, W.Y., Wang, Z.B., Zhang, L.C., Wei, X., Li, L., 2012. Tight junction in blood–brain barrier:
an overview of structure, regulation, and regulator substances. CNS Neurosci. Ther.
18, 609–615.
Loewe, R., Holnthoner, W., Groger, M., Pillinger, M., Gruber, F., Mechtcheriakova, D., Hofer,
E., Wolff, K., Petzelbauer, P., 2002. Dimethylfumarate inhibits TNF-induced nuclear
entry of NF-kappa B/p65 in human endothelial cells. J. Immunol. 168, 4781–4787.
Lopez-Ramirez, M.A., Fischer, R., Torres-Badillo, C.C., Davies, H.A., Logan, K., Pﬁzenmaier,
K., Male, D.K., Sharrack, B., Romero, I.A., 2012. Role of caspases in cytokine-induced
barrier breakdown in human brain endothelial cells. J. Immunol. 189, 3130–3139.
Marti, H.H., Risau, W., 1998. Systemic hypoxia changes the organ-speciﬁc distribution of
vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
95, 15809–15814.
Montesano, R., Pepper, M.S., Mohle-Steinlein, U., Risau, W., Wagner, E.F., Orci, L., 1990.
Increased proteolytic activity is responsible for the aberrant morphogenetic behavior
of endothelial cells expressing the middle T oncogene. Cell 62, 435–445.
Mrowietz, U., Christophers, E., Altmeyer, P., 1998. Treatment of psoriasis with fumaric
acid esters: results of a prospective multicentre study. German Multicentre Study.
Br. J. Dermatol. 138, 456–460.
Mrowietz, U., Christophers, E., Altmeyer, P., 1999. Treatment of severe psoriasis with
fumaric acid esters: scientiﬁc background and guidelines for therapeutic use. The
German Fumaric Acid Ester Consensus Conference. Br. J. Dermatol. 141, 424–429.
Obermeier, B., Daneman, R., Ransohoff, R.M., 2013. Development, maintenance and
disruption of the blood–brain barrier. Nat. Med. 19, 1584–1596.
Ooi, A., Wong, J.C., Petillo, D., Roossien, D., Perrier-Trudova, V., Whitten, D., Min, B.W., Tan,
M.H., Zhang, Z., Yang, X.J., Zhou, M., Gardie, B., Molinie, V., Richard, S., Tan, P.H., Teh,
B.T., Furge, K.A., 2011. An antioxidant response phenotype shared between hereditary
and sporadic type 2 papillary renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Cell 20, 511–523.

111

Plaschke, K., Staub, J., Ernst, E., Marti, H.H., 2008. VEGF overexpression improves mice
cognitive abilities after unilateral common carotid artery occlusion. Exp. Neurol.
214, 285–292.
Pun, P.B., Lu, J., Moochhala, S., 2009. Involvement of ROS in BBB dysfunction. Free Radic.
Res. 43, 348–364.
Reischl, S., Li, L., Walkinshaw, G., Flippin, L.A., Marti, H.H., Kunze, R., 2014. Inhibition of HIF
prolyl-4-hydroxylases by FG-4497 reduces brain tissue injury and edema formation
during ischemic stroke. PLoS ONE 9, e84767.
Rostami Yazdi, M., Mrowietz, U., 2008. Fumaric acid esters. Clin. Dermatol. 26, 522–526.
Sandoval, K.E., Witt, K.A., 2008. Blood–brain barrier tight junction permeability and ischemic stroke. Neurobiol. Dis. 32, 200–219.
Scannevin, R.H., Chollate, S., Jung, M.Y., Shackett, M., Patel, H., Bista, P., Zeng, W., Ryan, S.,
Yamamoto, M., Lukashev, M., Rhodes, K.J., 2012. Fumarates promote cytoprotection
of central nervous system cells against oxidative stress via the nuclear factor
(erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 pathway. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 341, 274–284.
Schilling, S., Goelz, S., Linker, R., Luehder, F., Gold, R., 2006. Fumaric acid esters are effective
in chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and suppress macrophage
inﬁltration. Clin. Exp. Immunol. 145, 101–107.
Schoch, H.J., Fischer, S., Marti, H.H., 2002. Hypoxia-induced vascular endothelial growth
factor expression causes vascular leakage in the brain. Brain 125, 2549–2557.
Shah, Z.A., Li, R.C., Thimmulappa, R.K., Kensler, T.W., Yamamoto, M., Biswal, S., Dore, S.,
2007. Role of reactive oxygen species in modulation of Nrf2 following ischemic reperfusion injury. Neuroscience 147, 53–59.
Shih, A.Y., Li, P., Murphy, T.H., 2005. A small-molecule-inducible Nrf2-mediated antioxidant response provides effective prophylaxis against cerebral ischemia in vivo.
J. Neurosci. 25, 10321–10335.
Simard, J.M., Kent, T.A., Chen, M., Tarasov, K.V., Gerzanich, V., 2007. Brain oedema in focal
ischaemia: molecular pathophysiology and theoretical implications. Lancet Neurol. 6,
258–268.
Srivastava, S., Alﬁeri, A., Siow, R.C., Mann, G.E., Fraser, P.A., 2013. Temporal and spatial
distribution of Nrf2 in rat brain following stroke: quantiﬁcation of nuclear to
cytoplasmic Nrf2 content using a novel immunohistochemical technique. J. Physiol.
591, 3525–3538.
Tanaka, N., Ikeda, Y., Ohta, Y., Deguchi, K., Tian, F., Shang, J., Matsuura, T., Abe, K., 2011.
Expression of Keap1-Nrf2 system and antioxidative proteins in mouse brain after
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Brain Res. 1370, 246–253.
Vandermeeren, M., Janssens, S., Borgers, M., Geysen, J., 1997. Dimethylfumarate is an
inhibitor of cytokine-induced E-selectin, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1 expression in human
endothelial cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 234, 19–23.
Vandermeeren, M., Janssens, S., Wouters, H., Borghmans, I., Borgers, M., Beyaert, R.,
Geysen, J., 2001. Dimethylfumarate is an inhibitor of cytokine-induced nuclear translocation of NF-kappa B1, but not RelA in normal human dermal ﬁbroblast cells.
J. Invest. Dermatol. 116, 124–130.
Wallbrecht, K., Drick, N., Hund, A.C., Schon, M.P., 2011. Downregulation of endothelial
adhesion molecules by dimethylfumarate, but not monomethylfumarate, and impairment of dynamic lymphocyte-endothelial cell interactions. Exp. Dermatol. 20,
980–985.
Wang, C.X., Shuaib, A., 2007. Critical role of microvasculature basal lamina in ischemic
brain injury. Prog. Neurobiol. 83, 140–148.
Wang, Y., Kilic, E., Kilic, U., Weber, B., Bassetti, C.L., Marti, H.H., Hermann, D.M., 2005. VEGF
overexpression induces post-ischaemic neuroprotection, but facilitates haemodynamic steal phenomena. Brain 128, 52–63.
Weis, S.M., Cheresh, D.A., 2005. Pathophysiological consequences of VEGF-induced vascular
permeability. Nature 437, 497–504.
Wierinckx, A., Breve, J., Mercier, D., Schultzberg, M., Drukarch, B., Van Dam, A.M., 2005.
Detoxication enzyme inducers modify cytokine production in rat mixed glial cells.
J. Neuroimmunol. 166, 132–143.
Wilms, H., Sievers, J., Rickert, U., Rostami-Yazdi, M., Mrowietz, U., Lucius, R., 2010.
Dimethylfumarate inhibits microglial and astrocytic inﬂammation by suppressing
the synthesis of nitric oxide, IL-1beta, TNF-alpha and IL-6 in an in-vitro model of
brain inﬂammation. J. Neuroinﬂammation 7, 30.
Wunder, A., Schoknecht, K., Stanimirovic, D.B., Prager, O., Chassidim, Y., 2012. Imaging
blood–brain barrier dysfunction in animal disease models. Epilepsia 53 (Suppl. 6),
14–21.
Yang, Y., Candelario-Jalil, E., Thompson, J.F., Cuadrado, E., Estrada, E.Y., Rosell, A.,
Montaner, J., Rosenberg, G.A., 2010. Increased intranuclear matrix metalloproteinase
activity in neurons interferes with oxidative DNA repair in focal cerebral ischemia.
J. Neurochem. 112, 134–149.
Zhao, Y., Rempe, D.A., 2011. Prophylactic neuroprotection against stroke: low-dose,
prolonged treatment with deferoxamine or deferasirox establishes prolonged neuroprotection independent of HIF-1 function. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 1412–1423.

