Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295
DOI 10.1007/s00401-014-1372-1

ORIGINAL PAPER

Perivascular microglia promote blood vessel disintegration
in the ischemic penumbra
Valérie Jolivel · Frank Bicker · Fabien Binamé · Robert Ploen · Stefanie Keller · René Gollan · Betty Jurek ·
Jérôme Birkenstock · Laura Poisa‑Beiro · Julia Bruttger · Verena Opitz · Serge C. Thal · Ari Waisman ·
Tobias Bäuerle · Michael K. Schäfer · Frauke Zipp · Mirko H. H. Schmidt 

Received: 2 June 2014 / Revised: 1 December 2014 / Accepted: 1 December 2014 / Published online: 13 December 2014
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

Abstract  The contribution of microglia to ischemic cortical stroke is of particular therapeutic interest because of
the impact on the survival of brain tissue in the ischemic
penumbra, a region that is potentially salvable upon a brain
infarct. Whether or not tissue in the penumbra survives critically depends on blood flow and vessel perfusion. To study
the role of microglia in cortical stroke and blood vessel stability, CX3CR1+/GFP mice were subjected to transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion and then microglia were investigated using time-lapse two-photon microscopy in vivo. Soon
after reperfusion, microglia became activated in the stroke
penumbra and started to expand cellular protrusions towards

V. Jolivel and F. Bicker contributed equally as first but M. K.
Schäfer, F. Zipp and M. H. H. Schmidt contributed equally as last
authors.
Electronic supplementary material  The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1372-1) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
V. Jolivel · R. Ploen · R. Gollan · B. Jurek · J. Birkenstock ·
L. Poisa‑Beiro · F. Zipp 
Department of Neurology, Focus Program Translational
Neuroscience (FTN), Rhine Main Neuroscience Network (rmn2),
Johannes Gutenberg University, University Medical Center,
Mainz, Germany
F. Bicker · S. Keller · V. Opitz · M. H. H. Schmidt (*) 
Molecular Signal Transduction Laboratories, Institute
for Microscopic Anatomy and Neurobiology, Focus Program
Translational Neuroscience (FTN), Rhine Main Neuroscience
Network (rmn2), Johannes Gutenberg University, University
Medical Center, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany
e-mail: mirko.schmidt@unimedizin‑mainz.de

adjacent blood vessels. All microglia in the penumbra were
found associated with blood vessels within 24 h post reperfusion and partially fully engulfed them. In the same time frame
blood vessels became permissive for blood serum components. Migration assays in vitro showed that blood serum proteins leaking into the tissue provided molecular cues leading
to the recruitment of microglia to blood vessels and to their
activation. Subsequently, these perivascular microglia started
to eat up endothelial cells by phagocytosis, which caused an
activation of the local endothelium and contributed to the disintegration of blood vessels with an eventual break down of
the blood brain barrier. Loss-of-microglia-function studies
using CX3CR1GFP/GFP mice displayed a decrease in stroke
size and a reduction in the extravasation of contrast agent
into the brain penumbra as measured by MRI. Potentially,
medication directed at inhibiting microglia activation within
the first day after stroke could stabilize blood vessels in the
penumbra, increase blood flow, and serve as a valuable treatment for patients suffering from ischemic stroke.
J. Bruttger · A. Waisman 
Institute for Molecular Medicine, Focus Program Translational
Neuroscience (FTN), Rhine Main Neuroscience Network (rmn2),
Johannes Gutenberg University, University Medical Center,
Mainz, Germany
S. C. Thal · M. K. Schäfer 
Department of Anesthesiology, Focus Program Translational
Neuroscience (FTN), Rhine Main Neuroscience Network (rmn2),
Johannes Gutenberg University, University Medical Center,
Mainz, Germany
T. Bäuerle 
Institute of Radiology, University Medical Center, Erlangen,
Germany

F. Binamé 
Molecular Cell Biology, Department of Biology, Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany

13

	
280

Keywords  Blood-brain barrier · Endothelial cell ·
Ischemic stroke · Microglia · Middle cerebral artery
occlusion

Introduction
Ischemic stroke ranks among the most common causes of
mortality and adult disability in industrialized countries
[38]. Astrup et al. [5] observed in 1977 that the reduction
of cerebral blood flow to under a critical limit created dysfunctional regions in the brain, as the occlusion of a cerebral artery causes the abrupt deprivation of oxygen and
nutrients leading to impaired ionic balance, neuronal depolarization, and massive cell death [1, 27, 43]. The region
in which blood flow drops to below 20 % of preocclusion
values is designated as the core of the lesion. Basic tissue
metabolism cannot be maintained and cell loss is fast and
irreversible [21]. In the surrounding penumbra, blood flow
ranges between 25 and 50 % of preocclusion values [17,
20]. The damaged tissue there remains in a critical state for
hours and days, during which a further reduction of blood
flow leads to cell death but an increase to functional recovery and repair [39]. Consequently, an evolvement of tissue
damage in the ischemic penumbra is observed, which can
be separated in three phases. First, the acute phase, which
takes place in the first minutes upon stroke and is characterized by massive cell loss in the core region. Subsequently,
the subacute phase lasts for about 6–24 h and is characterized by an expansion of tissue damage from the core into
the surrounding healthy tissue of the penumbra. Finally, the
delayed injury phase, which lasts for days to weeks and is
characterized by secondary phenomena, such as vasogenic
edema and inflammation [21]. The temporal and spatial
progression of ischemic cell damage and its dependence on
blood flow suggest that modulators of blood vessel integrity affect the magnitude of damaged tissue and the speed
at which damage occurs.
Key elements in stroke are brain resident mononuclear
phagocytes termed microglia, which are part of the innate
immune system and are considered as orchestrators of the
inflammatory response in the CNS [61]. Under physiological conditions these cells exhibit a small cell body bearing
thin and ramified processes that are continuously palpating
the brain parenchyma [9, 51]. Upon ischemic stroke microglia become activated and adopt a de-ramified morphology
with retracted processes and enlarged cell bodies. Several
studies have demonstrated the involvement of microglia in
brain ischemia [22, 23] but their contribution to the progression of stroke remains under debate. The transplantation of microglia into a lesioned area reduced the infarct
volume and improved functional recovery [28, 29]; however, less invasive loss-of-microglia-function studies such

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

as the genetic knock-out of CX3CR1 led to a reduction of
the infarct volume by 56 % [12].
Putatively, the analysis of different microglia subpopulations and a diverging impact on the breakdown of the
blood–brain barrier (BBB) [67] cause these antagonistic observations, and in order to explore the mechanism,
dynamics, and the orchestration of microglia-dependent
events in ischemic stroke, we performed kinetic investigations and intravital two-photon laser-scanning microscopy
of CX3CR1+/GFP mice subjected to reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). In a time frame corresponding to the subacute to early delayed phase of stroke,
we observed the engulfment of blood vessels by microglia
in the penumbra, which culminated in the phagocytic degradation of blood vessels and the active breakdown of the
BBB leading to the conclusion that microglia actively participate in the transfer of stroke-induced injury in healthy
neighboring tissue by the disassembly of blood vessels
and the resulting decrease in blood flow in the ischemic
penumbra.

Materials and methods
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
MCAO was performed by application of the intraluminal suture technique using C57BL/6J or B6.129PCX3CR1tm1Litt/J mice (The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA), referred to in the text as CX3CR1+/GFP
(heterozygous, no phenotype) or CX3CR1GFP/GFP (homozygous, CX3CR1 knock-out) mice, respectively. Previously,
C57BL/6J and heterozygous animals have been shown
to exhibit similar infarct sizes [13]. Briefly, after a midline incision at the neck, a filament with a silicon-coated
tip (Doccol, Sharon, MA, USA) was advanced from the
external carotid artery into the lumen of the internal carotid
artery until it blocked the origin of the left middle cerebral
artery. MCAO was verified by a drop in laser Doppler flow
(Perimed, Järfälla, Sweden) of at least 80 % of the baseline.
Sham animals were obtained by inserting the filament into
the internal carotid artery without insertion into the middle
cerebral artery. The filament was removed 1 h after MCAO
in order to allow reperfusion. Animal procedures were performed under the supervision of authorized investigators
in accordance with the European Union normative for care
and use of experimental animals. Mice were anesthetized
by isoflurane (AbbVie, Ludwigshafen, Germany) applied in
oxygen (3 l/min) and received a subcutaneous injection of
Rimadyl (Pfizer, Berlin, Germany) as an analgesic. Body
temperature was maintained at 37.5 ± 0.5 °C by a homeothermic blanket. Finally, animals were placed for 2 h in a
recovery chamber maintained at 33 °C after subcutaneous

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

administration of 500 µL of 0.9 % saline. Only animals that
exhibited a score ≥1 in neurological evaluations [36] were
used for experimental analyses.
Intravital microscopy
Mice were anesthetized with 1.5 % isoflurane (AbbVie)
applied in oxygen/nitrous oxide (2:1, 3 l/min) using a face
mask and then tracheotomized and continuously respirated
with a Harvard Apparatus advanced safety respirator (Hugo
Sachs, March-Hugstetten, Germany). The cerebral cortex
was exposed by careful removal of the skull bone of the left
hemisphere. The brain was superfused with isotonic Ringer
solution that was continuously exchanged by a peristaltic
pump. An agarose patch (0.5 % in 0.9 % NaCl solution)
was installed on the exposed brain surface to reduce heartbeat and breathing artifacts. The depth of anesthesia was
controlled by continuous CO2 measurements of exhaled gas
and recorded with a CI-240 Microcapnograph (Columbus
Instruments, Columbus, OH, USA). Prior to preparation
the vasculature was stained by intravenous injection of rhodamine–dextran 1.5 h before imaging (Sigma, Hamburg,
Germany). Experiments were performed using a specialized two-photon laser-scanning microscope (TriMscope;
LaVision BioTec, Bielefeld, Germany) equipped with a
Ti:Sa laser (MaiTai, SpectraPhysics, Darmstadt, Germany)
set at 850 nm and a synchronously pumped optical parametric oscillator (APE, Berlin, Germany) set at 1,100 nm
for simultaneous imaging of two colors. XYZ stacks were
typically collected within a scan field of 300 × 300 μm at
512 × 512 pixel resolution and a z-plane distance of 2 μm
at a frequency of 400 or 800 Hz. The penumbra region in
two-photon imaging studies was defined by preliminary
MCAO studies (ligation time 1 h, n  = 16). One day after
reperfusion mice were killed and the location and size
of the infarct analyzed by cresyl violet staining. MCAO
yielded reproducible results and allowed prediction of the
localization of core and penumbra of stroke. Further, mice
were scored for motor deficits and only animals that exhibited a score ≥1 in neurological evaluations [36] were used
for two-photon imaging.
Immunofluorescence
Mice were anesthetized with ketamine (Ratiopharm, Ulm,
Germany) plus xylazine (Bayer Vital, Leverkusen, Germany) and were killed by transcardial perfusion with 4 %
paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 1, 3, 6, 12, 24, and 72 h post
reperfusion. These mice received an intravenous injection
of 100 µl of 20 mg/ml Evans blue (Sigma) 30 min before
the perfusion. Brains were removed, successively transferred into 15 and 30 % sucrose solution, frozen in cooled
isopentane (Applichem, Gatersleben, Germany), and

281

subsequently cryosectioned. Brain sections (20 µm) were
incubated overnight with rabbit anti-caveolin-1 (1:250,
clone D46G3, Cell Signaling Technology, Cambridge, UK),
rat anti-CD31 (clone MEC 13.3, 1:150, BD Biosciences,
San Jose, CA, USA), rat anti-CD31/PECAM1 (1:100,
Dianova, Hamburg, Germany), rabbit anti-CD68 (1:200,
AbD Serotec, Oxford, UK), mouse anti-claudin-5 (1:200,
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), rabbit anti-Glut1 (1:100,
Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), goat anti-EGFL7
(1:100, Santa Cruz, La Jolla, CA, USA), rabbit anti-Iba-1
(1:1,000, Wako Chemicals, Richmond, VA, USA), rat antiICAM-1 (1:100, clone YN1/1.7.4, BioLegend, San Diego,
CA, USA), mouse anti-MAP2 (1:750, Sigma), rat anti-neutrophil (imp-R14, 1:250, Abcam, Cambridge, UK), mouse
anti-NF160 (1:300, Sigma), mouse anti-NG2 (1:500,
Merck Millipore), rabbit anti-PDGF-B (kindly provided by
Carl-Henrik Heldin, LICR, Uppsala University, Sweden),
goat anti-podocalyxin (1:200, R&D Systems, Minneapolis,
MN, USA), mouse anti-SMA (1:200, Sigma), rabbit antiVEGF (1:100, Abcam), or rabbit anti-vWF (1:1,000, Dako,
Hamburg, Germany) primary antibodies followed by incubation with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-rabbit,
Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated goat anti-mouse, anti-rabbit
or anti-rat, Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated goat anti-rabbit
(Invitrogen), or Alexa 594-conjugated donkey anti-goat
(Jackson, Baltimore, PA, USA) secondary antibodies at a
dilution of 1:1,000. Cell nuclei were counterstained with
0.5 µg/ml DAPI (Sigma) for 5 min at RT. Images were
captured using an SPE confocal microscope (Leica, Mannheim, Germany). 3D reconstruction and analysis were
performed using Imaris 8 (Bitplane, Zurich, Switzerland)
or ImageJ software v1.41 (National Institute of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA).
In order to analyze BBB breakdown and blood leakage, murine IgG in the brain parenchyma was measured
in the cortical stroke region. Deeply anesthetized mice
were perfused with 4 % PFA and brain sections prepared
on a vibratome (Thermo). Slides were incubated overnight
with Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody (1:250; Invitrogen) to stain for murine IgG. The next
day neurons were identified by rabbit anti-NeuN (1:500;
Abcam) as a primary and Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated
goat anti-rabbit as a secondary antibody (1:1,000, Invitrogen). Slides were mounted in Immu-Mount (Thermo) and
images obtained by an inverted TCS-5 confocal laser-scanning microscope (Leica).
The association of microglia with blood vessels was
quantified in fluorescence microscopy images using the
Leica Microscope Imaging Software by counting and comparing cells associated and not associated with blood vessels. In order to measure endocytosis of blood vessel components by microglia, immunohistochemical colocalization
of the blood vessel marker CD31 and the microglia marker

13

	
282

Iba-1 was quantified using the Imaris 8 software (Bitplane).
Thresholds were chosen according to signal intensities and
analyzed data represent the percentage of the signal that
colocalized above the threshold for each time point.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
CX3CR1GFP/GFP and wild-type mice underwent MCAO
and were killed 6 or 24 h post reperfusion by transcardial
perfusion with 4 % PFA solution. The MR contrast agent
Gadovist (Bayer) was injected by intravenous injection at
0.2 mmol/kg in all animals, 15 min before being killed.
Brains were removed, post-fixed in 4 % PFA and, for MR
examinations, processed in 4 % agarose to prevent movement within the scanner. The samples were placed in a
mouse whole body coil (Bruker, Ettlingen, Germany) of a
dedicated small animal ultra-high-field MR scanner (ClinScan 7 Tesla). Imaging sequences and parameters were chosen as follows: T1-weighted imaging (slices 12, TR 500 ms,
TE 9 ms, averages 2, voxel size 0.073 × 0.073 × 0.7 mm3,
acquisition time 5:38 min), diffusion-weighted imaging
(DWI, slices 7, TR 8,000 ms, TE 60 ms, averages 1, voxel
size 0.234 × 0.234 × 1.0 mm3, acquisition time 16:16 min)
and T2*-weighted imaging (slices 14, TR 983 ms, TE 4 ms,
averages 2, voxel size 0.156 × 0.156 × 0.5 mm3, acquisition time 6:17 min). The volumes (mm3) of diffusion
restriction after MCAO (infarcted areas are displayed as
hypointense on maps of the apparent diffusion coefficient,
ADC), of local bleeding (displayed as hypointense on maps
of T2*-weighted imaging), or the breakdown of the BBB
(displayed as hyperintense on T1-weighted imaging) were
determined using the Osirix software (Osirix-Foundation,
open-source).

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

guidelines. Primers for quantitative reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reactions (qRT-PCRs) were designed
using the Beacon Designer 8 software (Premier Biosoft,
Palo Alto, CA, USA) and were subsequently tested for efficiency and specificity. qRT-PCR was performed using the
iQ SYBR Green supermix and the iCycler iQ5 device (both
BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA). Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and elongation factor 1 alpha
(EF-1 alpha) were used as a housekeeping genes and relative changes in gene expression were determined using the
ΔΔCt method [37].
qRT-PCR analyses of matrix metalloprotease 9
(MMP-9) were performed in duplicate using the primers AAGTCTCAGAAGGTGGAT and AATAGGCTTTGTCTTGGTA yielding an amplicon size of 106 bp, a
SYBR Green PCR kit (BioRad), and a Lightcycler 480
PCR system (Roche). Absolute copy numbers of MMP-9
were normalized to peptidylprolyl isomerase A (PPIA) as a
housekeeping gene. Statistical analyses were performed as
described below.
Trans‑well migration assays in vitro
Migration of BV2 cells was measured using modified
Boyden chambers (8 µm pore size, BD Biosciences) coated
with poly-l-lysine. Then 1.5 × 105 cells were seeded
in 200 µl medium in the upper chamber, while the bottom well contained 600 µl of medium supplemented with
albumin (0.1 and 0.5 %), fibrinogen (0.01 and 0.5 %), or
fetal calf serum (5 %). Migration was carried out for 6 h
and cells were fixed with 4 % PFA. Cells that had migrated
to the lower side of the filter were stained with Hoechst
33258 (Sigma) and counted upon image acquisition with an
inverted microscope (Leica).

Gene expression
Flow cytometry analyses (FACS)
BV2 cells [19] were cultured under standard conditions
(5 % CO2 and 95 % humidity) in Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco, Karlsruhe, Germany)
supplemented with 10 % fetal calf serum and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were serum deprived 1 day prior
to the experiment and the next day trypsinized, plated on
poly-l-lysine (Sigma)-coated dishes, and treated for 6 h
with 0.1 or 0.5 % albumin (Sigma), 0.01 or 0.5 % fibrinogen (Merck Millipore), or 5 % fetal calf serum (Sigma).
Total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and DNAse I treatment (Roche,
Mannheim, Germany) performed to avoid contaminations
with genomic DNA. The quality of total RNA preparation
was confirmed using a Nanodrop 2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo) and cDNA obtained using the Superscript
III first strand synthesis system together with random hexamer primers (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s

13

Mice were deeply anesthetized and perfused with PBS
1 day post reperfusion. Subsequent to the removal of the
cerebellum, each brain was separated into an ipsilateral
and a contralateral hemisphere. Tissue was dissociated
using the “neuronal tissue dissociation kit (P)” (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were enriched by a
Percoll (Sigma) gradient and prepared for FACS using
anti-CD11b-Pe-Cy7 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA),
anti-CD45.2-PE (eBioscience), anti-CD68-FITC (Acris
Antibodies, San Diego, CA, USA), or anti-CD86 V450
(BD Biosciences) antibodies. Measurements were performed using a FACSCanto II (BD Biosciences) device and
data was analyzed using FlowJo v9.6.2 software (Tree Star,
Ashland, OR, USA). CD45.2 intermediate and CD11b high
cells were considered as microglia.

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using Prism5 software (Graphpad, San
Diego, CA, USA). Data are presented as mean ± SEM of at
least three independent experiments. Statistical analysis of
the data was conducted using a non-parametric test (Mann–
Whitney or Kruskal–Wallis tests) followed by a Dunn’s
multiple comparison test. Alternatively, data are presented
as mean ± SD and were compared between experimental
groups with Wilcoxon Mann–Whitney rank sum tests with
p values adjusted for each parameter for multiple comparisons by Bonferroni adjustment. Statistical analysis was performed with the Sigma Plot 11 statistical software package
(Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA).

283

morphology of activated cells and displayed enlarged cell
bodies with shortened thick processes that were in direct
contact with blood vessels (Fig. 1l). At 24 h post reperfusion an increased number of microglia displayed spherical
cell bodies (Fig. 1m). After 72 h a decreased number of
blood vessels was observed (Fig. 1n). Quantification of the
amount of blood vessel-associated microglia over time displayed a steady increase in perivascular microglia reaching
a 2.5-fold increase 24 h and a 3.1-fold increase 72 h post
reperfusion as compared to sham-operated mice (Fig. 1o).
Costaining of microglia (Iba-1) and smooth muscle
cells (SMA; Suppl. Fig. 1a–d) or pericytes (NG2; Suppl.
Fig. 1e–h) in the ischemic penumbra 24 h post reperfusion
showed that perivascular microglia did not stain positive
for either of the latter markers.

Results

Microglia form perivascular clusters upon MCAO

Microglia associate with blood vessels after MCAO

In order to study the dynamics of microglia association
with blood vessels upon MCAO, intravital two-photon
microscopy was performed in anesthetized CX3CR1+/GFP
mice using a cranial window drilled into the skull to analyze the cerebral cortex. At 24 h after reperfusion, evenly
distributed, highly ramified microglia were observed in
control mice (Fig. 2a). In contrast, microglia in the penumbra of MCAO-treated animals displayed enlarged cell bodies and formed perivascular clusters (Fig. 2b). Time-lapse
recordings taken 24 h after reperfusion illustrated “resting
microglia”, which scanned the brain parenchyma with thin
and long processes in control animals (Fig. 2c) but identified activated microglia with enlarged cell bodies and
shorter processes in the penumbra (Fig. 2d). As a matter of
fact, neighboring groups of microglia protruded their processes towards rhodamine–dextran-labeled blood vessels
(Fig. 2e). Individual microglia fully enwrapped small blood
vessels as displayed in a 3D reconstruction of a perivascular microglia cell in the penumbra (Fig. 2f).

BBB disruption and microglial activation are prominent pathological features of stroke; however, little attention has been paid to the dynamics and kinetics of microglial activation and the implications for blood vessels. In
order to address this issue, we applied a mouse model in
which the knock-in of GFP into the CX3CR1 gene labels
microglia and peripheral macrophages under heterozygous conditions (CX3CR1+/GFP) and which serves as a
microglia-loss-of-function model under homozygous conditions (CX3CR1GFP/GFP). CX3CR1+/GFP mice were subjected to transient MCAO with an occlusion time of 1 h,
which was determined as a sufficient time frame to induce
cortical damage (Fig. 1a). GFP expression was restricted
to Iba-1-positive microglia (Fig. 1b–d). Imaging studies were performed at a tissue depth of 80 µm or deeper
as measured from the tissue surface to reduce imaging artifacts due to the opening of the skull. Brain sections of MCAO-treated mice revealed that the core of the
stroke was devoid of microglia and neurons (Fig. 1e), but
in the ischemic penumbra, a close association of microglia (Iba-1), blood vessels (CD31), and neurons (MAP2)
was observed (Fig. 1f–h). In a time course analysis taken
1–72 h post reperfusion, microglia adjacent to CD31-positive blood vessels displayed hypertrophic characteristics,
an elongated shape, and thicker and retracted processes
after 1 h (Fig. 1i). The number of cells that displayed an
elongated morphology and enlarged cell bodies steadily
increased over time (3 h) and microglia began to align with
blood vessels in the ischemic hemisphere (Fig. 1j). At 6 h
post reperfusion, the ongoing association of microglia with
blood vessels in the penumbra resulted in an uneven distribution of microglia in the perilesional tissue (Fig. 1k). After
12 h, perivascular microglia exhibited the characteristic

Blood‑derived proteins activate microglia
The engulfment of blood vessels in the ischemic penumbra
by microglia raised the question of what are the molecular mechanisms that lead to the recruitment and activation
of the local microglia pool. Serum albumin and fibrinogen
have been described as proteins leaking into the parenchyma upon BBB breakdown [2, 70]; therefore, we analyzed whether or not these proteins attract microglia upon
MCAO. The administration of albumin and fibrinogen
to microglial BV2 cells in trans-well migration assays in
vitro increased cell migration in a dose-dependent manner
(Fig. 3a). Further, albumin and fibrinogen caused an activation of BV2 microglia cells as determined by the upregulation of inflammatory proteins such as the cytokines IL-1β,

13

	
284

IL-6, IL-10, TNF-α, the chemokines MIP-1α and MCP-1,
and the chemokine receptor CX3CR1 (Fig. 3b–h). In order
to verify the activation of microglia in vivo, CD45.2-intermediate and CD11b-high microglia were isolated from
wild-type, sham- or MCAO-treated animals 24 h after
surgery and analyzed by FACS. Interestingly, the populations of cells positive for the phagocytosis marker CD68
(16.5-fold) or the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 (55-fold)
were elevated in microglia from the ipsilateral hemisphere
as compared to those from the contralateral site or control
(Fig. 3i, j). Data suggest extravasating serum proteins such
as albumin and fibrinogen contribute to the recruitment and
activation of microglia subsequent to MCAO.
Phagocytosis of blood vessels by perivascular microglia
The above findings raised the questions of the functional
relevance of the association of microglia with blood vessels. Therefore, brain sections of the contralateral (Fig. 4a)
or ipsilateral hemisphere of MCAO-treated animals
(Fig.  4b) were stained for Iba-1 (microglia) and CD31
(blood vessels). Subsequently, immunostaining and microscopical analysis were performed and orthogonal optical
sections were three-dimensionally reconstructed. Perivascular microglia were barely seen in the control situation
(Fig.  4a′) but most microglia were found to be associated with blood vessels in the ipsilateral hemisphere upon
MCAO (Fig. 4b′). Importantly, the association of microglia
with blood vessels was not restricted to individual cells
but was observed for almost all microglia. Furthermore,
the micromorphology of microglia was different comparing cells derived from the contralateral (Fig. 4c) and the
ipsilateral hemisphere (Fig. 4d). In the latter, individual
perivascular microglia displayed intracellular vesicles
containing CD31-positive particles, suggesting a partial
or full uptake of blood vessel-derived endothelial cells
(EC). A time course analysis revealed a steady increase in
CD31-positive intracellular vesicles in perivascular microglia (Fig. 4e–g). Quantification yielded a massive increase
in internalization 24 h (70-fold) and 72 h (115-fold) post
reperfusion as compared to sham-operated mice (Fig. 4h).
Immunohistochemical staining of the phagocytosis marker
CD68 verified that intracellular vesicles were phagosomes
(Fig.  4i). To verify that intracellular particles carried EC
material, we additionally applied the brain vasculaturespecific EC markers Glut-1 (Suppl. Fig. 2a–c), caveolin-1
(Suppl. Fig. 2d–f), claudin-5 (Suppl. Fig. 2g–i), and podocalyxin (Suppl. Fig. 2j–l), which colocalized specifically
with CD31 in brain vessels. Indeed, intracellular vesicles in
microglia (Iba-1) also stained positive for all four endothelial markers, verifying that blood vessel components were
internalized by microglia (Suppl. Fig. 3a–l). Further, no
colocalization between perivascular microglia and smooth

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

muscle cells (Suppl. Fig. 1a–d) or pericytes was observed
(Suppl. Fig. 1e–h), showing that not these cells but ECs
were internalized. Whether microglia phagocytized EC or
dying neurons was analyzed by staining for Iba-1 and a
combination of the neuronal marker MAP2 plus the neurofilament marker NF160 that marks neuronal processes and
filaments. However, no perivascular microglia phagocytizing neuronal debris could be observed (Suppl. Fig. 1i–l),
indicating that indeed EC components were taken up by
perivascular microglia in the ischemic penumbra.
Perivascular microglia-mediated blood vessel disintegration was followed in real time and in vivo by intravital two-photon microscopy of heterozygous CX3CR1+/GFP
mice. At 4 h post reperfusion, we detected the activation
of microglia with extensions of individual cells converging towards adjacent blood vessels in the cerebral tissue (Suppl. Movie 1). Long-term measurements starting
4 h post reperfusion and running for approximately 4.5 h
revealed the localized and simultaneous recruitment of
microglia to blood vessels as soon as 8 h post reperfusion
in the ischemic penumbra (Suppl. Movie 2). This involved
movements of microglia processes as well as cell bodies
(Suppl. Movies 3, 4). At 24 h post reperfusion perivascular microglia started to phagocytize rhodamine–dextranpositive blood vessel components (Suppl. Movie 5), which
eventually led to the disintegration of individual tubes
(Suppl. Movie 6). Data suggest an MCAO-induced association of microglia with blood vessels, which led to a partial
or full phagocytosis of neighboring blood vessel ECs.
Perivascular microglia contribute to the breakdown of the
BBB
The findings above raised the question of whether the
phagocytosis of EC components affects the respective
blood vessels. Under physiological conditions, ECs of
healthy vessels are found in a resting mode referred to as
phalanx cells. Upon an insult that disrupts the integrity of
the EC layer, phalanx cells become activated and may form
tip and stalk cells, which display a high degree of plasticity and allow the damaged blood vessel to repair itself
through a process termed angiogenesis. Once the damage
is fixed, ECs re-enter a quiescent mode [7]. A novel marker
expressed in activated ECs is the protein epidermal growth
factor-like protein 7 (EGFL7) [49, 60], which we employed
here as a marker for the activated endothelium [50] as
an alternative to the vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF). Immunohistochemical staining of brain slices
for EGFL7 and the EC activation marker VEGF 24 h post
reperfusion showed that both proteins colocalized in brain
ECs in the ischemic penumbra (Suppl. Fig. 4a–c). Upregulation of further activation markers such as the plateletderived growth factor-B (PDGF-B), the von Willebrand

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

Fig. 1  Microglia associate with the vasculature upon MCAO. a
Cresyl violet stained murine brain sections 24 h after MCAO. Box
indicates the region analyzed in subsequent sections. Bar represents
1 mm. b–d Brain sections derived from CX3CR1-GFP mice were
immunostained for Iba-1 to verify co-labeling of microglia by both
markers. Bar represents 20 µm. e–h Murine brain sections 24 h after
MCAO. Infarct area including core and penumbra are labeled with
dotted lines. Iba-1-positive microglia (e, f, and h) as well as MAP2positive neurons (g, h) are present in the penumbra but not in the core

285

of the infarct area. Scale bar represents 500 µm (e) and 10 µm (h). i–
n Brain sections derived from wild-type mice subsequent to transient
MCAO at various time points after reperfusion. Microglia cells were
identified by Iba-1 and blood vessels by anti-CD31 immunostaining,
cell nuclei were counterstained by DAPI. Bar represents 25 µm. o
Quantification of blood vessel-associated and non-associated microglia revealed a steady increase in the amount of perivascular microglia over time post reperfusion (n ≥ 3)

13

	
286

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

Fig. 2  Microglia form perivascular clusters and engulf blood
vessels upon stroke. a Twophoton images of the cerebral
cortex of CX3CR1+/GFP control
(sham operated) or b MCAO
animals in vivo 24 h post
reperfusion. Blood vessels
were visualized by perfusion
with rhodamine–dextran. Insets
represent gray scale pictures
of the same figures to illustrate
microglia morphology (n ≥ 10).
Bar represents 20 µm and 5 µm
(inset). c Time-lapse recordings identified resting microglia
actively palpating the tissue in
control animals, while d MCAO
led to an activation of microglia
as displayed by a migratory
phenotype and e an active
association of microglia with
rhodamine–dextran-positive
blood vessel (n ≥ 10). Bars
represent 5 µm. f Microglia
enwrapped blood vessel in the
penumbra 24 h post MCAO as
determined by double-immunostaining of Iba-1 (microglia)
and CD31 (ECs) followed by
orthogonal optical sectioning
and a 3D reconstruction. Bars
represent 5 µm

factor (vWF), or the intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1) [24, 64, 68] verified that indeed ECs of brain
vessels in the ischemic penumbra were activated 24 h post
MCAO (Suppl. Fig. 4d–l). Brain slides taken from control
animals (Fig. 5a–d) or MCAO-treated animals (Fig. 5e–h)
were immunohistochemically triple-stained for claudin-5
(blood vessels; Fig. 5a, e), EGFL7 (activated blood vessels;
Fig. 5b, f), and Iba-1 (microglia; Fig. 5c, g). Data revealed
that perivascular microglia upregulated EGFL7 in adjacent
blood vessels 24 h post MCAO (Fig. 5h′). This indicates

13

that ECs in these blood vessels were activated, which is
indicative of disintegration of the BBB [69].
In order to determine whether or not perivascular microglia induced a breakdown of the BBB, various hallmarks
of this event were analyzed. At 24 and 72 h post reperfusion the expression of MMP-9, a protein described to be
involved in stroke BBB turnover [4, 11], increased threefold in the penumbra upon MCAO as compared to shamtreated animals (Fig. 6a). In parallel, staining for extravasated IgG in the cerebral cortex of animals upon MCAO

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

Fig. 3  Extravasating blood serum proteins activate microglia. a
Trans-well migration assays of microglia cells revealed a dosedependent stimulation of microglia migration by blood serum albumin, fibrinogen, or fetal calf serum, which served as a positive control. Results are plotted as compared to the migration of unstimulated
microglia (mean ± SEM, n = 4, *p < 0.05). b–f Likewise, albumin
and fibrinogen caused an activation of microglia cells as determined
by qRT-PCR of inflammatory proteins such as b IL-1β, c IL-6, d

287

IL-10, and e TNF-α, the chemokines f MIP-1α and g MCP-1, or h the
chemokine receptor CX3CR1 (mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < 0.05). i, j
CD45.2-intermediate and CD11b-high microglia were isolated from
the brain of control (sham-operated) mice or the contra- as well as
the ipsilateral hemisphere of MCAO-treated animals 24 h after surgery. FACS analyses revealed that the phagocytosis marker i CD68
and j the co-stimulatory molecule CD86 were upregulated 16.5-fold
or 55-fold, respectively

13

	
288

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

Fig. 4  Perivascular microglia
phagocytize blood vessels upon
MCAO. a Brain slices of the
contralateral or b ipsilateral
hemisphere of MCAO-treated
animals were stained for Iba-1
(microglia) and CD31 (ECs).
Orthogonal optical sections
revealed individual microglia
enwrapping and partially
digesting blood vessels after
stroke. a′, b′ 3D reconstructions indicate an intimate spatial
relationship of microglia and
blood vessels upon MCAO in
the penumbra. Bars represent
20 µm. c, d Higher magnifications of a and b with d displaying CD31-positive vesicles in
perivascular microglia suggesting phagocytosis of EC components as indicated by arrows.
Bars represent 10 µm. e–g
Double-staining of microglia for
Iba-1 and CD31 (ECs) revealed
a steady increase in the amount
of CD31-positive intracellular
vesicles over time post reperfusion (arrowheads and asterisks). Bars represent 10 µm. h
Quantification of colocalization
(yellow, intracellular particles)
yielded a 70-fold increase after
24 h and a 115-fold increase
72 h post reperfusion as compared to sham-operated mice.
i Staining of microglia (Iba-1)
for the phagocytosis marker
CD68 showed that perivascular
microglia were phagocytically
active 24 h post reperfusion.
Bars represent 10 µm

revealed that blood vessels in the ipsilateral hemisphere
of the treated animals became much more permissive for
blood components such as IgG 24 h after reperfusion as
compared to the contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 6b, c).
Leakage of IgG occurred in the core and the penumbra as
indicated by the diminished immunoreactivity for the neuronal marker NeuN (Fig. 6d). Immunohistochemical analysis and 3D reconstruction revealed that the association of

13

microglia with blood vessels contributed to their disintegration and BBB breakdown as shown by the extravasation of
Evans blue in vessels that were still perfused (Fig. 6e, e′).
Further, qRT-PCR analysis revealed a threefold increase
in the amount of CD11b-positive immune cells in the ipsilateral hemisphere as compared to the contralateral site
(Fig.  6f). This is indicative of the activation of the local
microglia pool [35] as well as an increased extravasation

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

289

Fig. 5  Perivascular microglia stimulate blood vessel plasticity upon
MCAO. Brain slices of MCAO-treated animals were immunohistochemically stained for claudin-5 (ECs), EGFL7 (EC plasticity), and
Iba-1 (microglia) on the contralateral (a–d) and ipsilateral (e–h) hemisphere 24 h post insult. Cell nuclei were counterstained with DAPI.

d, h Perivascular microglia induced an EC-specific upregulation of
the blood vessel plasticity marker EGFL7, indicative of EC activation
and BBB breakdown in the penumbra. Bars represent 25 µm. d′, h′
Display higher magnifications of the boxed regions in the corresponding figures. Bars represent 10 µm

of immune cells into the penumbra. In order to validate the
latter, we immunohistochemically stained for neutrophils,
microglia, and blood vessels in the penumbra of MCAOtreated animals at various times post reperfusion (Fig. 6g–
i). Activated perivascular microglia and extravasating neutrophils were observed in the ipsilateral hemisphere in the
penumbra 24 h post reperfusion (Fig. 6h). At 72 h post
reperfusion, activated microglia and neutrophils were still
observed in the penumbra but no tubular structures and
only fragments of blood vessels could be detected (Fig. 6i).
Data indicate that the blood vessels in the ischemic

penumbra disintegrated and were subsequently degraded.
The physiological relevance of the above findings was
analyzed using CX3CR1GFP/GFP mice harboring microglia
that are functionally impaired and therefore suited to perform loss-of-microglia-function studies [12]. MCAO was
performed for 1 h and animals were killed 6 and 24 h post
reperfusion by transcardial perfusion. At 15 min before
being killed mice received an injection of 0.2 mmol/
kg Gadovist as a contrast agent in order to quantify leakage of blood vessels in the stroke region. Stroke size and
extravasation of contrast agent in the brain penumbra were

13

	
290

measured by ultra-high-field MRI (Fig. 7a). At 24 h post
reperfusion loss of microglia function led to a significant
(p < 0.05) reduction in stroke size of 46.8 % (Fig. 7b) as
determined on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps.
Furthermore, extravasation of the contrast agent Gadovist
(T1-weighted imaging), representing a breakdown of the
BBB, was reduced by 50.4 % (Fig. 7c) in CX3CR1GFP/GFP
mice as compared to wild-type animals. At 6 h post reperfusion results showed comparable trends but did not reach
significance. Data demonstrate that reduced microglia
activity correlates with a decrease in stroke size as well as
increased blood vessel integrity.

Discussion
Intravital two-photon microscopy of CX3CR1+/GFP mice in
vivo revealed that microglia and peripheral macrophages
associated with blood vessels in the ischemic penumbra
upon transient MCAO. Microglia exhibited an altered morphology as compared to control cells with larger cell bodies
and extensions that were both shorter and thicker [26]. The
somata of perivascular microglia were found to fully engulf
individual blood vessels in the perilesional tissue within a
time frame of 24 h after the ischemic insult. In a related
study, microglia were instantly activated in response to an
acute microdisruption of the BBB induced by a laser [51].
Resting microglia of control animals repetitively palpated
their environment in the cerebral parenchyma with cellular
protrusions but microglia adjacent to the lesion switched
from an undirected to a directed movement of their cellular
extensions towards the damaged area. This culminated in a
shielding of blood vessels by microglial processes. However, this study did not elaborate on the subsequent role of
microglia in blood vessel disintegration and the implications of this pathological process for the evolvement of tissue damage into the ischemic penumbra.
The clearance of damaged cerebral tissue by microglia
has been shown to be essential for neuroregeneration [48]
and neuroplasticity [41]. In the current study, we present
evidence that perivascular microglia engulf blood vessels
and actively perform phagocytosis of EC or subcellular
EC-derived particles, as perivascular microglia displayed
CD68- and CD31-positive intracellular vesicles upon
MCAO. Engulfed blood vessels were still perfused as indicated by erythrocytes within the vascular tube (Fig. 6e),
suggesting that ECs were alive and the phagocytized CD31positive material was not derived from dead cells. Additionally, perivascular microglia exhibited spherical extensions
and cups at the extremity of the cellular processes, which
have been implicated in the clearance of cellular material
by microglia [63, 65]. The disposal of newborn neurons
[62], living neural precursor [8], and complete glioma cells

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

[31] by microglia was previously observed upon engulfment, indicating that perivascular microglia are capable of
internalizing and degrading EC.
This raises the question of the contribution of the microglia population to phagocytosis in general as microglia are
not the only phagocytic cell type detected upon cerebral
ischemia in the brain. As a matter of fact, an influx of circulating monocytes and macrophages has been reported to
occur 24 h after the insult and may persist for up to 1 week
[18]. Schilling et al. analyzed mice harboring genetically
GFP-labeled blood leukocytes for parenchymal leukocyte
invasion into the brain in response to stroke at various time
points. The study demonstrated that microglia predominantly exerted a phagocytic activity against neuronal cell
debris in the penumbra 24 h after transient MCAO, which
matches the time frame in which most of our analyses
were performed [59]. Nevertheless, Schilling et al. did not
emphasize the role of perivascular microglia in the phagocytosis of EC and the physiological role of it remains enigmatic. We suggest that the association of microglia with
blood vessels 24 h post MCAO and the succeeding phagocytosis of EC components are indicative of an active breakdown of tight junctions [30] and the BBB by microglia.
Indeed, permeabilization of the BBB following cerebral
ischemia has been reported in mammals [6, 33]. The opening of the BBB in the ischemic brain is associated with
blood vessel remodeling and angiogenesis in a VEGFdependent manner [69]. This biphasic event consists of an
early phase 4 h after stroke and a late phase occurring 24–
48 h after the ischemic insult [32, 47]. The early permeability phase [58] coincides with a peak expression of VEGF,
the earliest marker of vascular remodeling [15, 54], in the
ischemic penumbra [53]. At 24 h after the insult, EC activation markers such as EGFL7 [50], PDGF-B [3], vWF [66],
and ICAM-1 [24] are upregulated and, indeed, we detected
the expression of all four markers in blood vessels of the
ischemic penumbra at this time point, which is indicative
of the early stage of BBB breakdown. In order to test for
the disintegration of the BBB, we analyzed for proteins and
cells that have been associated with BBB breakdown. Pharmacological and genetic evidence indicated that MMP-9 is
required for angiogenesis in response to brain ischemia [34,
45]. Further, microglia are considered to be a major source
of the protein in human specimens [56]. Indeed, we found
MMP-9 to be upregulated in the penumbra 24–72 h after
the insult. Classical markers of BBB breakdown are the
release of blood serum components (e.g., serum albumin,
fibrinogen, IgG), Evans blue, or neutrophils from blood
vessels into the brain parenchyma. All of these hallmarks
were observed 24–72 h post MCAO in our model, indicating a breakdown of the BBB at this time point. Remarkably, at 72 h post reperfusion, vascular structures in the
penumbra were in part no longer present, indicating that

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

Fig. 6  MCAO induces BBB breakdown in the penumbra. a MCAO
induced a significant upregulation of the metalloprotease MMP-9 in
the penumbra (mean ± SEM, n ≥ 6, *p < 0.05). b–d Extravasation of
IgG from leaky blood vessels, 24 h post MCAO in the b contralateral
or c ipsilateral cerebral cortex with respect to the vessel occlusion.
Bars represent 10 µm. d Double immunostaining using antibodies
specific to the neuronal marker NeuN or d′ IgG illustrating neuronal
degeneration as well as the leakage of blood vessels in the stroke
area. d″ Arrows indicate the colocalization of extravasated IgG and
cortical neurons in the penumbra. Bars represent 100 µm. e Microglia (Iba-1), blood plasma extravasation (Evans blue) and cell nuclei
(DAPI) were detected by immunohistochemistry of brain sections
of MCAO-treated animals 24 post reperfusion. Microglia associated
with the still perfused blood vessels (see erythrocytes) during their
disintegration, as shown by the faint cloud of Evans blue around the

291

tube. e′ The 3D reconstruction highlights the close interaction of
microglia and perfused blood vessel. Bars represent 10 µm. f qRTPCR analysis revealed a threefold increase in the amount of CD11bpositive immune cells detected in the ipsilateral hemisphere as
compared to the contralateral site (mean ± SEM, n ≥ 6, *p < 0.05).
Immunohistochemical staining of blood vessels (claudin-5), microglia (Iba-1), neutrophils (Nimp), and cell nuclei (DAPI) of the g contra- or h ipsilateral hemisphere of MCAO-treated animals 24 h post
reperfusion revealed microglia activation and association with vascular structures as well as extravasation of neutrophils into the penumbra, which were observed intravascularly (arrows) and extravascularly (arrowheads). i 72 h post reperfusion, microglia were still
activated and neutrophils detected in the penumbra but blood vessels
were fully degraded. Bars represent 50 µm

13

	
292

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295

Fig. 7  Magnetic resonance
imaging of mouse brains after
MCAO. a Apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) maps of
diffusion-weighted imaging
(DWI) and T2*-weighted imaging of mouse brains following
MCAO (6 or 24 h) in coronal
orientation. Hypointense areas
represent restricted diffusion
of stroke (ADC) as well as
local bleeding (T2*) in WT
and CX3CR1GFP/GFP mice
(arrowheads). b Quantification of stroke size as measured by the volume (mm3) of
diffusion restriction on ADC
maps or c the volume (mm3)
of contrast media extravasation (T1-weighted imaging)
revealed a significant reduction of both parameters by
approximately 50 % 24 h post
reperfusion in CX3CR1−/−
mice (mean ± SEM, n = 3,
*p < 0.05)

activated microglia contributed to the disintegration and
degradation of blood vessels in this area. Intraparenchymal
neutrophils were observed 72 h post reperfusion; however,
the amount in the penumbra was low as compared to the
core (Fig. 6h), which is in agreement with previous publications [14, 25] and supports the role of microglia in blood
vessel breakdown.
Evidently, disintegration of blood vessels was not only
restricted to the core of the stroke but also occurred in the
neighboring tissue. Perivascular microglia were mostly
observed in the ischemic penumbra and, therefore, we
wondered which molecular cues might attract microglia to
local blood vessels. We hypothesized that, upon permeabilization of the vascular wall caused by the ischemic stroke,
blood components may diffuse into the cerebral parenchyma. Serum components such as albumin or fibrinogen
have been described as major stimulators of microglia [2,
70]. Recently, the deposition of fibrinogen in the cerebral
parenchyma has been reported to induce the clustering of
microglia along blood vessels as a consequence of BBB
disintegration [10]. These fibrinogen deposits have been
shown to precede the infiltration of circulating monocytes
into the brain parenchyma [16]. Furthermore, fibrinogenderived peptides were described as chemotactic cues for
human monocytes a long time ago [55]. In order to test
whether blood serum-derived proteins have the capacity
to activate resident microglia, we applied purified albumin
and fibrinogen to BV2 [19] and found that both types of

13

proteins induced the migration of microglia cells in a dosedependent manner. Furthermore, microglia activation markers such as the cytokines IL-1β or TNF-α were significantly
upregulated. This is in line with a previous publication that
identified fibrinogen as an activator of microglia that led to
an increase in cell body size and phagocytic activity [2].
Likewise, incubation of murine N9 microglia cells with
serum albumin promoted the secretion of cytokines such
as IL-1β and TNF-α [70]. Activation of microglia was also
observed upon stroke in vivo and we found the phagocytosis marker CD68 as well as the co-stimulatory molecule
CD86 to be upregulated, which is in agreement with the
phagocytosis and activation data described above.
Although neurological damage occurs within seconds to
minutes upon vessel occlusion, ischemic injury continues
for hours and days [46]. Current data imply a slow-burning
and irreversible scenario in which ischemic stroke causes a
reduction in blood flow in blood vessels of the penumbra
leading to hypoxia and upregulation of VEGF in the early
subacute phase 4–6 h following stroke [42, 50, 53]. VEGF
triggers an angiogenesis response that causes the disintegration of local EC and the extravasation of blood serum components like albumin or fibrinogen, which recruit nearby
microglia that phagocytize the now activated EC and support the breakdown of the BBB in the late subacute phase
6–24 h after stroke. Blood flow in the affected blood vessels
and in tubes connected to these vessels drops, which leads
to an activation of microglia [44]. This process evolves

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	

293

Fig. 8  Model of stroke-induced and microglia-mediated blood vessel destruction. Upon ischemic stroke, blood vessels in the core are
destroyed but are potentially salvable in the penumbra. Untreated,
hypoxia in these vessels triggers the upregulation of VEGF 4 h post
insult, which activates the endothelium and renders the BBB partially
permissive. Release of blood serum components such as fibrinogen
leads to an activation of local microglia, which are recruited to blood
vessels and contribute to their disintegration by the phagocytosis of

EC and EC-components (CD68+/CD31+ microglia). Enlarged vessel damage allows for the extravasation of neutrophils and further
blood serum components, which in turn activate more microglia and
thereby contribute to the expansion of the damage in the neighboring ischemic penumbra along the tubular network. At 72 h post insult,
blood vessel degradation is complete and remaining vessel debris is
cleared by microglia and the invading immune cells

along the vascular network until a larger part of the ischemic
penumbra is irreversibly damaged, but only an early restoration of blood flow can stop the evolving tissue damage in
stroke [40, 46]. In the final delayed phase of stroke, immune
cells such as lymphocytes and neutrophils invade the brain
parenchyma and cause secondary inflammatory effects [21].
We present an alternative scenario that is compatible
with previous data, but which includes the contribution of
microglia and, crucially, allows for the possibility of halting the “slow-burning” damage in the early subacute phase.
We found that microglia remove ECs from the process by
phagocytosis (Fig. 8) and, as a consequence, the endothelium is irreversibly damaged and blood vessels regress
resulting in tissue loss in the penumbra. As a matter of fact,
loss-of-microglia-function studies using CX3CR1GFP/GFP
animals revealed a reduction in stroke size and blood vessel extravasation by about half, which is in agreement with
previous reports [12]. Our model also extends to peripheral
macrophages, which cannot be distinguished from microglia using the methods applied in this manuscript. It fits
well to the kinetics observed in patients, where brain damage caused by stroke gradually gets worse within the first
24 h post insult [21, 40, 46] and leads to BBB permeability
as measured by the invasion of macrophages labeled with
ultra-small superparamagnetic iron oxide into the brain
parenchyma after 24 h [57]. Furthermore, targeting early
BBB disruption has been shown to mediate neurovascular
protection upon ischemic stroke [52]. In summary, the data
above suggest the inhibition of microglial activation as an
approach to decrease tissue damage in patients within the

first 24 h post ischemic stroke in order to keep as many
blood vessels intact as possible and to favor tissue repair in
the ischemic penumbra over injury [39].
Acknowledgments  We thank Heike Ehrengard, Christin Liefländer,
Christine Oswald, and Andreas Zymny for their excellent technical
assistance and Darragh O’Neill for proofreading the manuscript. This
work was supported by the Foundation Rhineland-Palatinate to FZ, by
the German Research Foundation (DFG) via the collaborative research
center 1080, projects A3 (MHHS) and B6 (MKS+FZ), DFG FOR1336
(AW) as well as the DFG Grant SCHM 2159/2-1 to MHHS.
Conflict of interest  The authors declare no competing financial
interests.

References
	 1.	 Abdullah N, Voronovitch L, Taylor S, Lippmann S (2003) Olanzapine and quick-response hyperglycemia. Psychosomatics
44:175–176
	2.	 Adams RA, Bauer J, Flick MJ et al (2007) The fibrin-derived
gamma377-395 peptide inhibits microglia activation and suppresses relapsing paralysis in central nervous system autoimmune
disease. J Exp Med 204:571–582
	 3.	 Arimura K, Ago T, Kamouchi M et al (2012) PDGF receptor beta
signaling in pericytes following ischemic brain injury. Curr Neurovasc Res 9:1–9
	 4.	 Asahi M, Wang X, Mori T et al (2001) Effects of matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene knock-out on the proteolysis of blood-brain
barrier and white matter components after cerebral ischemia. J
Neurosci 21:7724–7732
	5.	 Astrup J, Symon L, Branston NM, Lassen NA (1977) Cortical
evoked potential and extracellular K+ and H+ at critical levels of
brain ischemia. Stroke 8:51–57

13

	
294
	 6.	 Belayev L, Busto R, Zhao W, Ginsberg MD (1996) Quantitative
evaluation of blood-brain barrier permeability following middle
cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Brain Res 739:88–96
	 7.	 Carmeliet P, De Smet F, Loges S, Mazzone M (2009) Branching
morphogenesis and antiangiogenesis candidates: tip cells lead the
way. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 6:315–326
	 8.	 Cunningham CL, Martinez-Cerdeno V, Noctor SC (2013) Microglia regulate the number of neural precursor cells in the developing cerebral cortex. J Neurosci 33:4216–4233
	9.	 Davalos D, Grutzendler J, Yang G et al (2005) ATP mediates
rapid microglial response to local brain injury in vivo. Nat Neurosci 8:752–758
	10.	 Davalos D, Ryu JK, Merlini M et al (2012) Fibrinogen-induced
perivascular microglial clustering is required for the development
of axonal damage in neuroinflammation. Nat Commun 3:1227
	11.	del Zoppo GJ, Milner R, Mabuchi T et al (2007) Microglial
activation and matrix protease generation during focal cerebral
ischemia. Stroke 38:646–651
	12.	 Denes A, Ferenczi S, Halasz J, Kornyei Z, Kovacs KJ (2008) Role
of CX3CR1 (fractalkine receptor) in brain damage and inflammation induced by focal cerebral ischemia in mouse. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 28:1707–1721
	13.	 Denes A, Ferenczi S, Halasz J, Kornyei Z, Kovacs KJ (2008) Role
of CX3CR1 (fractalkine receptor) in brain damage and inflammation induced by focal cerebral ischemia in mouse. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 28:1707–1721
	14.	 Enzmann G, Mysiorek C, Gorina R et al (2013) The neurovascular unit as a selective barrier to polymorphonuclear granulocyte
(PMN) infiltration into the brain after ischemic injury. Acta Neuropathol 125:395–412
	15.	 Ferrara N, Gerber HP, LeCouter J (2003) The biology of VEGF
and its receptors. Nat Med 9:669–676
	16.	 Floris S, Blezer EL, Schreibelt G et al (2004) Blood-brain barrier
permeability and monocyte infiltration in experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis: a quantitative MRI study. Brain 127:616–627
	17.	Furlan M, Marchal G, Viader F, Derlon JM, Baron JC (1996)
Spontaneous neurological recovery after stroke and the fate of the
ischemic penumbra. Ann Neurol 40:216–226
	18.	 Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K et al (2009) Temporal
and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell accumulation in
stroke. Stroke 40:1849–1857
	19.	Girard S, Brough D, Lopez-Castejon G, Giles J, Rothwell NJ,
Allan SM (2013) Microglia and macrophages differentially modulate cell death after brain injury caused by oxygen-glucose deprivation in organotypic brain slices. Glia 61:813–824
	20.	 Heiss WD (2000) Ischemic penumbra: evidence from functional
imaging in man. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 20:1276–1293
	21.	 Heiss WD (2012) The ischemic penumbra: how does tissue injury
evolve? Ann N Y Acad Sci 1268:26–34
	22.	 Iadecola C, Anrather J (2011) The immunology of stroke: from
mechanisms to translation. Nat Med 17:796–808
	23.	 Jin R, Yang G, Li G (2010) Inflammatory mechanisms in ischemic
stroke: role of inflammatory cells. J Leukoc Biol 87:779–789
	24.	Justicia C, Panes J, Sole S et al (2003) Neutrophil infiltration
increases matrix metalloproteinase-9 in the ischemic brain after
occlusion/reperfusion of the middle cerebral artery in rats. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23:1430–1440
	25.	 Kalimo H, del Zoppo GJ, Paetau A, Lindsberg PJ (2013) Polymorphonuclear neutrophil infiltration into ischemic infarctions:
myth or truth? Acta Neuropathol 125:313–316
	26.	Karperien A, Ahammer H, Jelinek HF (2013) Quantitating the
subtleties of microglial morphology with fractal analysis. Front
Cell Neurosci 7:3
	27.	 Katsura K, Kristian T, Siesjo BK (1994) Energy metabolism, ion
homeostasis, and cell damage in the brain. Biochem Soc Trans
22:991–996

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295
	28.	 Kitamura Y, Takata K, Inden M et al (2004) Intracerebroventricular injection of microglia protects against focal brain ischemia. J
Pharmacol Sci 94:203–206
	29.	Kitamura Y, Yanagisawa D, Inden M et al (2005) Recovery of
focal brain ischemia-induced behavioral dysfunction by intracerebroventricular injection of microglia. J Pharmacol Sci 97:289–293
	30.	 Knowland D, Arac A, Sekiguchi KJ et al (2014) Stepwise recruitment of transcellular and paracellular pathways underlies bloodbrain barrier breakdown in stroke. Neuron 82:603–617
	31.	 Kopatz J, Beutner C, Welle K et al (2013) Siglec-h on activated
microglia for recognition and engulfment of glioma cells. Glia
61:1122–1133
	32.	Kuntz M, Mysiorek C, Petrault O et al (2014) Stroke-induced
brain parenchymal injury drives blood-brain barrier early leakage
kinetics: a combined in vivo/in vitro study. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 34:95–107
	33.	Kuroiwa T, Ting P, Martinez H, Klatzo I (1985) The biphasic
opening of the blood-brain barrier to proteins following temporary
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Acta Neuropathol 68:122–129
	34.	 Lee CZ, Xu B, Hashimoto T, McCulloch CE, Yang G-Y, Young
WL (2004) Doxycycline suppresses cerebral matrix metalloproteinase-9 and angiogenesis induced by focal hyperstimulation
of vascular endothelial growth factor in a mouse model. Stroke
35:1715–1719
	35.	 Li T, Pang S, Yu Y, Wu X, Guo J, Zhang S (2013) Proliferation of
parenchymal microglia is the main source of microgliosis after
ischaemic stroke. Brain 136:3578–3588
	36.	 Li X, Blizzard KK, Zeng Z, DeVries AC, Hurn PD, McCullough
LD (2004) Chronic behavioral testing after focal ischemia in the
mouse: functional recovery and the effects of gender. Exp Neurol
187:94–104
37.	Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD (2001) Analysis of relative gene
	
expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta
Delta C(T)) method. Methods 25:402–408
	38.	 Lloyd-Jones D, Adams R, Carnethon M et al (2009) Heart disease and stroke statistics–2009 update: a report from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics
Subcommittee. Circulation 119:480–486
	39.	 Lo EH (2008) A new penumbra: transitioning from injury into
repair after stroke. Nat Med 14:497–500
	40.	Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA (2003) Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities in stroke. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:399–415
41.	Madinier A, Bertrand N, Mossiat C et al (2009) Microglial
	
involvement in neuroplastic changes following focal brain
ischemia in rats. PLoS One 4:e8101
	42.	 Marti HJ, Bernaudin M, Bellail A et al (2000) Hypoxia-induced
vascular endothelial growth factor expression precedes neovascularization after cerebral ischemia. Am J Pathol 156:965–976
	43.	 Martin RL, Lloyd HG, Cowan AI (1994) The early events of oxygen and glucose deprivation: setting the scene for neuronal death?
Trends Neurosci 17:251–257
	44.	 Masuda T, Croom D, Hida H, Kirov SA (2011) Capillary blood
flow around microglial somata determines dynamics of microglial processes in ischemic conditions. Glia 59:1744–1753
	45.	Morancho A, Hernández-Guillamon M, Boada C et al (2013)
Cerebral ischaemia and matrix metalloproteinase-9 modulate the
angiogenic function of early and late outgrowth endothelial progenitor cells. J Cell Mol Med 17:1543–1553
	46.	 Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C (2010) The science of stroke:
mechanisms in search of treatments. Neuron 67:181–198
	47.	 Nag S, Kapadia A, Stewart DJ (2011) Review: molecular pathogenesis of blood-brain barrier breakdown in acute brain injury.
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 37:3–23
	48.	 Neumann H, Kotter MR, Franklin RJ (2009) Debris clearance by
microglia: an essential link between degeneration and regeneration. Brain 132:288–295

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:279–295	
49.	Nikolic I, Plate KH, Schmidt MHH (2010) EGFL7 meets
	
miRNA-126: an angiogenesis alliance. J Angiogenes Res 2:9
	50.	 Nikolic I, Stankovic ND, Bicker F et al (2013) EGFL7 ligates
alphavbeta3 integrin to enhance vessel formation. Blood
121:3041–3050
	51.	 Nimmerjahn A, Kirchhoff F, Helmchen F (2005) Resting microglial cells are highly dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in
vivo. Science 308:1314–1318
	52.	 Pillai DR, Shanbhag NC, Dittmar MS, Bogdahn U, Schlachetzki
F (2013) Neurovascular protection by targeting early blood-brain
barrier disruption with neurotrophic factors after ischemia-reperfusion in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33:557–566
	53.	 Plate KH, Beck H, Danner S, Allegrini PR, Wiessner C (1999)
Cell type specific upregulation of vascular endothelial growth
factor in an MCA-occlusion model of cerebral infarct. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58:654–666
	54.	Pugh CW, Ratcliffe PJ (2003) Regulation of angiogenesis by
hypoxia: role of the HIF system. Nat Med 9:677–684
55.	Richardson DL, Pepper DS, Kay AB (1976) Chemotaxis for
	
human monocytes by fibrinogen-derived peptides. Br J Haematol
32:507–513
	56.	 Rosell A, Ortega-Aznar A, Alvarez-Sabín J et al (2006) Increased
brain expression of matrix metalloproteinase-9 after ischemic and
hemorrhagic human stroke. Stroke 37:1399–1406
	57.	 Saleh A, Schroeter M, Ringelstein A et al (2007) Iron oxide particle-enhanced MRI suggests variability of brain inflammation at
early stages after ischemic stroke. Stroke 38:2733–2737
	58.	 Sandoval KE, Witt KA (2008) Blood-brain barrier tight junction
permeability and ischemic stroke. Neurobiol Dis 32:200–219
	59.	 Schilling M, Besselmann M, Muller M, Strecker JK, Ringelstein
EB, Kiefer R (2005) Predominant phagocytic activity of resident
microglia over hematogenous macrophages following transient
focal cerebral ischemia: an investigation using green fluorescent protein transgenic bone marrow chimeric mice. Exp Neurol
196:290–297
	60.	 Schmidt MHH, Bicker F, Nikolic I et al (2009) Epidermal growth
factor-like domain 7 (EGFL7) modulates Notch signalling and
affects neural stem cell renewal. Nat Cell Biol 11:873–880

295
	61.	 Sierra A, Abiega O, Shahraz A, Neumann H (2013) Janus-faced
microglia: beneficial and detrimental consequences of microglial
phagocytosis. Front Cell Neurosci 7:6
	62.	 Sierra A, Encinas JM, Deudero JJ et al (2010) Microglia shape
adult hippocampal neurogenesis through apoptosis-coupled
phagocytosis. Cell Stem Cell 7:483–495
	63.	 Stence N, Waite M, Dailey ME (2001) Dynamics of microglial
activation: a confocal time-lapse analysis in hippocampal slices.
Glia 33:256–266
	64.	 Strasser GA, Kaminker JS, Tessier-Lavigne M (2010) Microarray analysis of retinal endothelial tip cells identifies CXCR4
as a mediator of tip cell morphology and branching. Blood
115:5102–5110
	65.	 Ueyama T, Lennartz MR, Noda Y et al (2004) Superoxide production at phagosomal cup/phagosome through beta I protein
kinase C during Fc gamma R-mediated phagocytosis in microglia. J Immunol 173:4582–4589
	66.	 Yang JP, Liu HJ, Liu XF (2010) VEGF promotes angiogenesis
and functional recovery in stroke rats. J Invest Surg 23:149–155
67.	Yenari MA, Xu L, Tang XN, Qiao Y, Giffard RG (2006)
	
Microglia potentiate damage to blood-brain barrier constituents: improvement by minocycline in vivo and in vitro. Stroke
37:1087–1093
	68.	 Zhang J, Defelice AF, Hanig JP, Colatsky T (2010) Biomarkers of
endothelial cell activation serve as potential surrogate markers for
drug-induced vascular injury. Toxicol Pathol 38:856–871
	69.	 Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q et al (2000) VEGF enhances angiogenesis and promotes blood-brain barrier leakage in the ischemic
brain. J Clin Invest 106:829–838
	70.	 Zhao TZ, Xia YZ, Li L et al (2009) Bovine serum albumin promotes IL-1beta and TNF-alpha secretion by N9 microglial cells.
Neurol Sci 30:379–383

13

