Dysphagia (2014) 29:61–67
DOI 10.1007/s00455-013-9481-x

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A Novel Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke
Naoto Sugiyama • Eiji Nishiyama • Yukitoshi Nishikawa •
Takashi Sasamura • Shinji Nakade • Katsumasa Okawa •
Tadashi Nagasawa • Akane Yuki

Received: 30 November 2012 / Accepted: 25 June 2013 / Published online: 2 August 2013
Ó Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract Patients who have an ischemic stroke are at high
risk of swallowing disorders. Aspiration due to swallowing
disorders, specifically delayed trigger of the pharyngeal
stage of swallowing, predisposes such patients to pneumonia. In the present study, we evaluated swallowing reflex in a
rat model of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(tMCAO), which is one of the most common experimental
animal models of cerebral ischemia, in order to develop a
novel animal model of dysphagia following ischemic stroke.
A swallowing reflex was elicited by a 10-s infusion of distilled water (DW) to the pharyngolaryngeal region in the
tMCAO rat model. Swallowing reflex was estimated using
the electromyographic activity of the mylohyoid muscle
from 1 to 3 weeks after surgery. Two weeks after tMCAO,
the number of swallows significantly decreased and the onset
latency of the first swallow was prolonged compared with
that of the sham group. The number of swallows in rats
significantly increased by infusions of 10 mM citric acid and

N. Sugiyama and E. Nishiyama have contributed equally to this study.
N. Sugiyama (&)
Food Technology Section, Industrial Research Institute of
Shizuoka Prefecture, 2078 Makigaya, Aoi-ku, Shizuoka-shi,
Shizuoka 421-1298, Japan
e-mail: naoto@iri.pref.shizuoka.jp
E. Nishiyama
Project Management, Translational Medicine Center, Ono
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 3-1-1 Sakurai, Shimamoto-cho,
Mishima-gun, Osaka 618-8585, Japan
e-mail: e.nishiyama@ono.co.jp
Y. Nishikawa  T. Sasamura  S. Nakade
Discovery Research Laboratories I, Minase Research Institute,
Ono Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 3-1-1 Sakurai, Shimamoto-cho,
Mishima-gun, Osaka 618-8585, Japan

0.6 lM capsaicin to the pharyngolaryngeal region compared
with the number from infusion of DW. It has been reported
that sensory stimulation of the pharyngolaryngeal region
with citric acid, capsaicin, and L-menthol ameliorates
hypofunction of pharyngeal-stage swallowing in dysphagia
patients. Therefore, the tMCAO rat model may show some of
the symptoms of pharyngeal-stage swallowing disorders,
similar to those in patients with ischemic stroke. This rat
tMCAO model has the potential to become a novel animal
model of dysphagia following stroke that is useful for
development of therapeutic methods and drugs.
Keywords Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion 
Cerebral ischemia  Stroke  Dysphagia  Deglutition 
Deglutition disorders

Introduction
Patients with dysphagia have difficulties in swallowing
food, liquid, and saliva and aspirate into the lungs rather
K. Okawa
Planning Department, Industrial Research Institute of Shizuoka
Prefecture, 2078 Makigaya, Aoi-ku, Shizuoka-shi, Shizuoka
421-1298, Japan
T. Nagasawa
Electronic Technology Section, Industrial Research Institute of
Shizuoka Prefecture, 2078 Makigaya, Aoi-ku, Shizuoka-shi,
Shizuoka 421-1298, Japan
A. Yuki
Environment Technology Section, Industrial Research Institute
of Shizuoka Prefecture, 2078 Makigaya, Aoi-ku, Shizuoka-shi,
Shizuoka 421-1298, Japan

123

62

often, resulting in being predisposed to aspiration pneumonia [1, 2]. Aspiration pneumonia accounts for
31.2–35 % of all in-hospital deaths after acute stroke [3, 4]
and is the leading cause of death in patients with ischemic
stroke and of transient ischemic attack after hospital discharge [5]. Therefore, effective therapies for reducing or
preventing pneumonia-related mortality are needed in
clinical practice. Many medical and rehabilitation therapies, compensatory techniques using alternative feeding
methods, and surgical procedures have often been used to
prevent aspiration [6, 7]. However, these preventive measures have not improved delayed triggering of the pharyngeal stage of swallowing, which causes aspiration, and
there are fewer effective treatments for swallowing disorders in patients with dysphagia. Thus, a novel therapeutic
method and drug for dysphagia has been sought, but there
is no useful animal model of some of the swallowing
symptoms observed in patients with dysphagia that could
be used for development of effective treatments. In order to
discover a novel therapeutic method and drug, it is crucially important to develop an animal model that manifests
the symptoms of human dysphagia, particularly during the
pharyngeal stage following stroke.
Dysphagia occurs in up to 50 % of patients who have
had a stroke [8, 9]. About 80 % of stroke is due to brain
ischemia, and local ischemia in the cerebral areas,
including middle cerebral artery (MCA), causes dysphagia
with high frequency [10, 11]. Many animal models of
cerebral ischemia have been developed, some of which
have been gradually improved over the years [12]. The
ligature of both common carotid artery (LBCCA) model is
a rat chronic cerebral hypoperfusion model and has the
characteristic of impaired swallowing reflex [13]. In our
preliminary study, swallowing disorders following cerebral
ischemia were not completely reproduced in a rat LBCCA
model, in which chronic cerebral hypoperfusion may have
been induced without development of cerebral ischemia. In
the study in which we used a rat model of transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO), we developed an animal model that shows some symptoms of human dysphagia
following ischemic stroke in cerebral areas. The middle
cerebral artery occlusion procedure is most often used
experimentally for a cerebral ischemic stroke model [14,
15]. In particular, the technique for inducing tMCAO with
an intraluminal filament has been used extensively in
experimental models of ischemic stroke [16]. The rat with
tMCAO has been used as an animal model that reproduces
the ischemic brain damage commonly observed in patients
after ischemic stroke [12, 14]. Therefore, it was judged to
be an appropriate animal model for reproducing swallowing function in patients with dysphagia following ischemic
stroke. However, the characteristics of the swallowing
reflex in the tMCAO rat model are still unknown. In this

123

N. Sugiyama et al.: Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke

study we estimated the swallowing reflex in the rat tMCAO
model to confirm whether this animal model manifests the
symptoms of dysphagia following ischemic stroke that
occur in patients. Development of such a model is expected
to help provide a detailed understanding of the causes of
dysphagia following ischemic stroke and thus the discovery
of effective therapeutic methods and drugs to treat the
dysphagia.

Materials and Methods
Animal Preparation and Experimental Design
All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Industrial
Research Institute of Shizuoka Prefecture.
A total of 57 young male Wistar rats (8 weeks old) that
weighed 270–310 g were obtained from Charles River
Laboratories Japan, Inc. and maintained on a 12-h light/
dark cycle with free access to food and water. Rats were
divided at random into the following four groups: (1) the
tMCAO group: rats (n = 24) underwent tMCAO; (2) the
sham group: rats (n = 15) underwent all surgical procedures for tMCAO except MCAO; (3) the control group:
rats (n = 3) remained intact; and (4) the citric acid-, capsaicin-, and L-menthol-treated groups: rats (n = 5 for each
group) underwent tMCAO 2 weeks before evaluation. The
purpose of the sham group was to confirm that the surgical
manipulation had no effect on swallowing function.
In experiment 1, rats from the tMCAO (n = 9) and the
control (n = 3) groups were used to evaluate time-dependent changes in swallowing reflex at 1, 2, and 3 weeks after
tMCAO. In experiment 2, rats from the tMCAO (n = 15)
and the sham (n = 15) groups were used to compare
swallowing reflex 2 weeks after surgery, where these rats
were evaluated in random order to reduce the interanimal
variability. In experiment 3, rats from the citric acid(n = 5), capsaicin- (n = 5), and L-menthol-treated (n = 5)
groups were used to evaluate the effects of peripheral
sensory stimulation, which were reported to modulate
swallowing initiation, on the swallowing reflex [17, 18].
Surgical Procedures for tMCAO
The method used for tMCAO in this study had been previously described in detail [19]. While under anesthesia,
maintained with 1.5–2.0 % isoflurane, rats were placed in a
supine position and then a skin incision was made in the
midline of the neck. The right common carotid artery
(CCA) was exposed with careful conservation of the vagus
and superior laryngeal nerves, which are the most

N. Sugiyama et al.: Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke

important nerves for the initiation of reflex swallowing
from the larynx [20, 21]. The muscle fascia was bluntly
dissected to expose the bifurcation of the external carotid
artery (ECA) and subsequently isolate the internal carotid
artery (ICA). After ligation of the common and external
carotid arteries with a 7-0 silk suture, a silicone-coated
nylon monofilament was introduced through a small incision into the right CCA lumen and gently advanced
through the ICA until its tip occluded the origin of the
MCA. The CCA was again ligated loosely with a silk
suture, just distal to the point of suture insertion, to prevent
bleeding. After surgery, the incision was closed, anesthesia
was discontinued, and rats were allowed to awaken and
move freely in breeding cages for 90 min before reperfusion. After 90 min of ischemia, the filament was withdrawn
to allow reperfusion under the same anesthetic condition as
surgery. Sham-operated rats underwent the same surgical
procedures as tMCAO rats except for the ligation of CCA
and ECA and introduction of the monofilament.
Measurement of Swallowing Reflex (Stimulation
of the Pharynx)
The method used for measuring the swallowing reflex in
the study had been previously described in detail [22]. Rats
were anesthetized with urethane (1.3 g/kg i.p.; SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and fixed in a supine position. The body temperature was maintained at 37.0 °C with
a heating pad. A midline incision was made on the ventral
surface of the neck. The trachea was cannulated to maintain respiration and another tube was placed into the lower
esophagus to drain infused solutions after swallowing.
A guide tube (35 mm, PE205) was fixed in the midline
of the hard palate. An infusion tube (4 Fr), inserted into the
guide tube, was used to infuse liquid solutions into the
pharyngolaryngeal region. Liquid solutions were automatically infused with a programmable infusion pump at a
flow rate of 3.0 lL/s for 10 s. Such infusion was repeated
three or five times at intervals of 6 min. During any infusion interval, the pharyngolaryngeal region was rinsed with
saline and the residue was removed with an aspiration
pump. A paired unipolar electrode made of enamel
nichrome wire was inserted into the right mylohyoid
muscle to record electromyogram (EMG) activity. EMG
signals were digitized at a sampling rate of 1,000 Hz for
later offline analysis by a data logger. The EMG signal was
transformed into a linear envelope through full-wave rectification and filtering using low-pass filters with a cutoff
frequency of 10 Hz. Swallowing reflex, elicited by infusions of liquid solutions, was identified by EMG signals
and analyzed in terms of the number of swallows during
infusion and the onset latency of the first swallow. The
number of swallows was defined as swallowing frequency

63

measured for 10 s. The onset latency of the first swallow
was defined as the time required to elicit the first swallow
from the onset of stimulation. Liquid solutions used
included distilled water (DW), 10 mM citric acid (Wako
Pure Chemical Industries Ltd., Osaka, Japan), 0.6 lM
capsaicin (Wako), and 1 mM L-menthol (Wako). In
experiments 1 and 2, the number of swallows and the onset
latency of the first swallow were determined by calculating
a mean value for five trials for each rat. In experiment 3,
the number of swallows after infusions of DW, citric acid,
capsaicin, and L-menthol was determined by calculating a
mean value for three trials for each rat, since capsaicin and
L-menthol have the possibility of desensitization of the
swallowing reflex by repeated exposure [23].
Statistical Analysis
A statistical analysis was performed using Ekuseru-Toukei
2008 statistical software (Social Survey Research Information Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Results are expressed as
mean ± SEM. Statistical significance was determined
using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiplecomparison test or Student’s t test or Paired t test. P \ 0.05
was considered statistically significant.

Results
Figure 1 shows representative examples of EMG activity
recorded from the mylohyoid muscle during swallowing.

Fig. 1 Typical examples of EMG recordings from the mylohyoid
muscle during distilled water (DW) administration into the pharyngolaryngeal region in rats. a Successive swallows elicited by infusion
of DW in intact rats. b Successive swallows elicited by infusion of
DW in tMCAO rats at 2 weeks after surgery. Horizontal solid lines
indicate 10-s infusion of DW

123

64

N. Sugiyama et al.: Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke

Successive EMG responses show a swallowing reflex
elicited by infusion of DW. The number of swallows
elicited by infusion of DW was 14 and the onset latency of
the first swallow was 0.78 s in intact rats (Fig. 1a). The
number of elicited swallows was 8 and the onset latency
was 1.86 s in tMCAO rats at 2 weeks after surgery
(Fig. 1b). In tMCAO rats, the number of swallows significantly decreased and the onset latency of the first swallow
was significantly prolonged compared to those of intact
rats. We also analyzed time-dependent changes after
tMCAO in the number of swallows elicited by infusion of
DW and the onset latency of the first swallow in both intact
and tMCAO rats. Figure 2 shows the number of swallows
and the onset latency of the first swallow in intact rats and
in tMCAO rats at 1, 2, and 3 weeks after surgery. In intact
rats (n = 3), the number of swallows and onset latency for
intact rats which were measured only once, not at 1, 2, and
3 weeks along with the tMCAO rats, were 13.5 ± 1.1
(Fig. 2a) and 0.93 ± 0.33 s (Fig. 2b), respectively. The
onset latency of the first swallow in intact rats was about
the same as that in the study by Kitagawa et al. [20]. In
tMCAO rats (n = 3), the number of swallows was
7.7 ± 2.2 at 2 weeks after surgery and 7.4 ± 1.5 at
3 weeks after surgery, and significantly decreased compared with that in intact rats (F[3, 8] = 5.31, P \ 0.05)
(Fig. 2a). In tMCAO rats (n = 3), the onset latency of the
first swallow at 2 weeks after surgery was 2.3 ± 0.45 s and
was significantly prolonged compared with that in intact
rats (F[3, 8] = 5.21, P \ 0.05) (Fig. 2b). In tMCAO rats at
1 week after surgery (n = 3), however, the number of
swallows was 13.5 ± 0.7 (Fig. 2a) and the onset latency of
the first swallow was 0.85 ± 0.15 s (Fig. 2b), suggesting
no significant differences in these indexes between intact
and tMCAO rats.
Considering that the swallowing function in tMCAO
rats was significantly attenuated at 2 weeks after tMCAO,

we compared the swallowing reflex in tMCAO rats to that
in sham-operated rats at 2 weeks after surgery to confirm
that there was no effect of surgical manipulation on swallowing function (Fig. 3). The number of swallows in
tMCAO rats significantly decreased compared with that in
sham-operated rats (tMCAO rats vs. sham-operated rats:
8.2 ± 0.8 vs. 13.4 ± 0.5, n = 15 in each, t28 = 5.62,
P \ 0.01) (Fig. 3a). The onset latency of the first swallow
in tMCAO rats was significantly prolonged compared with
that in sham-operated rats (tMCAO rats vs. sham-operated
rats: 1.71 ± 0.12 vs. 0.98 ± 0.08, n = 15 in each,
t28 = 5.07, P \ 0.01) (Fig. 3b).
We measured the number of swallows elicited by infusions of various liquid solutions, which have facilitated
swallowing function in humans, in tMCAO rats at 2 weeks
after surgery in order to evaluate the usefulness thereof for
drug screening [17, 18]. The number of swallows elicited
by infusions of 10 mM citric acid and 0.6 lM capsaicin
significantly increased compared with that of DW (citric
acid vs. DW: 18.1 ± 1.6 vs. 6.3 ± 1.6, n = 5, t4 = 9.74,
P \ 0.01; capsaicin vs. DW: 9.9 ± 1.5 vs. 7.4 ± 1.4,
n = 5, t4 = 6.12, P \ 0.01) (Fig. 4). However, the number
of swallows elicited by infusion of 1 mM L-menthol was
not significantly different from that of DW (L-menthol vs.
DW: 7.7 ± 1.9 vs. 7.0 ± 1.7, n = 5, t4 = 0.78, P [ 0.05)
(Fig. 4).

Fig. 2 The mean number of swallows (a) and the onset latency of the
first swallow (b) induced by infusion of distilled water before and at
1, 2, and 3 weeks after tMCAO. Results are expressed as the
mean ± SEM (n = 3 for each group). Asterisks indicate significant

differences between intact and tMCAO rats. Statistical analyses were
performed by one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s multiple-comparison
post hoc test; *P \ 0.05. 1w, 2w, and 3w indicate rats at 1, 2, and
3 weeks after tMCAO

123

Discussion
In the present study, we estimated the characteristics of the
swallowing reflex after tMCAO in rats by measuring the
number of swallows and the onset latency of the first
swallowing. The results showed that an infusion of DW
significantly decreased the number of swallows and significantly prolonged the onset latency of the first swallow

N. Sugiyama et al.: Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke

Fig. 3 The mean number of swallows (a) and the onset latency of the
first swallow (b) induced by infusion of distilled water 2 weeks after
sham surgery or tMCAO. Open circles represent values for individual
animals. Horizontal bars represent group mean values (n = 15 for
each group). Asterisks indicate significant differences between shamoperated and tMCAO rats. Statistical analyses were performed with
Student’s t test; **P \ 0.01

Fig. 4 The number of swallows induced by infusion of distilled
water (DW) or chemical solution (10 mM citric acid, 0.6 lM
capsaicin, or 1 mM L-menthol) 2 weeks after tMCAO. Results are
expressed as the mean ± SEM (n = 5 for each group). Asterisks
indicate significant differences between DW and chemical solution
groups. Statistical analyses were performed with Paired t test;
**P \ 0.01. Cit citric acid, Cap capsaicin, Ment L-menthol

in tMCAO rats at 2 weeks after surgery compared with
sham-operated rats. Previous animal studies reported that
successive swallowing was evoked in anesthetized animals
by long-lasting repetitive electrical stimulation of the
superior laryngeal nerve or by an infusion of a liquid such
as DW into the pharyngolaryngeal region [20, 22, 24]. As
peripheral sensory stimulation input increased, the number
of swallows increased and the onset latency of the first
swallow was shortened [20, 22]. When tMCAO rats were

65

stimulated by an infusion of DW the same as sham-operated rats were, however, the onset latency of the first
swallow was prolonged and the number of swallows
decreased. This result seems to indicate that tMCAO rats
showed impairment of swallowing function as well as some
of the symptoms of swallowing disorders observed in
humans.
Swallowing is a complex behavior that is thought to be
controlled primarily through the central neuronal network
located in the brainstem [24, 25]. Afferent inputs trigger
the activity in the medullary swallowing center, in which
the neuronal network controls a coordinated and stereotyped motor sequence [24, 26]. In addition, mounting
evidence from both electrophysiological and clinical
studies indicates that the cerebral cortex also plays an
important role in swallowing regulation [27]. The rats in
the tMCAO model used in this study had typical lesions in
the brain, including the cerebral cortex and the ipsilateral
subcortical tissues (mainly striatum, substantia nigra,
thalamus, and hippocampus) [14–16, 19, 28], and the other
brain regions such as the brainstem and cerebellum, to the
both of which the blood was supplied by the vertebral
artery, remained intact without ischemia. The superior
laryngeal nerve and the pharyngeal branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve, which plays a major role in the initiation
of reflex swallowing from the pharynx [20], were not
damaged after surgery. Thus, since peripheral afferent
pathways and medullary central pattern generators
remained intact in tMCAO rats, it seems that cortical and
subcortical dysfunction due to ischemic stroke caused
impairment of swallowing reflex in a manner similar to that
observed in human stroke victims [27]. This is the first
nonclinical report which showed that dysfunction of the
cortex or the corticobulbar tract after occlusion of the
middle cerebral artery caused swallowing disorders.
Swallowing ability was impaired in tMCAO rats at 2
and 3 weeks after surgery. In human stroke, however,
swallowing difficulties have been observed on the first few
days after stroke [1, 8]. According to Smithard et al. [8],
many swallowing problems were resolved over the first 7
or 14 days after stroke onset. It is still unknown why there
is a difference in onset time of swallowing disorders
between a rat model and humans; it may be due to neurological deficits that correlate with the size of area of
infarction. Du et al. [29] have reported that infarction after
mild focal ischemia can develop in a surprisingly delayed
fashion, i.e., 3 days to 2 weeks after the original insult in
rats. As slow cell death continues for several weeks after
surgery in tMCAO rats with mild ischemia, swallowing
disorders may develop slowly [29]. Considering this possibility, tMCAO rats may have shown impairment of
swallowing function not within 1 week but at 2 weeks or
more after the surgery.

123

66

The tMCAO rat model used in this study is a stroke model
with right unilateral hemisphere infarct. Although the incidence of dysphagia is more common in patients with brainstem or bilateral hemispheric stroke, several studies have
shown that it frequently occurs following unilateral hemispheric stroke [1, 11]. Dysphagia following stroke in humans
is characterized by impairment of the oral and pharyngeal
stages of swallowing, delayed triggering of the swallowing
reflex during the pharyngeal stage, and severely elevated
sensory thresholds [30, 31]. Dysphagia seems to occur more
commonly in patients with a right-hemispheric stroke,
because a left-hemispheric stroke is thought to be associated
more with oral-stage dysfunction, while a right-hemispheric
stroke is associated with both oral- and pharyngeal-stage
dysfunction [11, 30–32]. Although there is no common
opinion on the effects of lesion sites on swallowing, based on
the results of the present study, tMCAO rats with unilateral
right-hemispheric infarcts are considered to manifest
symptoms of pharyngeal-stage swallowing disorders.
In this study, the swallowing disorders were improved
by infusion of citric acid or capsaicin into the pharyngolaryngeal region of tMCAO rats. It has been reported that
sensory stimulation of the pharyngolaryngeal region by
infusion of citric acid, capsaicin, and L-menthol ameliorates pharyngeal-stage swallowing disorders in dysphagia
patients [17, 18]. These results suggest that the tMCAO rat
model is a novel model in which the rat shows some
responses to treatment that are similar to those of patients
with dysphagia, specifically pharyngeal-stage swallowing
disorders. Since L-menthol, which has an effect on swallowing in humans, was less effective in improving swallowing in tMCAO rats, it is unlikely that the menthol
receptor TRPM8 is involved in their swallowing function.
Nevertheless, tMCAO rats have the potential to become an
animal model that is useful for development of methods
and drugs to treat dysphagia after stroke.
Human swallowing is studied using video fluorography
and endoscopy during wakefulness. In this study, on the
other hand, we evaluated the swallowing reflex in anesthetized rats because it is impossible to do so in an awake
rat. It is desirable to conduct basic research using the same
diagnostic procedures and under the same conditions as
used in humans, but in reality that is impossible. The onset
latency of the first swallow was apparently prolonged in
tMCAO rats compared with sham rats in this study. It has
also been reported that the onset latency of the first swallow was prolonged in patients with dysphagia [30]. Considering these two results, obtained under different
measurement conditions, we think that the tMCAO rat
model shows some of symptoms observed in patients with
dysphagia and therefore is useful for research leading to the
development of new therapeutic methods and drugs for
treating swallowing disorders in humans.

123

N. Sugiyama et al.: Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke

Conclusion
The present study demonstrated that a rat model of tMCAO
shows some of symptoms of dysphagia following stroke, in
particular, pharyngeal-stage swallowing disorders. Some
liquid solutions that have ameliorated dysphagia in humans
were effective in improving swallowing in this tMCAO rat
model. These results suggest that the tMCAO model has
the potential to become an animal model that is useful for
exploring effective treatment methods for dysphagia following stroke. Since the differences in the mechanism for
developing swallowing hypofunction between tMCAO rats
and human are still unknown, additional research is needed
to investigate the mechanism of swallowing disorders in
this model.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Dr. T. Kobayashi for animal
surgery, Dr. T. Shingai for measurement of swallowing, Dr. S. Katsumata, and Dr. T. Umekawa for commenting on the manuscript, and
S. Orimoto for English proofreading.
Conflict of interest
disclose.

The authors have no conflicts of interest to

References
1. Gordon C, Hewer RL, Wade DT. Dysphagia in acute stroke. Br
Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1987;295(6595):411–4.
2. Ding R, Logemann JA. Pneumonia in stroke patients: a retrospective study. Dysphagia. 2000;15(2):51–7.
3. Heuschmann PU, Kolominisky-Raba PL, Misselwitz B, Hermanek P, Leffmann C, Janzen RW, Rother J, Buecker-Nott HJ,
Berger K. Predictors of in-hospital mortality and attributable risks
of death after ischemic stroke. The German stroke registers study
group. Arch Intern Med. 2004;164:1761–8.
4. Hinchey JA, Shephard T, Furie K, Smith D, Wang D, Tonn S.
Formal dysphagia screening protocols prevent pneumonia.
Stroke. 2005;36:1972–6.
5. Kimura K, Minematsu K, Kazui S, Yamaguchi T. Mortality and
cause of death after hospital discharge in 10,981 patients with
ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack. Cerebrovasc Dis.
2005;19:171–8.
6. Palmer JB, Drennan JC, Baba M. Evaluation and treatment of
swallowing impairments. Am Fam Physician. 2000;61(8):2453–62.
7. Logemann JA. Dysphagia: evaluation and treatment. Folia Phoniatr Logop. 1995;47(3):140–64.
8. Smithard DG, O’Neill PA, England RE, Park CL, Wyatt R,
Martin DF, Morris J. The natural history of dysphagia following a
stroke. Dysphagia. 1997;12(4):188–93.
9. Lawrence ES, Coshall C, Dundas R, Stewart J, Rudd AG,
Howard R, Wolfe CD. Estimates of the prevalence of acute stroke
impairments and disability in a multiethnic population. Stroke.
2001;32(6):1279–84.
10. Paciaroni M, Mazzotta G, Corea F, Caso V, Venti M, Milia P,
Silvestrelli G, Palmerini F, Parnetti L, Gallai V. Dysphagia following stroke. Eur Neurol. 2004;51(3):162–7.
11. Robbins J, Levine RL, Maser A, Rosenbek JC, Kempster GB.
Swallowing after unilateral stroke of the cerebral cortex. Arch
Phys Med Rehabil. 1993;74(12):1295–300.

N. Sugiyama et al.: Animal Model of Dysphagia Following Stroke
12. Hossmann KA. Experimental models for the investigation of
brain ischemia. Cardiovasc Res. 1998;39(1):106–20.
13. Zhang N, Miyamoto N, Tanaka R, Mochizuki H, Hattori N,
Urabe T. Activation of tyrosine hydroxylase prevents pneumonia
in a rat chronic cerebral hypoperfusion model. Neuroscience.
2009;158(2):665–72.
14. Liu F, McCullough LD. Middle cerebral artery occlusion model
in rodents: methods and potential pitfalls. J Biomed Biotechnol.
2011;2011:464701.
15. Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL,
Bartkowski H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of
the model and development of a neurologic examination. Stroke.
1986;17(3):472–6.
16. Belayev L, Alonso OF, Busto R, Zhao W, Ginsberg MD. Middle
cerebral artery occlusion in the rat by intraluminal suture. Neurological and pathological evaluation of an improved model.
Stroke. 1996;27(9):1616–22.
17. Logemann JA, Pauloski BR, Colangelo L, Lazarus C, Fujiu M,
Kahrilas PJ. Effects of a sour bolus on oropharyngeal swallowing
measures in patients with neurogenic dysphagia. J Speech Hear
Res. 1995;38(3):556–63.
18. Ebihara S, Kohzuki M, Sumi Y, Ebihara T. Sensory stimulation
to improve swallowing reflex and prevent aspiration pneumonia
in the elderly dysphagic people. J Pharmacol Sci. 2011;115(2):
99–104.
19. Koizumi J, Yoshida Y, Nakazawa T, Ooneda G. Experimental
studies of ischemic brain edema. 1. A new experimental model of
cerebral embolism in rats in which recirculation can be introduced in the ischemic area. Jpn J Stroke. 1986;8:1–8.
20. Kitagawa J, Nakagawa K, Hasegawa M, Iwakami T, Shingai T,
Yamada Y, Iwata K. Facilitation of reflex swallowing from the
pharynx and larynx. J Oral Sci. 2009;51(2):167–71.

67
21. Doty RW. Neural organization of deglutition. In: Code CF, editor. Handbook of physiology. Washington, D.C.: American
Physiology Society; 1968. p. 1861–902.
22. Kajii Y, Shingai T, Kitagawa J, Takahashi Y, Taguchi Y, Noda T,
Yamada Y. Sour taste stimulation facilitates reflex swallowing
from the pharynx and larynx in the rat. Physiol Behav. 2002;
77(2–3):321–5.
23. Cliff MA, Green BG. Sensitization and desensitization to capsaicin and menthol in the oral cavity: interactions and individual
differences. Physiol Behav. 1996;59(3):487–94.
24. Jean A. Brain stem control of swallowing: neuronal network and
cellular mechanisms. Physiol Rev. 2001;81(2):929–69.
25. Jean A. Brainstem control of swallowing: localization and organization of the central pattern generator for swallowing. In:
Taylor A, editor. Neurophysiology of the Jaws and Teeth. London: MacMillan; 1990. p. 294–321.
26. Miller AJ. Deglutition. Physiol Rev. 1982;62(1):129–84.
27. Martin RE, Sessle BJ. The role of the cerebral cortex in swallowing. Dysphagia. 1993;8(3):195–202.
28. Nagasawa H, Kogure K. Exo-focal postischemic neuronal death
in the rat brain. Brain Res. 1990;524(2):196–202.
29. Du C, Hu R, Csernansky CA, Hsu CY, Choi DW. Very delayed
infarction after mild focal cerebral ischemia: a role for apoptosis?
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1996;16(2):195–201.
30. Robbins J, Levin RL. Swallowing after unilateral stroke of the
cerebral cortex: preliminary experience. Dysphagia. 1988;3(1):
11–7.
31. Daniels SK, Foundas AL, Iglesia GC, Sullivan MA. Lesion site in
unilateral stroke patients with dysphagia. J Stroke Cerebrovasc
Dis. 1996;6(1):30–4.
32. Irie H, Lu CC. Dynamic evaluation of swallowing in patients
with cerebrovascular accident. Clin Imaging. 1995;19(4):240–3.

123

