Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771
DOI 10.1007/s12015-014-9535-y

PSA-NCAM+ Neural Precursor Cells from Human
Embryonic Stem Cells Promote Neural Tissue Integrity
and Behavioral Performance in A Rat Stroke Model
Han-Soo Kim & Seong-Mi Choi & Wonsuk Yang &
Dae-Sung Kim & Dongjin R. Lee & Sung-Rae Cho &
Dong-Wook Kim

Published online: 29 June 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract Recently, cell-based therapy has been highlighted
as an alternative to treating ischemic brain damage in stroke
patients. The present study addresses the therapeutic potential
of polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule (PSANCAM)-positive neural precursor cells (NPCPSA-NCAM+) derived from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) in a rat
stroke model with permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. Data showed that rats transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+
are superior to those treated with phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) or mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in behavioral performance throughout time points. In order to investigate its
underlying events, immunohistochemical analysis was performed on rat ischemic brains treated with PBS, MSCs, and
NPCPSA-NCAM+. Unlike MSCs, NPCPSA-NCAM+ demonstrated
a potent immunoreactivity against human specific nuclei,
doublecortin, and Tuj1 at day 26 post-transplantation, implying their survival, differentiation, and integration in the host
brain. Significantly, NPCPSA-NCAM+ evidently lowered the

positivity of microglial ED-1 and astrocytic GFAP, suggesting
a suppression of adverse glial activation in the host brain. In
addition, NPCPSA-NCAM+ elevated α-SMA+ immunoreactivity
and the expression of angiopoietin-1 indicating angiogenic
stimulation in the host brain. Taken together, the current data
demonstrate that transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ preserve brain
tissue with reduced infarct size and improve behavioral performance through actions encompassing anti-reactive glial
activation and pro-angiogenic activity in a rat stroke model.
In conclusion, the present findings support the potentiality of
NPCPSA-NCAM+ as the promising source in the development of
cell-based therapy for neurological diseases including ischemic stroke.

Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.1007/s12015-014-9535-y) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.

Introduction

H.<S. Kim : S.<M. Choi : W. Yang : D.<S. Kim : D. R. Lee :
D.<W. Kim (*)
Department of Physiology and Cell Therapy Center, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-Ro, Seodaemun-gu,
Seoul, South Korea
e-mail: dwkim2@yuhs.ac
D. R. Lee : D.<W. Kim
Brain Korea 21 Plus Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea
S.<R. Cho (*)
Department and Research Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine,
Yonsei University College of Medicine, 50 Yonsei-Ro,
Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, South Korea
e-mail: srcho918@yuhs.ac

Keywords PSA-NCAM . Neural precursor cells . Human
embryonic stem cells . Pluripotent stem cells . Mesenchymal
stem cells . Ischemic stroke

Stem cells are noted to be a promising therapeutic candidate
for a variety of diseases because of their multi-potency. For
example, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multi-potent
adult stem cells which are easily accessible and isolated, and
secrete numerous trophic factors producing angiogenic stimulation and inflammatory suppression [1]. These characteristics of MSCs have prompted researchers to consider their
therapeutic application in human diseases. Recent studies
demonstrated that MSCs contribute to tissue repair in a number of animal models [2, 3] and human clinical settings [4, 5].
Although several reports described the potentiality of MSCs
to differentiate into neural-lineage cells in vitro encompassing
neurons [6] and astrocytes [3], there is no definitive evidence
as to the functionality of these differentiated cells in vivo. The

762

beneficial effects of MSCs seem to be induced by paracrine
mechanisms rather than cell replacement, and thus transplantation of MSCs may have temporary and confined effects
instead of long-lasting improvement [7].
In contrast, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are known to
differentiate into all specialized cell types derived from the
three embryonic germ layers with an extensive capacity for
self-renewal. Significantly, neural precursor cells (NPCs) derived from ESCs are considered to be a potential cell source
for brain repair as they can primarily differentiate into specific
types of neural-lineage cells including neurons, astrocytes,
and oligodendrocytes. These cells also release several factors
that foster survival and proliferation of endogenous NPCs [8].
However, it still remains unclear how NPCs from ESCs contribute to functional improvement after transplantation in disease models.
We previously reported that polysialic acid-neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM)-positive NPCs (NPCPSANCAM+
) are primitive neural precursors isolated from neural
rosettes of human ESCs or iPSCs [9]. They extensively
expressed neural markers (80–98 % of the total cells) with
no signs of non-neural cell population, and were propagated
for multiple passages while retaining their primitive characteristics in culture conditions. Therefore, the current study was
conducted to investigate the therapeutic potential of NPCPSANCAM+
derived from human ESCs in a rat stroke model. On
the other hand, MSCs were employed as a positive control to
compare its paracrine effects with those of NPCPSA-NCAM+ in
this transplantation study. A relevant study indicates that
MSCs elicit neuroprotective effects through antiinflammation and pro-angiogenesis, or endogenous
neurogenesis in the ischemic brain of stroke animal models
[10]. Here, we show that human ESC-derived NPCPSA-NCAM+
can be a promising source for cell-based therapies with antiglial activation and pro-angiogenic stimulation in ischemic
stroke that may potentially extend its use in the treatment of
various neurological diseases.

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

containing 5 % CO2. After 24 h, non-adherent cells were
washed and removed. The medium was changed every 3rd
day and the cells were sub-cultured using 0.05 % trypsin/
EDTA (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) when they reached 90 %
confluence. Adherent MSCs at passages 3–5 were used for
this study.
For neural induction, embryoid bodies (EBs) derived from
hESCs were cultured for 4 days in suspension with 5 μM
dorsomorphin (DM) (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and 5–10 μM
SB431542 (SB) (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) in hESC medium deprived of bFGF (Invitrogen), and then attached on
Matrigel-coated dishes (BD Biosciences, Bedford, MA) in 1×
N2 (Invitrogen) media supplemented with 20 ng/ml bFGF for
the additional 5 days [9]. Neural rosettes that appeared in the
center of attached EB colonies were carefully isolated using
pulled glass pipettes from the surrounding flat cells. Small
rosette clumps were then seeded on Matrigel-coated dishes
after gentle trituration and cultured in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1× N2, 1× B27 (all from Invitrogen) (referred to
as N2B27 medium) plus 20 ng/ml bFGF [11].
Isolation of PSA-NCAM-Positive NPCs by MACS

Materials and Methods

Expanded neural rosette cells at 80–90 % confluence were
exposed to 10 μM Y27632 (Sigma) for 1 h to prevent celldeath prior to being subjected to the magnetic activated cell
sorting (MACS) procedure. After dissociation using Accutase
(Invitrogen), the cells (~1×108 cells) were briefly blocked in
PBS with 2 % BSA, and then incubated with anti-PSANCAM antibody conjugated with microbeads (Miltenyi
Biotec) for 15 min at 4 °C.
After extensive washing, the cell suspension was subjected
to the MACS procedure and positively-labeled cells that
remained in the column were eluted to a tube with culture
media. Isolated NPCPSA-NCAM+ were re-plated on the culture
dish at a density of 4–5×105 cells/cm2 in N2B27 medium or
1× N2, 0.5× B27, and 0.5× G21 supplement (Gemini BioProducts, West Sacramento, CA) (referred to as NBG medium) plus 20 ng/ml of bFGF. Culture medium was changed
every day and the cells were passaged every 2–3 days.

Culture and Differentiation of Human MSCs and Human
ESC-Derived NPCPSA-NCAM+

Establishment of Stroke Model and Stereotaxic Injection
of NPCPSA-NCAM+

The use of human cells was approved by the Institutional
Review Board (IRB No. 4-2008-0643). Human bone marrow
was obtained by aspiration from the posterior iliac crest from
healthy adult volunteers who provided informed consent.
Briefly, bone marrow mononuclear cells were isolated using
density gradient centrifugation (GE Healthcare, Uppsala,
Sweden) and were plated at a density of 1×106 cells/cm2 in
DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS (Gibco, Grand Island,
NY), and cultured at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere

Male Sprague–Dawley rats which are 2 month old (approximately 250 through 300 g of body weight), were anesthetized
with 3 % isoflurane (Hana Pharm, Seoul, Korea) in a 70–30 %
mixture of N2O to O2. The left common carotid artery and
external carotid artery were isolated and ligated with a 4–0
surgical suture. A nylon thread was inserted into the left
internal carotid artery and advanced to the Circle of Willis
(permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion: pMCAo). The
thread was left in place until the rats were sacrificed.

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

Stereotaxic injection of NPCPSA-NCAM+, MSCs, or PBS was
performed 2 days after pMCAo. Rats were anesthetized with
zoletil (Virbac S.A., France, 25 mg/kg) and then placed in a
stereotaxic surgical apparatus (David Kopf Instruments,
Tujunga, CA). A 26-gauge needle (Hamilton syringe, Hamilton, Reno, NV) was inserted into the left striatum (coordinates
from the bregma: anteroposterior +0.7 mm, mediolateral 2 mm and dorsoventral -5.5 mm, -2.5 mm from meninges);
5 μl of NPCPSA-NCAM+ or MSCs (1×105 cells/μl each) or PBS
was injected into the 5.5 mm and -2.5 mm sites. All cells were
constantly infused into the left striatum at a rate of 1 μl/min
with continuous agitation to prevent cellular aggregation.
Nine animals died while pMCAo surgery and cell transplantation were performed.
All animals were housed in the facility approved by the
Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory
Animal Care (AAALAC), using a 12 h light/dark cycle. The
experiment was approved by the Institutional Review Board
(IRB No. 4-2011-0087).
Behavioral Tests
Foot Fault Test The foot fault test measures the accuracy of
forepaw placement on an equi-distant grid (60×60 cm, 6 cm
distance) during a 2-min testing period. This test was a modified procedure that is based on the previous study [12, 13].
Asymmetric Behavior Test The modified elevated body swing
test was adapted from the previous report. Rats were examined for lateral movements after elevation by their tails up to
10 cm above the surface of the testing area. The frequency of
left or right swing was scored for 1 min. Asymmetric score
value was calculated by the following scores; score 0-torso
twist, left and right swing, score 1-asymmetric twist<30o,
score 2-asymmetric twist>30o. According to the direction of
torso twisting, the score was counted as either ipsilateral twist
(same as infarct site) or contralateral twist (opposite of infarct
site).
Beam Balance Test The beam walking apparatus consist of a
beam (100×5×2 cm). Motor performance was graded on a 6point scale adapted from a previous description; score 1balance with steady posture and paws on top of the beam,
score 2-grasps side of beam and has shaky movement, score 3one or more paws slip off beam, score 4-attempts to balance
on the beam but falls off, score 5-drapes over the beam but
falls off, score 6-falls off the beam with no attempt to balance.
Prehensile Traction Test The prehensile portion of the test
involves the rat’s ability to hang onto the horizontal rope by
its forepaws. The prehensile traction test was used to measure
the rat’s muscle strength. This test was adapted from similar
tests described previously. The steel bar (2-cm diameter, 100-

763

cm length) was placed horizontally 70 cm above the foam
rubber pad (7.5 cm thickness). The rat’s forepaws were placed
on the steel bar and the animal was released. The rat was
allowed to hang onto the steel bar for up to 5 s. Time of falling
was noted as well as whether or not rat brought the rear limb
up to the bar with the following scores; score 0-the rat hangs
on for 5 s and brings rear limb up, score 1- rat hangs on for 5 s
and no rear limb is brought up, score 2- rat hangs on for 3–4 s,
score 3-the rat hangs on for 0–2 s.
Modified Neurological Severity Score (mNSS) The neurological severity score is a composite of motor, sensory, and reflex
tests as described previously. The objective quantifications
were based on the asymmetric behavior test, beam balance
test, prehensile traction test, open field test (rotation frequency), and foot fault test with the following scores; score 0-no
deficits, score 2-difficulty in fully extending the contralateral
forelimb (3≤front foot fault<10), score 4-unable to extend the
contralateral forelimb (front foot fault≥10), score 6-mild circling to the contralateral side (1≤rotation or asymmetric twisting<5), score 8-severe circling (rotation or asymmetric twisting≥5), score 10-falling to the contralateral side (prehensile
traction≤2).
Immunohistochemical Analysis and Quantification
The brain was fixed for 24 h in 4 % paraformaldehyde and
washed with PBS. For the paraffin sections, the tissues were
dehydrated in a graded ethanol series and then embedded in
paraffin. The paraffin-embedded brain was sectioned into
5-μm-thick layers on a microtome, deparaffinized in xylene
for 10 min, and rehydrated in a graded alcohol series. Sections
were treated with 10 mM citric acid for 1 h followed by the
addition of 5 % BSA solution containing PBS and 0.5 %
Triton X-100. Afterwards, the brain sections were incubated
with primary antibodies to DCX (Abcam), Tuj1 (Covance),
hNu (Millipore, clone 235-1), GFAP (Millipore), Ki67 (Leica
Microsystems), hMito (Millipore), MAP2 (Millipore), human
Nestin (Millipore, clone 10C2), or ED-1 (Abcam) (1:100) for
10-12 h at 4 °C. Following the overnight incubation with the
primary antibodies, the sections were washed with PBS before
incubating them with a fluorescently-labeled secondary antibody, anti-rabbit IgG, for 1 h. The sections were then washed
once more with PBS before being mounted with 1 μg/ml
4’,6’-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). A fluorescent microscope (Olympus IX71) was used to produce fluorescent images of the sections, from which the cells could be counted. In
order to accurately determine the numbers of neuronal cells in
the brain that reacted with specific antibodies, a blind test was
utilized. Three individuals, all of whom had no previous
knowledge of the experiment, were asked to count the number
of ED-1+ cells and α-SMA+ vessels (with diameter less than
50 μm) in five of the squares on a slide, each square having a

764

dimension of 50 mm2. An investigator then took the results of
all three individuals to accurately determine the number of
detected neurons.
Twenty six days after transplantation, the rats (n=10 per
group) were anesthetized with zoletil (Virbac S.A., France,
25 mg/kg) and perfused with PBS and 4 % paraformaldehyde
in PBS (pH 7.5). For infarct area measurement, the brain
sections were stained with hematoxylin and photographed
with a microscope (Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). The indirect lesion area, in which the intact area of the ipsilateral
hemisphere was subtracted from the area of the contralateral
hemisphere, was calculated. Relative infarct area was analyzed with NIH Image J program (version 1.47). It was presented as an average percentage of the indirect lesion compared with contralateral hemisphere [14].
Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR)
Total RNA was isolated using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen).
Standard reverse-transcription (RT) was first conducted using
Transcriptase II (Invitrogen) and then, RT-PCR was performed with specific PCR primer set (forward primer:
TGTGTCCATCAGCTCCAGTTGC, reverse primer: CGGC
TACCATGCTCGAGATAGG) for angiopoietin 1 (Bioneer,
Daejeon, Korea). The PCR products were run at 1.2 % agarose
gel and then stained with ethidium bromide to detect bands
(approximate size: 400 base pairs) under UV light. Finally, the
detected bands were quantified by use of NIH Image J program (version 1.47).
Statistical Analysis
The data were expressed as mean±S.E.M. Data of behavioral
test and infarct area were analyzed by ANOVA and independent t-test using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences
(SPSS) version 20.0. Differences with P-values<0.05 were
considered to be statistically significant.

Results
Transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ Reduced Infarction Area
in Host Brain
The overall design for this experiment is shown in Fig. 1a. The
severity of neural tissue damage was determined as brain area
which is not normally stained with hematoxylin at day 26
following transplantation. Infarct lesions mainly appeared on
the cortex and striatum. Infarction area was obviously larger in
ischemic brains treated with PBS than in those transplanted
with MSCs or NPCPSA-NCAM+ (Fig. 1b). The percentage of
infarction area relative to the contralateral side was

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

significantly reduced in rats transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+
(7.1±2.5 %) or MSCs (14.9±1.9 %) compared to that of the
PBS group (25.1±2.4 %) (F=13.64, P<0.01). Although the
PSA-NCAM+
infarction areas of NPC
- and MSC-transplanted groups
were not statistically different, NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted
rats obviously showed smaller infarction area than that of
MSC-transplanted rats (Fig. 1c).
Transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ Improved Behavioral
Performances of A Rat Stroke Model
The rats lost 40 g of their body weight compared to a baseline
measured on the first day after pMCAo. Weight loss reached
maximum at day 7 after treatment in PBS-treated rats. In
MSC-transplanted group, body weight was recovered to baseline state by day 17 after transplantation. However, the significant recovery of body weight began to appear from day 3
after transplantation in the NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted group
when compared with PBS controls (P<0.05) (Fig. 2a).
After pMCAo, foot faults/line cross frequency increased.
However, the foot faults significantly decreased in rats
transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ and MSCs compared with
PBS controls, from day 3 (P<0.05) through 13 (P<0.01)
(Fig. 2b). Additionally, NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted group
showed a significant reduction in foot faults/line cross compared with MSC-transplanted group on day 13. Yet, this was
less evident in later days (day 17 and 24 after transplantation)
when the animals’ activity decreased due to weight gain.
While all rats displayed relatively little asymmetry in the
elevated body swing test before pMCAo, asymmetry was
evident in all animals after pMCAo. On day 3 posttransplantation, NPCPSA-NCAM+- and MSC-transplanted
groups started to show ipsilateral twisting behavior. Whereas
MSC-transplanted group showed modest improvement up to
day 13 after transplantation (P<0.05), the asymmetric behavior score significantly decreased in NPC PSA-NCAM+ transplanted group at day 7 and lasted up to day 24 after
transplantation (P<0.01) (Fig. 2c).
NPCPSA-NCAM+ transplantation also improved functional
recovery in the beam balance test from day 3 through 24,
compared with MSC-transplanted group and PBS controls
(P<0.01) (Fig. 2d). NPCPSA-NCAM+ transplantation significantly increased the retention time on the beam, which is well
correlated with motor coordination, while no statistical difference was shown between MSC- and PBS-treated groups.
Prehensile traction score, negatively related with muscle
strength of the forepaw, gradually decreased in NPCPSANCAM+
-transplanted group from day 3 through 24 (P<0.01)
(Fig. 2e). MSC-transplanted group also showed a similar
pattern of improvement from day 7 through 24 after
transplantation.
To normalize the quantifications of neurologic outcome,
we finally assessed the mNSS criteria based on a asymmetric

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

765

Fig. 1 Shrinkage of infarction
area in rat ischemic brain
transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+
and MSCs. a Experimental design.
One day after pMCAo, animals
were randomly allocated to receive
NPCPSA-NCAM+, MSCs, or PBS
(n=10 each). At day 26 following
transplantation, animals were
sacrificed, and the brains were
processed for
immunohistochemistry. b Effect of
MSCs and NPCPSA-NCAM+
transplantation on infarction size in
a rat model with pMCAo at day 26
post-transplantation. Values are
mean±S.E.M. *P<0.05 and
**P<0.01 when compared to that
of PBS group. c Representative
images obtained at day 26 after cell
transplantation in rats treated with
PBS, NPCPSA-NCAM+ or MSCs

Body weight measurement & Behavioral evaluation

A

Cyclosporin A (10mg/kg/24 hr)

pMCAo

Sacrifice

Transplantation

C

B

PBS

40

Infarction area

(% of contralateral side)

*
**
30

NPCPSA-NCAM+
20

10

MSCs

0

NPC PSA-NCAM+

PBS

behavior score, beam balance test, prehensile traction test,
open field test (rotation frequency, data not shown), and foot
fault test. The mNSS showed that progressive recovery in
neurological function becomes significant after day 3

A

*

*

*
*

*

*

*

-50

-100

2.5

Asymmetric behavior Score

*

Foot fault / Line cross

4

3

2

**
*

*

1

*

*

***

-1

3

7

13

17

24

Base

Days after Transplantation

-1

3

7

13

17

3

**
**

1

**

**

0

Prehensile Traction Score

4

-1

3

7

13

17

Days after Transplantation

*

24

**

**

Base

-1

3

7

13

**

**

17

24

Days after Transplantation

F
3

12

PBS
NPCPSA-NCAM+
MSCs

10
2

8

*

1

*

6

*
*

4

*
**

**

3

7

0
Base

*

0.5

24

E
5

**

*
1.0

Days after Transplantation

D

2

*
1.5

0.0

0
Base

2.0

mNSS

Body Weight (g)

C
5

50

Beam Balance

MSCs

in both NPCPSA-NCAM+-and MSC-transplanted groups compared to PBS-treated groups (P<0.05) (Fig. 2f). Moreover,
NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted group showed substantial improvement in comparison with MSC-transplanted group from

B
100

0

Sacrifice

Base

-1

**

**

**

13

17

24

Days after Transplantation

Fig. 2 Enhancement of behavioral performance in rat stroke model
transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ a Body weight. b Foot fault test. c
Asymmetric test. d Beam balance test. e Prehensile traction test. f mNSS

**

2

**

*

**

**

17

24

0
Base

-1

3

7

13

Days after Transplantation

was performed. Values are mean±S.E.M. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, and
***P<0.001 when compared to those of PBS group

766

day 7 through 24 (P<0.01). The effect of NPCPSA-NCAM+transplanted group was especially apparent from day 3
through 7, suggesting strong paracrine effect at the early time
point after transplantation.
Transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ Survived and Differentiated
With Neuronal Commitment in Host Brain
To track destiny of transplanted cells, we performed histologic
analysis with hNu (human-specific nuclei), Ki67 (proliferating cell marker), DCX (neuroblast marker), nestin (neural
stem cell marker), and Tuj1 (neuronal marker) antibodies at
day 26. Following transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+, most
cells were found at the original transplantation site (i.e., striatum). The survival, proliferation, and differentiation of
transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ were confirmed by Ki67+,
DCX+, Tuj1+, and nestin+ cells in damaged brain (Fig. 3a
and b). A majority of transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ expressed
either DCX or Tuj1, whereas a portion of them were positive
for nestin. Mitotic state of transplanted cells was revealed by
Ki67-immunoreactivity. A subset of hNu+ cells (9184 counts)
was positive for Ki67 (432 cells) at day 26 following transplantation (4.7 %). Tuj-1 immunoreactivity largely overlapped
with that of DCX in NPCPSA-NCAM+ (Fig. 3b). These DCXimmunoreactive cells were not of rat origin but of human
origin (Fig. 3c), implying that the reduced brain infarction
area seen with NPCPSA-NCAM+ was due in part to transplanted
cell integration.
Whereas many transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ demonstrated
good survival and integration into damaged tissue, only a few
grafted MSCs were detected with hNu expression at day 26
following transplantation (Fig. 3d). Most grafted NPCPSANCAM+
were immature neuronal cells, i.e., DCX positive cells
with a fraction of Ki67 positive cells (Fig. 3b). In contrast,
transplanted MSCs (hNu+ cells) did not exhibit DCX positivity in the lesions, and a small number of proliferating
hNu-Ki67+ cells were in and around the needle tract in most
cases of MSC-grafted groups (Fig. 3d).
While we could detect hMito+MAP2+ and hNu+MAP2+
double-labeled cells in NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted rats
(Fig. 4a, b), hMito+GFAP+ (Fig. 4d) or hMito+GalC+ (data
not shown) co-stained cells were hardly detectable, indicating
that NPCPSA-NCAM+ are progenitor cells with mainly neuronal
commitment. No hMito+ cells were observed in contralateral
striatum (Fig. 4c).
Transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ Suppressed Reactive Glial
Activation in Host Brain
Expression of GFAP (astrocyte marker), was notably low in
NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted group, although some GFAPpositive cells were found along the needle tracks (Fig. 4e).
In fact, the number of GFAP-positive cells greatly reduced in

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

the NPCPSA-NCAM+ group (P<0.001), and to a lesser extent in
the MSC-transplanted group (P<0.05) compared to that of
PBS group (Fig. 4e, f). These findings suggest that NPCPSANCAM+
transplantation intensely suppressed reactive astrocyte
activation, thereby promoting a favorable environment for
tissue repair [15].
Ischemic stroke also induces adverse microglial response
accompanied by tissue damage. Thus, we examined the
microglial activation in ischemic brain tissues at day 26 following transplantation using an ED1 antibody that recognizes
CD68 (active microglial marker) (Fig. 4e). Of importance, the
number of ED1-positive cells significantly decreased in
NPCPSA-NCAM+ group (P<0.001), and to a lesser extent in
MSC-transplanted group (P<0.05) (Fig. 4f). Although hNu+
cells in the striatum were detected after 6 months, there was no
sign of teratoma in any of the grafts or other regions of the
brains transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+.
Transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ Enhanced Angiogenesis
in Host Brain
Endogenous angiogenesis was examined in ischemic brain
tissues using α-SMA antibody, a smooth muscle actin marker.
We found that the number of α-SMA-reactive vessels in
NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted rats increased around the graft
site, compared with those of MSC- and PBS-treated groups
(Fig. 5a, b). Quantitative analysis of micro-vessels clearly
demonstrated that α-SMA+ vessels in NPCPSA-NCAM+transplanted rats increased in the infract area, compared with
those of MSC- and PBS-treated groups (Fig. 5c).
When the expression levels of pro-angiogenic marker,
angiopoietin-1, in the brain tissues were investigated using
RT-PCR at day 7 and 26 after transplantation, the levels were
substantially higher in NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted rats at day
26 than other groups (P<0.05) (Fig. 5d), suggesting the induction of angiogenesis by long-term survived NPCPSANCAM+
. NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted rats at day 26 also demonstrated an increasing pattern of angiopoietin-1 compared
with its level at day 7, whereas angiopoietin-1 in MSCstreated rats at day 26 did not change or slightly decreased
compared with the level at day 7. However, MSCs-treated rats
showed an increasing pattern at day 7 compared with that of
PBS-treated group (P<0.05).

Discussion
Due to the lack of regenerative treatments available for stroke
patients, stem cells have been spotlighted as an alternative
therapeutic source. At present, cell therapy based on stem cells
is being noted as a promising treatment option in the development of neurological medicine. Functional recovery

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

767

NPCPSA-NCAM+

A

DCX/DAPI

ki67/DAPI

NPCPSA-NCAM+

B

DCX/DAPI

ki67/DAPI

Tuj1/DAPI

Nestin/ki67/DAPI

D
MSCs

C
NPCPSA-NCAM+

DCX/ki67/DAPI

DAPI

hNu

hNu/DAPI

DCX

Ki67/DAPI

hNu/Ki67

hNu/DCX

Fig. 3 Integration and differentiation of viable NPCPSA-NCAM+ into rat
brain tissue. a Infacrtion site. Survival and proliferation of transplanted
NPCPSA-NCAM+ were examined at day 26. Ki67 (green) or DCX (red)
positive cells were seen in rat ischemic brain. Scale bar: 500 μm. b High
magnification of the inset in A. Scale bar: 200 μm. c Many grafted

NPCPSA-NCAM+ demonstrated hNu positivity indicating good survival
and integration into damaged brain. Examples of grafted NPCPSA-NCAM+
showing co-expression of hNu (green) and DCX (red). Scale bar: 20 μm.
+
d A few proliferating Ki67 hNu- cells were observed in and around the
needle tract in most cases of MSC-grafted groups. Scale bar: 200 μm

following ischemic brain damage can be made through various processes including cellular replacement, angiogenesis,
immunomodulation and neurotropic support. In this perspective, the application of MSCs are substantially being considered in stroke patients, where MSCs can ameliorate ischemic
tissue damage and produce trophic factors as well as an
appropriate environment for angiogenesis [16]. However,
transplantation of MSCs alone is not likely to produce optimal
functional recovery in neurological diseases because grafted
MSCs do not survive and integrate well in host tissue [7]. It
prompted us to turn our attention into neural stem cells
(NSCs)/NPCs as the substitute of MSCs. Significantly, recent
animal studies demonstrated that they restored damaged brain
tissue [17, 18]. These protective effects derived from NSCs/
NPCs appear to be relevant to the elevation of trophic factors
including IGF-1, VEGF, TGF-β1, BDNF, and SDF-1α [8] as
well as immunoregulatory action in ischemic brain [19].

We previously reported that NPCPSA-NCAM+ are isolated
from hESC and iPSC-derived neural rosettes and expandable
for a long period. As well, non-neural lineage cells are not
found in grafts of sorted cells compared with those of unsorted
neural rosette cells, suggesting the isolated NPCPSA-NCAM+
are considerably homogenous [9]. Therefore, we have
attempted to use NPCPSA-NCAM+ in a rat stroke model to
investigate whether these cells can restore global ischemic
brain damage. We also compared bone marrow derived MSCs
with hESC-derived NPCPSA-NCAM+ in a rat stroke model,
which received intra-striatal transplantation.
We first examined neural tissue integrity and behavioral
performances following transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ or
MSCs in a rat stroke model. Once ischemic environment is
formed in the brain, infarction generally occurs together with
motor dysfunction [20]. The current findings show that transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ significantly reduced infarction

768

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

A

B

DAPI

C

hMito

MAP2 hMito/MAP2/DAPI
DAPI

E

D

MAP2

hNu

NPCPSA-NCAM+

PBS

MSCs

DAPI

MAP2

hMito

hMito/MAP2/DAPI

F
***

GFAP

ED-1/DAPI

PBS

ED-1/DAPI

NPCPSA-NCAM+

ED-1/DAPI

PBS

NPC

MSC

MSCs

hMito

hMito/GFAP/DAPI

GFAP/DAPI

GFAP/DAPI

GFAP/DAPI
PBS

NPC

MSC

Fig. 4 Neuronal commitment of NPC
and reduction of glial
activation in rat brain tissue. a Cells with hMito+ (red) and MAP2+
(green) were observed in NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted rat brain. Scale
bar: 20 μm. b Confocal images of grafted cells at day 26 after transplantation. The donor-derived cells (green, hNu+) co-localized with MAP2
(red) within the grafts generated by NPCPSA-NCAM+ transplantation.
DAPI, blue. c Host neurons in the contralateral striatum were devoid of
hMito colocalized with MAP2. Note the prominent MAP2+ cells in the
striatum. Scale bar: 20 μm. d The hMito+GFAP+ cells were not detectable

in the NPC
-transplanted rat brain. Scale bar: 20 μm. e ED-1
positivity in the ipsilateral striatum was significantly reduced in NPCPSANCAM+
-transplanted group, and to a lesser extent in MSC-transplanted
group. Both NPCPSA-NCAM+- and MSC-transplanted groups were significantly different from PBS group. Expression of GFAP was notably lower
in NPCPSA-NCAM+-transplanted group than in MSC- or PBS groups. Scale
bar: 200 μm. f Number of ED1 or GFAP positive cells counted in at least
5 separate microscopic fields. Values are mean±S.E.M. *P<0.05 and
***P<0.001 when the multiple comparison were made among the groups

area (Fig. 1) and improved behavioral performance (Fig. 2) in
a rat stroke model. Obviously, the better effects appeared in
animals transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ than MSCs. It stimulated us to address the events underlying these phenomena.
In particular, we investigated striatum of lesion sites, where
NPCPSA-NCAM+ or MSCs were transplanted. The present data
show that lots of NPCPSA-NCAM+ survived, proliferated, and
differentiated up to 26 days post-transplantation, whereas only
a few MSCs were found in damaged striatum (Figs. 3 and 4).
Interestingly, much higher expression of trophic factors including brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), nerve growth factor
(NGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was observed in brain
tissue transplanted with NPC PSA-NCAM+ than MSCs

(Fig. S1). However, this expression pattern of trophic factors
was exhibited differently in the in vitro cultured MSCs and
NPCPSA-NCAM+. That is, the levels of BDNF, NGF, bFGF, and
VEGF were higher in MSCs than NPCPSA-NCAM+, whereas
anti-inflammatory agents such as tumor growth factor beta 1
(TGFβ1) and insulin growth factor 1 (IGF1) were more
expressed in NPCPSA-NCAM+ than MSCs (data not shown).
Overall, it is supposed that NPCPSA-NCAM+ possess their own
distinctions to relieve hostile ischemic milieu to adjust themselves to the host brain tissue after long-term survival, presumably contributing to tissue integrity and behavioral
recovery.
We then investigated reactive glial activation in the striatum transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ since it is cardinal
pathology, typically observed in an ischemic brain [21, 22].

PSA-NCAM+

PSA-NCAM+

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771

769

A

B
NPCPSA-NCAM+

PBS

MSCs

C

D

DAPI

hNu

-SMA

hNu/ -SMA/DAPI

Angiopoietin-1

60

**

GAPDH

*

40

0.8

Expression relative
to GAPDH

-SMA+ vessel counts

50

30

20

10

*

0.6
0.4
0.2

*
*

0.0
-0.2

0

PBS

NPC PSA-NCAM+

MSCs

Fig. 5 Stimulation of angiogenesis in rat ischemic brain transplanted
with NPCPSA-NCAM+ a α-SMA immunostaining in ischemic brain of PBS
group, NPCPSA-NCAM+- or MSC-transplanted group, respectively. Scale
bar: 200 μm. b Representative images of host origin α-SMA-positive
vascular endothelial cells (red) at the NPCPSA-NCAM+-grafted region.
Scale bar: 20 μm. c Quantitative analysis of α-SMA+ micro-vessels in
NPCPSA-NCAM+- or MSC-transplanted rats around the graft site. Values
are mean±S.E.M. *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 when compared with that of

MSCs or PBS group, respectively. d The expression levels of ratangiopoietin-1 in ischemic brain were assessed using RT-PCR at day 7
and 26 after transplantation with NPCPSA-NCAM+ (NPC) or MSCs. A
representative RT-PCR amplification of angiopoietin-1 (top) and the
quantification of GAPDH-normalized mRNA levels to that of sham
control (baseline) (bottom) are shown (n=3 per group). Values are
mean±S.E.M. *P<0.05 when compared to that of PBS group

As a matter of fact, reactive astrocytes proliferate and form
glial scar which hinders neurite outgrowth [23] and reactive
microglia release pro-inflammatory mediators that trigger and
aggravate neural tissue damage [24] in the brain of stroke
patients. Our findings show that transplantation of NPCPSANCAM+
reduced glial activation in damaged striatum as evidenced by the lowed positivity against ED1 (reactive microglia marker) or GFAP (reactive astrocyte marker) antibody,
respectively (Fig. 4). This inhibition of glial activation was
greater in the striatum transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ than
MSCs. In parallel, recent studies demonstrate that the transplantation of NPCs decreased gliosis in a rat stroke model
[25]. Since the control of reactive gliosis can be a novel
approach in stroke treatment, it is therapeutically important

that transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ alleviated local adverse glial
activation in ischemic brain of a rat stroke model.
We next examined angiogenesis in the striatum
transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ as they can facilitate both
the supply of trophic nutrients and the excretion of detrimental
metabolites in ischemic brain, possibly contributing to functional recovery. The current data show that transplantation of
NPCPSA-NCAM+ greatly enhanced angiogenesis in damaged
striatum as revealed by the increases of α-SMA-reactive
vessels and angiopoetin-1 expression (Fig. 5). Interestingly,
this angiogenesis more robustly occurred in the striatum
transplanted with NPCPSA-NCAM+ than MSCs. This phenomenon is probably relevant to the differential expression of
angiogenesis stimulating factors including vascular

770

endothelial growth factor (VEGF), or basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) in the host striatum following transplantation of
these cells (Fig. S1). Similarly, recent studies demonstrate that
the transplantation of NSCs promoted angiogenesis in a rat
stroke model [26, 27]. Given that angiogenesis contributes to
the reconstruction of vasculature linked to tissue repair in
ischemic stroke [28], it is therapeutically noteworthy that
transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ stimulated angiogenesis in
ischemic brain of a rat stroke model.
Taken together, the current findings demonstrate that transplantation of NPCPSA-NCAM+ preserve brain tissue and improve behavioral activities in a rat stroke model. These neuroprotective actions are probably done by NPCPSA-NCAM+
mediating anti-reactive glial activation and pro-angiogenesis,
both of which certainly occurred in ischemic brain tissue.
Future efforts might have to be made to elucidate the underlying cellular and molecular protective mechanisms in more
detail in ischemic brain tissue following NPCPSA-NCAM+ transplantation. As well, it needs to be further investigated whether
transplanted NPCPSA-NCAM+ can persistently ameliorate
multi-faceted neuropathology and substantially reconstruct
lost neural circuit to produce functional recovery in ischemic
animal models for a long period. In conclusion, the present
data support the potentiality of NPCPSA-NCAM+ as the promising source in the development of cell-based therapy for
neurological diseases including ischemic stroke.
Acknowledgments This research was supported by the Bio & Medical
Technology Development Program of the National Research Foundation
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (20100020408; 2012M3A9B4028631; 2012M3A9B4028639;
2012M3A9C7050126), and by a grant (A1202254) of the Korea Health
Technology R&D Project through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare,
Republic of Korea. Seong-Mi Choi and Wonsuk Yang equally contributed to this work.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest in this study.

References
1. Caplan, A. I., & Dennis, J. E. (2006). Mesenchymal stem cells as
trophic mediators. Journal of Cellular Biochemistry, 98, 1076–1084.
2. Chen, J., Li, Y., Katakowski, M., et al. (2003). Intravenous bone
marrow stromal cell therapy reduces apoptosis and promotes endogenous cell proliferation after stroke in female rat. Journal of
Neuroscience Research, 73, 778–786.
3. Kopen, G. C., Prockop, D. J., & Phinney, D. G. (1999). Marrow
stromal cells migrate throughout forebrain and cerebellum, and they
differentiate into astrocytes after injection into neonatal mouse brains.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 10711–10716.
4. Liu, J., Han, D., Wang, Z., et al. (2013). Clinical analysis of the
treatment of spinal cord injury with umbilical cord mesenchymal
stem cells. Cytotherapy, 15, 185–191.

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771
5. Bhasin, A., Srivastava, M. V., Mohanty, S., Bhatia, R., Kumaran, S.
S., & Bose, S. (2013). Stem cell therapy: a clinical trial of stroke.
Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery, 115, 1003–1008.
6. Bae, K. S., Park, J. B., Kim, H. S., Kim, D. S., Park, D. J., & Kang, S.
J. (2011). Neuron-like differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Yonsei Medical Journal, 52, 401–412.
7. Cho, S. R., Kim, Y. R., Kang, H. S., et al. (2009). Functional recovery
after the transplantation of neurally differentiated mesenchymal stem
cells derived from bone barrow in a rat model functional recovery
after the transplantation of spinal cord injury. Cell Transplantion, 18,
1359–1368.
8. Capone, C., Frigerio, S., Fumagalli, S., et al. (2007). Neurospherederived cells exert a neuroprotective action by changing the ischemic
microenvironment. PLoS ONE, 7, e373.
9. Kim, D. S., Lee, D. R., Kim, H. S., et al. (2012). Highly pure and
expandable PSA-NCAM-positive neural precursors from human
ESC and iPSC-derived neural rosettes. PLoS ONE, 7, e39715.
10. Honmou, O., Onodera, R., Sasaki, M., Waxman, S. G., & Kocsis, J.
D. (2012). Mesenchymal stem cells: therapeutic outlook for stroke.
Trends in Molecular Medicine, 18, 292–297.
11. Kim, D. S., Lee, J. S., Leem, J. W., et al. (2010). Robust enhancement
of neural differentiation from human ES and iPS cells regardless of
their innate difference in differentiation propensity. Stem Cell
Reviews and Reports, 6, 270–281.
12. Colle, L. M., Holmes, L. J., & Pappius, H. M. (1986). Correlation
between behavioral status and cerebral glucose utilization in rats
following freezing lesion. Brain Research, 397, 27–36.
13. Borlongan, C. V., Cahill, D. W., & Sanberg, P. R. (1995). Locomotor
and passive avoidance deficits following occlusion of the middle
cerebral artery. Physiology & Behavior, 58, 909–917.
14. Grabowski, M., Brundin, P., & Johansson, B. B. (1993). Pawreaching, sensorimotor, and rotational behavior after brain infarction
in rats. Stroke, 24, 889–895.
15. Gonzalez, F. F., McQuillen, P., Mu, D., et al. (2007). Erythropoietin
enhances long-term neuroprotection and neurogenesis in neonatal
stroke. Developmental Neuroscience, 29, 321–330.
16. Ding, D. C., Shyu, W. C., & Lin, S. Z. (2011). Mesenchymal stem
cells. Cell Transplantation, 20, 5–14.
17. Chang, D. J., Oh, S. H., Lee, N., et al. (2013). Contralaterally
transplanted human embryonic stem cell-derived neural precursor
cells (ENStem-A) migrate and improve brain functions in strokedamaged rats. Experimental and Molecular Medicine, 45, e53.
18. Mine, Y., Tatarishvili, J., Oki, K., Monni, E., Kokaia, Z., & Lindvall,
O. (2013). Grafted human neural stem cells enhance several steps of
endogenous neurogenesis and improve behavioral recovery after
middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Neurobiology of Disease,
52, 191–203.
19. Michel-Monigadon, D., Brachet, P., Neveu, I., & Naveilhan, P.
(2011). Immunoregulatory properties of neural stem cells.
Immunotherapy, 3, 39–41.
20. Rogers, D. C., Campbell, C. A., Stretton, J. L., & Mackay, K. B.
(1997). Correlation between motor impairment and infarct volume
after permanent and transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in the
rat. Stroke, 28, 2060–2065.
21. Li, T., Pang, S., Yu, Y., Wu, X., Guo, J., & Zhang, S. (2013).
Proliferation of parenchymal microglia is the main source of
microgliosis after ischaemic stroke. Brain, 136(Pt 12), 3578–3588.
22. Pekny, M., Wilhelmsson, U., & Pekna, M. (2014). The dual role of
astrocyte activation and reactive gliosis. Neuroscience Letter, 565C,
30–38.
23. Huang, L., Wu, Z. B., Zhuge, Q., et al. (2014). Glial scar formation
occurs in the human brain after ischemic stroke. International
Journal of Medical Sciences, 11, 344–348.
24. Tuttolomondo, A., Di Raimondo, D., di Sciacca, R., Pinto, A., &
Licata, G. (2008). Inflammatory cytokines in acute ischemic stroke.
Current Pharmaceutical Design, 14, 3574–3589.

Stem Cell Rev and Rep (2014) 10:761–771
25. Chang, D. J., Lee, N., Park, I. H., et al. (2013). Therapeutic potential
of human induced pluripotent stem cells in experimental stroke. Cell
Transplantation, 22, 1427–1440.
26. Zhang, P., Li, J., Liu, Y., et al. (2011). Human embryonic neural stem
cell transplantation increases subventricular zone cell proliferation
and promotes peri-infarct angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia.
Neuropathology, 31, 384–391.

771
27. Maurer, M. H., Thomas, C., Bürgers, H. F., & Kuschinsky, W.
(2007). Transplantation of adult neural progenitor cells transfected
with vascular endothelial growth factor rescues grafted cells in the rat
brain. International Journal of Biological Science, 4, 1–7.
28. Liu, J., Wang, Y., Akamatsu, Y., et al. (2014). Vascular remodeling
after ischemic stroke: Mechanisms and therapeutic potentials.
Progress in Neurobiology, 115C, 138–156.

