Journal of the Neurological Sciences 359 (2015) 275–279

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of the Neurological Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jns

A novel embolic middle cerebral artery occlusion model induced
by thrombus formed in common carotid artery in rat
Yin-Zhong Ma a, Li Li a, Jun-Ke Song a, Zi-Ran Niu a, Hai-Feng Liu b,c, Xiang-Shan Zhou c,
Fu-Sheng Xie b, Guan-Hua Du a,⁎
a
b
c

Beijing Key Laboratory of Drug Target and Screening Research, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100050, China
Shandong Ehua Biopharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Shandong 252201, China
Shandong Dong-e E-Jiao Co., Ltd., Shandong 252201, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 23 June 2015
Received in revised form 31 August 2015
Accepted 21 September 2015
Available online 5 October 2015
Keywords:
Stroke
t-PA
Thrombolytic
Cerebral embolism
Therapeutic time window
Disease model

a b s t r a c t
Stroke is a major cause of death and disability worldwide. However, treatment options to date are very limited. To
meet the need for validating the novel therapeutic approaches and understanding the physiopathology of the
ischemic brain injury, experimental stroke models were critical for preclinical research. However, commonly used
embolic stroke models are reluctant to mimic the clinical situation and not suitable for thrombolytic timing studies.
In this paper, we established a standard method for producing a rat embolic stroke model with autologous thrombus
formed within the common carotid artery (CCA) by constant galvanic stimulation. Then the thrombus was shattered
and channeled into the origin of the MCA and small (lacunar) artery. To identify the success of MCA occlusion,
regional cerebral blood ﬂow was monitored, neurological deﬁcits and infarct volumes were measured at 2, 4 and
6 h postischemia. This model developed a predictable infarct volume (38.37 ± 2.88%) and gradually reduced
blood ﬂow (20% of preischemic baselines) within the middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory. The thrombus
occluded in the MCA was able to be lysed by a tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) within 4 h postischemia.
The techniques presented in this paper would help investigators to overcome technical problems for stroke research.
© 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

1. Introduction
Stroke is one of the leading causes of death and disability worldwide,
but until now the treatment options for acute stroke remain limited
[10]. To develop the novel therapeutic approaches and understanding
the physiopathology of the ischemic brain injury, experimental strokes
were valuable tools. An ideal experimental stroke model needs to have
two features: occluded by autologous blood clots which can be lysed by
thrombolytics, such as t-PA [1]; the thrombosis and infarction closely
simulate human ischemic stroke.
At present, two major types of ischemic stroke models have been developed: intraluminal suture middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
and embolic MCAO. The intraluminal MCAO was developed by Koizumi
in 1986 to simulate this impactful human pathology in rats. A modiﬁcation of the MCAO method was later presented by Longa (Longa et al.,
1989). Both techniques have been widely used to identify molecular
mechanisms of brain injury resulting from ischemic stroke and potential
therapeutic modalities. However, it does not reliably reproduce the

inhomogeneous vascular ﬁndings at the microvascular and macrovascular
levels in acute territorial stroke [2]. Furthermore, the therapeutic window
for therapeutic options may be substantially shorter in this model than in
humans [5,9].
Embolic MCAO used blood drawn from the animal to form autologous
clots of speciﬁc size and composition in vitro and are subsequently (e.g.
24 h later) introduced into the cerebral circulation via a cannula inserted
and advanced along the internal carotid artery. Embolic MCAO causes
most human strokes and therefore models that simulate this type of
occlusion are useful for testing new thrombolytic agents. However, the
current embolic model failed to mimic the thrombosis and thrombusaging since the thrombus was formed from dried blood clots in vitro or
other artiﬁcial emboli. In this article, we demonstrated a standard method
for producing embolic stroke with thrombus formed by galvanic stimulation in CCA in rats. This model could develop a predictable infarct volume
within the MCA territory. The technique presented in this article was
suitable for the study of thrombolytic time window.
2. Materials and methods

Abbreviations: t-PA, tissue-type plasminogen activator; CCA, common carotid artery;
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; ECA, external carotid artery; ICA, internal carotid
artery; PPA, pterygopalatine artery; PU, perfusion unit; CBF, cerebral focal perfusion.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: dugh@imm.ac.cn (G.-H. Du).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2015.09.362
0022-510X/© 2015 Published by Elsevier B.V.

2.1. Experimental animals
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (250–290 g) were purchased from Vital
River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Beijing. All animal experiments

276

Y.-Z. Ma et al. / Journal of the Neurological Sciences 359 (2015) 275–279

were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the
Peking Union Medical College and in accordance with the principles
outlined in the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
All animals were acclimatized for 2 d or more prior to surgery.

2.2. Experimental embolic stroke models and treatments
Sterilize all surgical tools by autoclaving (minimum 121°°C, 15 psi, for
20 min). Sanitize the surgery table and associated surgical equipment
using 75% ethanol. Anesthetize the rat with isoﬂurane (5% for induction,
2–3% for maintenance) in 70% N2O and 30% O2 by a face mask. Conﬁrm
anesthesia by a toe pinch. Shave the fur on the ventral neck and head
regions with electric clippers to expose the skin areas. Temperature of
the rat was maintained at 36.5–37.5°°C using a homeothermic blanket
control unit.
Disinfect the shaved skin and surrounding fur with 10% povidone–
iodine followed by 75% ethanol. Make a 2-cm-long midline incision on
the neck. Use retractors to expose the surgical ﬁeld and dissect the
right CCA, external carotid artery (ECA), internal carotid artery (ICA),
and pterygopalatine artery (PPA). Dissect the CCA free from the
surrounding nerves and fascia (without harming the vagal nerve).
Wipe dry the CCA with sterile cotton-wool mops.
As was shown in Fig. 1A, three artery clamps were used to close
PPA, ECA and the right CCA (the distal end). Put the CCA into the
electric clamp from the YLS-14B thrombus formation tester (Jinan
Yiyan Science & Technology Development Co., Ltd) and initiated the
galvanic stimulation (1.00 mA) for 225 s. The thrombus could be observed
(about 5 mm-long, dark black) after the clamp was removed. The thrombus was smashed 5–10 times by an ophthalmic forceps with serrated soft
tip. Arteriopalmus was re-emerging when the thrombus pieces were

smashed into homogeneous pieces. The artery clamp on the right CCA
was relieved for 1–3 s to ﬂush the comminuted thrombus into the ICA
and the CCA was reclipped for another 10–15 min to channel the thrombus into the MCA/lacunar artery by Willis circulation.
Recheck the recanalization of CCA after relief of all the artery clamps.
Closed the midline incision by suture. Laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry (2 mm
posterior, 5 mm lateral to bregma) was used to monitor cerebral perfusion throughout the surgery. Only rats that showed sustained ischemia
to less than 20% of pre-embolic baselines were included. Animals with
spontaneous revascularization before thrombolysis were excluded (6 of
a total of 67 rats). Exclusion took place before assignment into the various
treatment groups: vehicle saline injected at 2–6 h after ischemia (n =
10); t-PA infused as a 10% bolus, and the remainder was infused continuously over a 30 min interval at 2–6 h after ischemia (n = 10).

2.3. Monitoring on cerebral focal perfusion (CBF)
Focal CBF was monitored by means of laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry
(Perimed, Sweden) throughout the surgery. Prior to thrombus occlusion,
a 1.2 cm long midline incision was made in the scalp to expose the skull
bone. The tissues on the skull bone were removed with a dental scraper
and sterile cotton-wool mops. The laser-Doppler probe was sticked at
2 mm posterior and 5 mm lateral to the bregma above the intact dura.
The perfusion unit (PU) value was recorded for 5 min as the baselines.
The results were calculated as the percentage change of PU values at the
endpoint compared with each baseline. The scalp incision was closed by
suture after the measurement. Special attention should be paid to avoid
the confounding effects of superﬂuous light, heterogeneous distribution
of superﬁcial blood vessels, and movement artifacts on laser-Doppler
ﬂowmetry.

Fig. 1. The CBF and mortality rate was measured in thromboembolic stroke model after the thrombolytic therapy. (A) Schematic diagram of the surgery. (B) Focal CBF was measured 0.25–6 h
after the infarction continuously. t-PA treatment signiﬁcantly restores the (C) focal CBF and lowers the (D) mortality rate. Data represent CBF as percentage change from postischemia baseline
and values are means ± SEM of 10 experiments.

Y.-Z. Ma et al. / Journal of the Neurological Sciences 359 (2015) 275–279

2.4. Neurological deﬁcit tests

3. Result

Neurological deﬁcits in the animals were assessed 24 h after the
surgery using a modiﬁed 5-point Bederson scale, as described in detail
previously [6]. The scoring was as follows: 0, no deﬁcit; 1, forelimb ﬂexion deﬁcit on contralateral side; 2, decreased resistance to lateral push
and torso turning to the ipsilateral side when held by the tail; 3, very signiﬁcant circling to the affected side and reduced capability to bear weight
on the affected side; 4, animal rarely moves spontaneously and prefers to
lay down or stay at rest.

3.1. General features of the embolic stroke model

2.5. Rotating rod test
A rotating rod apparatus was modiﬁed and used to assess motor
performance (diameter increased from 10 cm to 13 cm and lined with
1.5 mm thick rubber) [12]. Rats were placed on the elevated rotating
rod, which was started at 22 rpm over 60 s. Timing started after hindpaw
movement was observed. The scoring was as follows: 0 (walked on rod
for more than 60 s), 1 (walked on rod for less than 60 s), 2 (fell off
right after the rotation started), or 3 (fell off before the rotation started).

277

The physiological parameters remained within the normal range in
all groups. In the vehicle-treated group, there were 3 rats that died 1 d
later of modeling and 4 in 10 rats died in 5 d. The overall mortality
was 40% in vehicle-treated stroke-only rats. By contrast, the t-PA-treated
animals had a signiﬁcantly lower mortality (2 of 10 died in 5 d) as compared with the vehicle group. As was shown in Fig. 1B, once after the
occlusion, cerebral perfusion in the middle cerebral artery territory
dropped below 80% of preischemic baselines gradually. t-PA treatment
signiﬁcantly elevated the focal CBF and decreased the mortality to 20%
(Fig. 1C–D).
3.2. Success rate of model
In all stroke-only rats (67 rats), 11 rats died of intracranial hemorrhage
and edema in 24 h later of modeling, and 6 rats were excluded from the
success rate account as these rats were found to have spontaneous revascularization before thrombolysis. The success rate of our experimental
embolic stroke model is 74.6%.

2.6. Forelimb function test
3.3. Analysis of brain lesion
A grip strength meter was modiﬁed and used to assess the
hemiparesis and strength of the forelimb [8]. A rope of 0.5 mm diameter
and 20 cm long was fastened horizontally beyond a cage ﬁlled with dry
wooden chips. Both forepaws were placed on the rope and scoring was
as follows: 1 (both paws could grip the rope), 2 (only one paw could
grip the rope) or 3 (no paws could grip).

Rats were sacriﬁced 24 h after the modeling and the infarct areas
were assessed with TTC staining. The result showed that the infarct
volume in the vehicle-treated group was 38.37 ± 2.88% which was
close to the traditional embolic stroke model. t-PA treatment induced
detectable recovery from the MCA embolism determined either by TTC
or HE stained (Fig. 2A–C).

2.7. Inclined plane test

3.4. Evaluation of the thrombolytic time window

Motor performance was measured using a sliding apparatus [13].
The sliding apparatus had a 60 × 40 cm wood plane that could be
inclined at an angle of 0° (horizontal) to 90°. There is a 25 × 15-cm
rough plastic zone in the middle of the plane for the rat to grip. Each
rat was initially placed on the 80°-angled incline plane 3 times to preaccommodate. Each trial was performed by calculating the time which
the rat held its position in the plastic zone. Holding 120 s or longer
was counted as 120 s. Each trial was performed after a 1-min interval.
During this time the rat was returned to a cage ﬁlled with dry wooden
chips, with which the limbs and body were wiped and dried so as not
to inﬂuence the friction coefﬁcient by urine and feces. Trials in which
the rat held its position with one or more limbs slipping out of the plastic zone were not included in the result.

Delayed t-PA administration at 2, 4 and 6 h postischemia shows
variety outcomes. t-PA treatment at 2–4 h restored perfusion reduced
24-h infarct volumes signiﬁcantly, but no measurable improvement
with delayed t-PA treatment at 6 h postischemia was observed (Fig.
3A–B). t-PA administration improved all four behavior tests compared to the vehicle group at 2 h and 4 h postischemia. However,
no measureable change in behavior tests between the groups at 6 h
after the thrombosis was observed.

2.8. Quantiﬁcation of infarction volume
After the neurological deﬁcit test, rats were euthanized and decapitated and the brains were rapidly removed for the determination of
infarct size. Brains were perfused with saline, and 8 coronal sections
(2 mm thick) were stained with 0.5% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
(TTC) and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution to quantify the percentage of infarct volumes. Edema correction was performed as previously
described [7].
2.9. Data and statistical analysis
All results are presented as mean ± SEM. In most cases, statistical
analysis was obtained by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
post-hoc Newman–Keuls analysis for multiple comparisons with SPSS.
For comparison of the mortality between t-PA and vehicle, a χ2 test was
performed with SPSS. P b 0.05 was set as statistically signiﬁcant.

4. Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated a standard method for performing an
improved embolic stroke model in rats, in which the origin of the MCA
territory is occluded by fresh thrombus. The major advantage of this
model is: the occlusion of the MCA region with thrombus formed in
CCA is similar to thromboembolic stroke in humans. This model does
not require craniectomy and uses newly formed autologous thrombus
in vivo, which is suitable for performing preclinical investigation of
thrombolytic therapy. Compared with the traditional embolic stroke
model, this model could also develop a reproducible and predictable
infarct volume within the territory supplied by the MCA.
To perform this model, the well-shattered thrombus and its lodgment
is the key to success. Previous studies demonstrated that the dried blood
clot introduction is difﬁcult to manage. It could be easily lead to variations
in infarct size and affected brain regions [3,14]. In this study, we demonstrated how to prepare thrombosis in CCA by constant current for
1.00 mA, lasting 225 s. This condition only applied on rats weighted
250-290 g according to our preliminary study (data not shown). To precisely lodge the thrombus and produce a reproducible embolic stroke
model, CCA should be closed for 10–15 min right after the black shattered
clots channeled into ICA. This is because the negative pressure caused by
Willis circulation would draw the clots into the MCA zone. The shattered

278

Y.-Z. Ma et al. / Journal of the Neurological Sciences 359 (2015) 275–279

Fig. 2. The brain lesion was measured by TTC-staining (A) and HE-staining (C). t-PA was infused into the EJV right after the infarction and the brain tissue was fetched and subjected to each
process 24 h after the ischemia onset. Data represent infarct volume as percent of ipsilateral hemisphere volume and values are means ± SEM of 5 experiments.

thrombus was also readily visualized at the origin of the MCA in all salinetreated rats but was largely dissolved in all t-PA-treated rats at 24 h after
embolization.
To evaluate the success of our model, the CBF, four animal behavior
tests and the distribution of cerebral infarction were assessed. After the
infarction, CBF was decreased to 30% of baseline and this value continued
to drop to 20% at 6 h postischemia, consistent with previous reports [4,
15]. Without thrombolysis, 40% of the animals died within the ﬁrst 3 d
because of brain hemorrhage or edema. t-PA treatment signiﬁcantly
restored focal CBF, enhanced the survival rate and improved behavior
recovery. Moreover, we demonstrated that the tissue lesion was produced mostly within the MCA territory as seen in the neocortex and
striatum regions, and t-PA treatment signiﬁcantly reduced the infarct
size at 24 h after stroke. Together, our data demonstrated that the
thrombus could be lysed by effective thrombolytic agents in at least
4 h postischemia.
Finally, we note that there are several technical concerns that may
hinder the success of the embolic MCAO model. A common problem
encountered in performing the embolic MCAO model is early spontaneous reperfusion after embolization. The occurrence of spontaneous reperfusion is likely to be associated with the fragile extravascular coagulated
clot used to occlude the MCA [3,11,14]. We believe that this method
could meet the need of delayed thrombolysis study for the focal CBF

remains steady over at least 6 h. Animal behavior tests and brain lesion
can be observed 24 h after the embolism. Thrombolysis with t-PA at 2–
4 h restored focal CBF, promoted behavior tests and reduced 24-h infarct
volumes, but the lesion was obtained with delayed 6-h t-PA administration. This was probably due to the ischemia-reperfusion damage caused
by delayed thrombolysis.
5. Conclusion
The techniques presented in this article should help investigators to
overcome technical problems in embolic stroke research. The surgery
produced highly reproducible infarct size by fresh thrombus in a short
time period (about 20–25 min) according to the protocol.
Disclosure/conﬂict of interest
There is no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Major Scientiﬁc and Technological Special Project for “Signiﬁcant New Drugs Creation” (no. 2013ZX09508104),
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 81102444) and the

Y.-Z. Ma et al. / Journal of the Neurological Sciences 359 (2015) 275–279

279

Fig. 3. Delay t-PA treatment in thromboembolic stroke model. t-PA was infused into the EJV 2-6 h after the infarction and the focal CBF (A), infarct volume (B), neurologic deﬁcit (C),
rotating rod test (D), forelimb function test (E) and inclined plane test (F) were carried out. All data are presented as means ± SEM of 10 experiments.

Central Public Scientiﬁc Research Institution Fundamental Project (no.
2014CX05).
References
[1] R. Bhatia, M.D. Hill, N. Shobha, B. Menon, S. Bal, P. Kochar, T. Watson, M. Goyal, A.M.
Demchuk, Low rates of acute recanalization with intravenous recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator in ischemic stroke: real-world experience and a call for action,
Stroke 41 (2010) 2254–2258.
[2] G.J. del Zoppo, R.T. Higashida, A.J. Furlan, M.S. Pessin, H.A. Rowley, M. Gent, PROACT: a
phase II randomized trial of recombinant pro-urokinase by direct arterial delivery in
acute middle cerebral artery stroke. PROACT investigators. Prolyse in acute cerebral
thromboembolism, Stroke 29 (1998) 4–11.
[3] V.A. Dinapoli, C.L. Rosen, T. Nagamine, T. Crocco, Selective MCA occlusion: a precise
embolic stroke model, J. Neurosci. Methods 154 (2006) 233–238.
[4] U. Dirnagl, B. Kaplan, M. Jacewicz, W. Pulsinelli, Continuous measurement of cerebral
cortical blood ﬂow by laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry in a rat stroke model, J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 9 (1989) 589–596.
[5] W. Hacke, M. Kaste, E. Bluhmki, M. Brozman, A. Davalos, D. Guidetti, V. Larrue, K.R.
Lees, Z. Medeghri, T. Machnig, D. Schneider, R. von Kummer, N. Wahlgren, D. Toni, E.
Investigators, Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 hours after acute ischemic stroke,
N. Engl. J. Med. 359 (2008) 1317–1329.
[6] M.N. Hoda, W. Li, A. Ahmad, S. Ogbi, M.A. Zemskova, M.H. Johnson, A. Ergul, W.D.
Hill, D.C. Hess, I.Y. Sazonova, Sex-independent neuroprotection with minocycline
after experimental thromboembolic stroke, Exp. Trans. Stroke Med. 3 (2011) 16.
[7] K.Y. Lee, O.N. Bae, K. Serfozo, S. Hejabian, A. Moussa, M. Reeves, W. Rumbeiha, S.D.
Fitzgerald, G. Stein, S.H. Baek, J. Goudreau, M. Kassab, A. Majid, Asiatic acid attenuates
infarct volume, mitochondrial dysfunction, and matrix metalloproteinase-9 induction
after focal cerebral ischemia, Stroke 43 (2012) 1632–1638.

[8] W. Li, Z. Qu, R. Prakash, C. Chung, H. Ma, M.N. Hoda, S.C. Fagan, A. Ergul, Comparative
analysis of the neurovascular injury and functional outcomes in experimental stroke
models in diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rats, Brain Res. 1541 (2013) 106–114.
[9] S.R. Martini, T.A. Kent, Hyperglycemia in acute ischemic stroke: a vascular perspective, J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.: Off. J. Int. Soc. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 27 (2007) 435–451.
[10] V.L. Roger, A.S. Go, D.M. Lloyd-Jones, E.J. Benjamin, J.D. Berry, W.B. Borden, D.M.
Bravata, S. Dai, E.S. Ford, C.S. Fox, H.J. Fullerton, C. Gillespie, S.M. Hailpern, J.A. Heit,
V.J. Howard, B.M. Kissela, S.J. Kittner, D.T. Lackland, J.H. Lichtman, L.D. Lisabeth,
D.M. Makuc, G.M. Marcus, A. Marelli, D.B. Matchar, C.S. Moy, D. Mozaffarian, M.E.
Mussolino, G. Nichol, N.P. Paynter, E.Z. Soliman, P.D. Sorlie, N. Sotoodehnia, T.N.
Turan, S.S. Virani, N.D. Wong, D. Woo, M.B. Turner, American Heart Association
Statistics C, Stroke Statistics S, Heart disease and stroke statistics — 2012 update: a
report from the American Heart Association, Circulation 125 (2012) e2–e220.
[11] K.M. Sicard, M. Fisher, Animal models of focal brain ischemia, Exp. Trans. Stroke
Med. 1 (2009) 7.
[12] S. van Gorp, M. Leerink, S. Nguyen, O. Platoshyn, M. Marsala, E.A. Joosten, Translation
of the rat thoracic contusion model; part 2 — forward versus backward locomotion
testing, Spinal Cord 52 (2014) 529–535.
[13] F. Yonemori, T. Yamaguchi, H. Yamada, A. Tamura, Evaluation of a motor deﬁcit
after chronic focal cerebral ischemia in rats, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 18 (1998)
1099–1106.
[14] R.L. Zhang, M. Chopp, Z.G. Zhang, Q. Jiang, J.R. Ewing, A rat model of focal embolic
cerebral ischemia, Brain Res. 766 (1997) 83–92.
[15] H. Zhu, X. Fan, Z. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Murata, J. Lu, S. Zhao, K.A. Hajjar, E.H. Lo, X. Wang, Annexin
A2 combined with low-dose tPA improves thrombolytic therapy in a rat model of focal
embolic stroke, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.: Off. J. Int. Soc. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30
(2010) 1137–1146.

