Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology (2015) 42, 1158–1167

doi: 10.1111/1440-1681.12466

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Multipotent bone marrow stromal cell therapy promotes endogenous cell
proliferation following ischemic stroke
Gila Pirzad Jahromi,* Alireza Shabanzadeh Pirsaraei,†‡§ Seyed Shahabeddin Sadr,†‡ Golamreza Kaka,*
Mahvash Jafari,¶ Sadegh Seidi‡ and Jason Charish§
*Neuroscience Research Centre, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, †Electrophysiology Research Centre,
Neuroscience Institute, ‡Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran, §Genetics and Development Division, Toronto Western Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada and ¶Department
of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran

SUMMARY
Despite extensive research over the years, there still exists
some debate as to what constitutes the optimal therapeutic
strategy to promote recovery following stroke. Due to the
complexity of injured brain pathophysiology, treatment
approaches should ideally address numerous factors, ultimately aiming to promote tissue protection, axonal regrowth
and functional recovery. This study extends the understanding of the effects of bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) treatment following experimentally induced ischemic stroke in
rats. Focal ischemic brain injury was experimentally induced
in rats by placing a preformed clot into the middle cerebral
artery. Animals were injected intravenously with BMSCs at
24 h after stroke and were killed 7 days post injury. When
administered BMSCs following stroke, the neurological outcome was signiﬁcantly improved relative to controls. There
was an increase in the number of BMSCs labelled with BrdU
present in the injured hemisphere of the brain compared to
the non-injured side. Furthermore, administration of BMSCs
also led to increases in astrocytosis, vascularization and
endogenous proliferation. These ﬁndings provide insight into
the mechanisms of action of BMSC treatment and further
argue for the therapeutic potential of BMSCs as an effective
treatment following cerebral stroke.
Key words: bone marrow stromal cell, brain, stroke,
transplantation.

INTRODUCTION
A stroke involves the loss of neurological function due to a disturbance in the brain’s blood supply and is the second-leading cause
Correspondence: Dr. Alireza Shabanzadeh Pirsaraei, Genetics and
Development Division, Toronto Western Hospital/Toronto Western
Research Institute, KDT 8-418, 60 Leonard Street, Toronto, M5T 2S8
ON, Canada.
Email: ashabanz@uhnres.utoronto.ca
Received 8 February 2015; revision 15 July 2015; accepted 22 July
2015.
© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

of death in developed countries.1,2 The disturbance in blood supply
is due to either ischemia or haemorrhage,2 with ischemia arising
due to either blockage of a blood vessel via thrombosis or arterial
embolism, or by cerebral hypoperfusion.3 Numerous strategies
have been investigated in order to improve functional recovery following stroke. These studies have focused on various pharmacological and cellular therapeutic treatments which are administered
in the acute phase of ischemia, and act to amplify the intrinsic properties of the brain for neuroplasticity and subsequent neurological
recovery.4 Stem cell therapy is a cellular approach that has the
potential to induce a variety of beneﬁcial neurorestorative processes that can facilitate the recovery of neurological function.5
There are two broad types of stem cells: embryonic and adult
derived stem cells. Bone marrow is a rich source of adult stem
cells6 which have been investigated as potential treatments for several conditions, including spinal cord injury,7 liver cirrhosis,8
chronic limb ischemia9 and end-stage heart failure.10
Adult bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) contain multipotent
mesenchymal stem and progenitor cells that have the ability to
both stimulate endogenous repair mechanisms and to potentially
replace dying neurons11,12 and as such have great potential for
stroke therapy. At the site of injury, BMSCs can inﬂuence the
environment through the secretion of anti-inﬂammatory and antiapoptotic molecules as well as trophic factors which are able to
support axonal growth, immunomodulation, angiogenesis and
remyelination.13–16 Additionally, it has been demonstrated that
BMSCs may have the ability to differentiate into neuronal cells
in-vitro using co-culture or differentiation medium.17,18 BMSCs
also have the advantage of being relatively easy to access and
having the ability to be rapidly expanded ex-vivo for autologous
transplantation19. Following stroke, it is possible to use one of
several means of administration for cell transplantation, including
intracerebral, intravenous or intra-arterial delivery. Among these
options, intravenous injection seems to be the easiest way to
bring therapeutics to patients without risking further damage to
the brain and therefore has potential for human applications.20
Despite this wealth of evidence suggesting that BMSCs hold
great therapeutic promise, there still remains a wide gap regarding our understanding of the precise mechanisms contributing to
functional improvement following intravenous BMSC injection.

Cell proliferation after stroke
Reports of the transdifferentiation of BMSCs into cells of neural
lineage exist,5 with BMSCs differentiating in vitro into excitable
neuron-like cells that respond to several neurotransmitters, such
as GABA, glycine, and glutamate.17 On the other hand, recent
studies have also demonstrated that in vitro expanded BMSCs of
various origins have the capacity to modulate immune responses
and to change the progression of different inﬂammatory diseases.21 As tissue injuries are often accompanied by inﬂammation, inﬂammatory factors may provide cues to mobilize BMSCs
to tissue sites with damage. In order to promote tissue repair
functions, BMSCs may additionally prepare the microenvironment by modulating inﬂammatory processes and releasing various
growth factors in response to the inﬂammation status.21
Previously, it has been shown that intravascular BMSC administration 24 h after stroke can improve functional recovery and
decrease infarct volumes in adult rat ischemic-injured brains
7 days after thromboembolism when compared to controls.22
Thromboembolic stroke models are valuable in studying ischemic
infarction because they recapitulate the hallmark symptoms of
human cerebrovascular disease.23 Moreover, thromboembolic-induced strokes show predictable changes in blood ﬂow and a
more consistent degree of infarct distribution relative to other
models of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Therefore,
the present study, following thromboembolic-induced stroke in
rats, tested whether intravenously infused BMSCs are able to
enter the brain and contribute to neurological functional recovery.
In addition, several factors were assessed that potentially mediate
the beneﬁts of BMSCs in the ischemic brain, including the effect
of BMSC treatment on arteriogenesis, endogenous cellular
proliferation and astrocytosis at 7 days following MCAO.

1159

Fate of transplanted bone marrow stromal cells
A thromboembolic stroke model in rats was used in order to
recapitulate various hallmarks of human cerebrovascular disease

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 1 Bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) characterization. (a) Cells
exhibit typical elongated, ﬁbroblast-like morphology. (b) Cells stain positive for ﬁbronectin. Arrows show diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride
(DAB)-labelled cells; reaction product is brown. (c) Cells stain positive
for CD44. Arrows show DAB-labelled cells; reaction product is brown.
(d) Cells do not stain for CD45. Arrows show cells negative for staining.

RESULTS
Characterization of rat bone marrow stromal cells in vitro

(a)

Wistar adult male rats were used in order to generate BMSC
cultures, which were characterized by a typical elongated,
ﬁbroblast-like morphology and a large, ﬂattened shape (Fig. 1a).
As an indication of cell purity, immunochemistry examination
detected the presence of ﬁbronectin (97.67% of cells) and CD44
(94.78% of cells) on the cultures (Fig. 1b,c). As expected, the
BMSCs were negative for the marker CD45 (Fig. 1d) (n = 4
per group).

(b)

(c)

BrdU labeling of bone marrow stromal cells
Prior to performing transplantation studies, BMSC cultures were
ﬁrst generated and determined if BrdU labelling could be used as
an effective means of tracking the fate of BMSCs over time. In
order to do this, BMSCs were cultured with BrdU for 72 h after
which immunocytochemistry conﬁrmed BMSCs were positively
labeled with BrdU. In order to evaluate that maintenance of BrdU
over extended periods of time, after the removal of BrdU from
the media, cultures were maintained for an additional 7 days,
undergoing multiple cell passages and population expansion. At
this time point BrdU continued to be easily detectable within the
BMSC cultures (Fig. 2a) (n = 4 per group), suggesting that it
would be an adequate way of assessing the fate of the BMSCs
following transplantation.

Fig. 2 BrdU immunodetection. (a) BrdU maintenance in bone marrow
stromal cells (BMSC) 7 days after the removal of BrdU from the culture
medium. (b) BrdU immunodetection on a brain tissue section from a rat
that received BMSCs that were all pre-labeled with BrdU prior to transplantation. Arrows show DAB-labelled cells, reaction product is brown.
(c) The histogram shows quantiﬁcation of BrdU-positive cells from treated group. Treated group received BMSCs that were all pre-labeled with
BrdU. Data are presented as means  SEM.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

1160

G Pirzad Jahromi et al.

and to investigate the effects of BMSC treatment on stroke recovery. At 24 h after MCAO, injured rats were infused with
3 9 106 BMSCs through the tail vein. At 7 days post MCAO,
rats were killed, brains were sectioned and BrdU immunohistochemistry was performed in order to evaluate the level of integration of BMSCs into the lesion site. Approximately 5% of the
transplanted BrdU-reactive cells were identiﬁed in each treated
animal (Fig. 2b,c) (n = 4 per group). BrdU-reactive cells were
observed in multiple areas of the hemisphere ipsilateral to injury,
including cortexes and striatum. The vast majority of identiﬁed
cells (4.5% of injected cells) were located in the ischemic core
and its boundary zone. In contrast, very few cells were observed
in the contralateral hemisphere.
Bone marrow stromal cell treatment improves functional
recovery after stroke
In order to assess somatosensory function, rats were subjected to
an adhesive removal test both prior to MCAO and at various
time points following injury. Following MCAO there was a signiﬁcant functional impairment in all rats as indicated by their
adhesive removal times, with no signiﬁcant differences between
the control and the BMSC treated groups both prior to surgery

(a)

and at 24 h post-MCAO (Fig. 3a), indicating all animals attained
similar initial levels of functional impairment. In contrast, at
7 days post-MCAO, BMSC treatment led to a signiﬁcant reduction in adhesive removal times compared to controls
(74.37  5.11 vs 40  3.41, P < 0.001; n = 8 per group).
Neurological scores (Bederson scale) were used to assess functional motor deﬁcits after cerebral ischemia. Neurological scores
were recorded before MCAO and at 6, 24, 48, 72 h and 7 days
post-MCAO for the different groups. At 6 h after MCAO, all animals demonstrated similarly severe motor deﬁcits with mean
scores of (3.75  0.164) for control and (3.75  0.164) for
BMSC groups (non-signiﬁcant). Beginning at 72 h, BMSC treated rats had signiﬁcantly reduced motor deﬁcits compared to controls (1.50  0.189 vs 2.38  0.183, P < 0.01) and this
difference continued to be observed at 1 week following MCAO
(1.38  0.183 vs 2.38  0.183, P < 0.01; n = 8 per group)
(Fig. 3b).
Bone marrow stromal cell therapy reduces brain infarct
volume after middle cerebral artery occlusion and promotes
arteriogenesis
Histological examination using haematoxylin and eosin staining
on sections revealed that intravenous delivery of BMSCs signiﬁcantly reduced brain infarct volume (22.04  1.58%) relative to
controls (36.60  3.55%, P < 0.001) at 7 days after MCAO
(Fig. 4a,b) (n = 8 per group).
To evaluate the formation of new arterioles, we measured
SMA-coated vessels in the peri-infarct area of the injured hemisphere (Fig. 5a–d). These results indicate that BMSC therapy
signiﬁcantly increases arteriole density (29.63  1.49 a-SMA-

(a)

(b)
(b)

Fig. 3 Neurological outcome after stroke. (a) The panel shows adhesive
removal test times after stroke in two experimental groups: control (cont)
and bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC). Data are presented as
means  SEM. ***P < 0.001 versus control (n = 8 per group). (b) The
panel shows neurological deﬁcit scores according to the modiﬁed Bederson scoring system after stroke in two experimental groups: control (cont)
and bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC). Data are presented as
means  SEM. **P < 0.01 versus control (n = 8 per group).
cont,
BMSC.

Fig. 4 Infarct volume 7 days after middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO). (a) Haematoxylin and eosin–stained coronal sections showing
infarct area in control (cont) and bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC)
groups at 7 days after MCAO. (b) Histogram showing quantiﬁcation of
infarct volume in control and BMSC groups. Data are presented as
mean  SEM. ***P<0.001 versus control (n = 8 per group).

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

Cell proliferation after stroke
(a)

(c)

1161

(a)

(b)

(c)
(b)

(d)

Fig. 5 Bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) treatment of stroke increases
arteriogenesis in the ischemic brain. (a) a-SMA immunostaining in middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) control and (b) BMSC-treated rats.
Arrows show DAB-labeled SMA-vessels; reaction product is brown.
Quantitative data of arterial density (c) and area (d) in rats treated with
BMSCs or control (n = 4 per group). Data are presented as
mean  SEM. ***P < 0.001 compared with MCAO controls.

vessels/mm2) in comparison to the control MCAO rats (19.53
 2.54 a-SMA-vessels/mm2, P < 0.001). Moreover, the area of
SMA-vessels in the ischemic border zone (IBZ) of the BMSC
therapy group (16247.84  1016.2 mm2) was signiﬁcantly
increased compared to MCAO controls (10081.74 
2060.2 mm2, P < 0.001; n = 4 per group).
Intravenous administration of bone marrow stromal cells
decreases neuronal damage, and increases astrocyte density
after middle cerebral artery occlusion
Neuron-speciﬁc enolase (NSE) is normally located primarily in
the cytoplasm, however upon cell destruction it is released from
the cytoplasm.24 As such it can be used as a speciﬁc neurobiochemical marker of brain damage after brain infarction in
humans25 and in animals.24 Therefore, to assess the extent of
neural damage after MCAO, NSE immunostaining was performed and our results demonstrate that intravenous administration of BMSCs signiﬁcantly decreased NSE expression in the
ischemic brain (6.11  0.32) compared with control rats
(16.14  1.07, P < 0.001) (Fig. 6a–c) (n = 4 per group).
Astrocytes are a heterogeneous class of cells that take part in
maintaining homeostasis in the central nervous system and are
engaged in a number of functions including synaptic plasticity,
maintenance of the blood–brain barrier, inﬂammation and neuronal repair.26 Reactive astrogliosis is an astrocyte response to
various types of mechanical or chemical brain injuries and is
characterized by hypertrophy and the upregulation of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP).27 The GFAP expression in the
ischemic brain was quantiﬁed to test whether BMSC treatment

Fig. 6 Bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) treatment following stroke
decreases neuronal damage in the ischemic brain. Immunostaining of
NSE in middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) control-treated (a) or
BMSC-treated rats (b). Arrows show DAB-labeled damaged neurons;
reaction product is brown. (c) Quantiﬁcation of (a) and (b) (n = 4 per
group). Data are presented as mean  SEM. ***P < 0.001 compared
with MCAO control.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 7 Bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) treatment following stroke
increases astrocyte density in the ischemic brain. Glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein immunostaining in middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) control-treated (a, b) or BMSC-treated rats (c, d) and quantiﬁcation (e)
(n = 4 per group). Data are presented as mean  SEM. ***P < 0.001
compared with MCAO controls. Arrows show DAB-labelled astrocyte
cells in the border zone of injury; reaction product is brown. Asterisks
show the infarcted zone in the damaged hemisphere 1 week after MCAO.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

G Pirzad Jahromi et al.

1162

had an effect on reactive astrocyte expression. It was observed
that BMSC treatment induced a strong increase expression of
GFAP in the ischemic brain of injured rats (32.00  2.85) compared to the control group (8.58  0.48, P < 0.001; Fig. 7a–e)
(n = 4 per group).
Bone marrow stromal cell therapy increases the number of
proliferating cells in the subventricular zone after middle
cerebral artery occlusion
Ki-67 is a marker for newly produced neuroblasts in brain areas
following stroke damage.28 Therefore, in order to assess cell
proliferation, quantiﬁed cells were labelled with Ki-67 in the sub-

(b)

(a)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Fig. 8 Bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) treatment of stroke increases
the number of proliferating cells in the subventricular zone (SVZ).
Immunostaining of Ki-67 in middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
control-treated (a, b) or BMSC-treated rats (c, d) and quantiﬁcation of
data (e) (n = 4 per group). Data are presented as mean  SEM.
*P < 0.05 compared with MCAO controls. Arrows show DAB-labelled
proliferating cells; reaction product is brown. Asterisks show the SVZ of
the lateral ventricle in the damaged hemisphere 1 week after MCAO.

ventricular zone (SVZ) of the infarcted hemisphere. As shown in
Fig. 8a–e the number of Ki-67 immunoreactive cells in the SVZ
was signiﬁcantly higher in the BMSC treated group
(5.62  0.53) when compared to controls (1.69  0.18,
P < 0.05; (n = 4/group), demonstrating that BMSC treatments
may mediate additional beneﬁcial effects through its promotion
of cell proliferation.

DISCUSSION
Overall our results are in agreement with those from other groups
indicating that in animal models of stroke, BMSCs can effectively reduce infarct volume and improve functional recovery.22,29–31 Here we also further conﬁrm and elaborate upon
previous results by demonstrating that a small number of BMSCs
integrate into injured brain tissue and that treatment reduces NSE
expression, increases reactive astrocyte density, increases the
number of proliferating cells in the SVZ and promotes arteriogenesis following cerebral ischemia. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that BMSCs have potential as an effective treatment
to promote recovery following cerebral ischemic injury under
normothermic conditions.
Morphological analysis of the tissue indicates that BrdU-labeled BMSCs are more likely to enter into the side of the brain
ipsilateral to injury as opposed to the contralateral non-ischemic
brain, which is potentially facilitated by MCAO-induced disruption of the blood–brain barrier.32–34 Previous ﬁndings indicate
that BMSCs expressing CXCR4 have an active tropism towards
tissue damage zones where SDF-1 concentration is increased.35
Together these data support the hypothesis that injected BMSCs
pass the blood brain barrier and actively migrate to sites of tissue
damage.36
Furthermore, it was found that the expression of markers of
neurogenesis, arteriogenesis and astrocytosis (Ki-67, a-SMA and
GFAP respectively) were signiﬁcantly augmented at 7 days after
MCAO in the BMSC treatment group when compared to the
control group. Neuron-speciﬁc enolase staining revealed that
almost all penumbra neurons had only minor signs of damage in
the BMSC therapy group, whereas multiple damaged or dead
cells were observed in the control group. These ﬁndings are also
in agreement with previous reports that showed BMSC therapy
reduced infarct size at 7 days after MCAO.29,30
There are several possible explanations regarding the broad
mechanisms by which BMSC exert their beneﬁcial effects. For
example, it’s possible that BMSCs integrate into the target tissue
and replace damaged cells in order to reconstruct neural circuitry.30 Alternatively, the reduction in deﬁcits may be due to the
secretion of growth factors from BMSCs, such as colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1), stem cell factor, and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF).37 Additionally, BMSCs have been shown
to express basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (bFGF), nerve growth
factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and their
receptor mRNAs (trkA and trkB).38 In the results of the current
study, only about 5% out of the total number of injected BMSCs
were detected in the brain and the time course of the beneﬁcial
effects was relatively rapid, with signiﬁcant improvement
observed at 7 days post treatment. This therefore supports the
idea that at 7 days post MCAO, the reduction in ischemic-induced deﬁcits is largely attributable to the secretion of growth

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

Cell proliferation after stroke
factors rather than due to the relatively few BMSCs that may differentiate into brain cells. In agreement with this idea, there are
reports of improved wound healing following BMSC delivery5
and despite the low survival rate of BMSCs in ischemic hearts,
there is decreased scarring and increased neo-angiogenesis after
BMSC transplantation.39 BMSC injection has also led to
improvements in a model of pulmonary emphysema.40 In all
these cases, secretion of various growth factors and cytokines by
BMSCs is thought to bring about paracrine signaling, promoting
the survival of endogenous tissue cells or suppressing/modulating
harmful inﬂammation.41 In line with our results, the lack of
demonstrated persistence of the transplanted BMSCs in the
injured tissues has therefore resulted in these effects being attributed not to BMSC integration and regeneration of tissue, but
rather to beneﬁcial trophic effects.13
This study shows that BMSCs promote arteriogenesis in the
IBZ and in the brain at 7 days after stroke compared to MCAO
controls. BMSC treatment signiﬁcantly increases cerebral arterial
density and area in the ischemic brain. This effect may be due to
the regulation of cerebral blood ﬂow, the formation of new blood
vessels via angiogenesis as well as the development of collaterals
from pre-existing vessels, all of which are critical for the maintenance of neural function.42 Based on the NSE staining, it was
furthermore shown that an increased number of viable neurons
remain located near the damage border zone in the BMSC therapy group. Also demonstrated is an increase in the number of
proliferating cells in the SVZ 1 week after operation, all of which
may contribute to the beneﬁcial effects of BMSC treatment that
we see in functional tests.
Finally, it is shown that BMSC treatment induced strong
increase expression of GFAP in the ischemic brain compared to
the control group. Astrocytes play a signiﬁcant though potentially
contradictory role during CNS regeneration, with the astrocytic
response to stroke being complex and incompletely understood.
On the one hand, in the acute phase astrocytes are important in
neuronal antioxidant defense and may participate in BMSC mediated increases in growth factor secretion,43 which may provide
neuroprotection in the acute phase as well as promoting neurogenesis and regeneration in the chronic phase after injury.44 On the
other hand, in the chronic phase, astrocytes may also promote an
environment that is inhibitory for regeneration through formation
of the glial scar.44 Given that a BMSC-induced increase in reactive astrocytes is seen and associated with functional improvement, a detailed understanding of the astrocytic response, as well
as a thorough characterization of the timing and location of resultant changes, is necessary for the development of effective therapeutic strategies for stroke and warrants further investigation.
Overall a clear, signiﬁcant and early beneﬁcial effect of BMSC
transplantation on functional improvement following stoke was
observed, with these beneﬁcial effects likely being due to the
secretion of anti-inﬂammatory and anti-apoptotic molecules as
well as trophic factors.15 Given that intravascular administration
of BMSCs can dramatically reduce the neuropathological consequences of cerebral infarction in rats, our results combined with
those of others support BMSCs as being a promising therapeutic
approach for stroke. Furthermore, our results support the notion
that the development of therapeutics capable of targeted production of trophic factors has potential for ameliorating the devastating loss of function resulting from cerebral stroke.

1163
MATERIALS AND METHODS

Bone marrow stromal cell isolation, culture and
characterization
Wistar adult male rats were used to generate BMSCs. Following
animal sacriﬁce, femurs and tibias were aseptically removed and
bone marrow was gathered from each piece with approximately
5 mL of culture medium. Bone marrow was placed in T25 culture ﬂasks in Dulbecco’s Modiﬁed Eagle Medium (Invitrogen
Burlington, Canada) supplemented with 15% foetal bovine serum
(Invitrogen). In order to remove non-adherent cells, the culture
medium was changed once per day for 3 days. Following this
the culture medium was changed twice a week and cells were
passaged when they reached 70–80% conﬂuency. Cultures were
harvested with Trypsin–EDTA solution (0.25% Trypsin,
0.5 mmol/L EDTA; Sigma Oakville, Canada) for 5–10 min at
37°C to obtain a single-cell suspension. A cytometer was used in
order to count nucleated marrow cells and to ensure adequate cell
numbers for transplantation. This cycle was repeated four times
(passage 1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively). Using antibody staining at
the third passage, the BMSC purity was checked (see below).
Bone marrow stromal cells immunocytochemistry
Imunocytochemistry was used to conﬁrm the presence or absence
of various BMSC surface markers. The BMSCs (third passage)
were seeded into 24-well plates and cultured up to 70–80% conﬂuency, washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and ﬁxed
with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 15 min. Fixed cells were
washed twice with PBS before staining. For permeabilization and
blocking, cells were incubated in a solution consisting of 0.1%
Triton X-100 and 10% goat serum in PBS for 1 h. Primary antibodies consisted of mouse anti-ﬁbronectin monoclonal antibody
diluted to 1 : 100, mouse anti-CD44 polyclonal antibody diluted
to 1 : 300 and mouse anti-CD45 polyclonal antibody diluted to
1 : 250 (Sigma). Primary antibodies were incubated overnight at
4°C, followed by three washes in PBS. Then, 3% H2O2 was
applied in order to block endogenous peroxidase activity. Following three washes in PBS, streptavidin–biotin complex (rabbit
anti-mouse; Abcam) was added for 1 h at room temperature
(RT). Peroxidase was visualized by incubation in a solution containing diaminobenzidine-H2O2 for 5–8 min. Haematoxylin was
used for counter staining, followed by washing in PBS.
BrdU labelling of bone marrow stromal cells
BrdU (5-bromodeoxyuridine) incorporation was used to label
BMSCs before transplantation. For labelling, BMSCs were incubated with BrdU (30 lg/mL) for 3 days.45 BrdU immunocytochemistry was performed on BMSCs in culture media in order to
check the maintenance of BrdU within BMSCs throughout their
divisions. Brieﬂy, BMSCs were cultured in DMEM + 10% FBS
until 60% conﬂuency. Cells were then rinsed once with PBS and
cultured in DMEM without FBS + 30 lg/mL BrdU for 3 days
(Sigma-Aldrich Oakville, Canada).46 The media was changed
every day. Then, BMSCs were placed in DMEM + 10% FBS for
7 days. During this period, the culture was sustained by media
changes and passages. Finally cells were detached and placed on
glass coverslips in order to perform BrdU immunostaining.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

1164

G Pirzad Jahromi et al.

Model for animal cerebral focal ischemia
As described previously, injection of a preformed clot into the
MCA induces focal cerebral ischemia.22,47 Following the general
protocols of the Animal Ethics Community of Tehran University
of Medical Sciences, a total of 36 adult male Wistar rats weighing 250–300 g were used in this study. Prior to surgery, the rats
were anaesthetized as described previously.22,47,48 During surgery, a constant ﬂow of oxygen was provided through a face
mask. During the surgery and in the postoperative period, body
temperature was maintained at 37°C with a heating pad until the
animal was fully recovered from anaesthesia. A 1.5 cm longitudinal incision was made in the midline of the ventral cervical skin.
The right common carotid artery, right internal carotid artery and
right external carotid artery were exposed. The distal portion of
the external carotid artery was ligated and cut, and then a perforation was made. Blood was withdrawn into a polyethylene-50
(PE-50) tube and left to sit still at RT for 1–2 h so that the blood
clotted. Coagulated blood was subsequently sectioned into
20 mm segments, washed with saline and transferred to a modiﬁed PE-50 catheter with a tip diameter of 0.3 mm for injection.
The modiﬁed PE-50 tube with the 20 mm clot (5 lL) was connected to a modiﬁed PE-10 catheter and was then advanced 15–
17 mm into the internal carotid artery until its tip was 1–2 mm
away from the origin of the MCA. Then the preformed clot was
injected in the catheter, and the catheter was removed. Finally,
the wound was closed, and the animal was returned to its cage.
Experimental design

backed paper dots of equal size (113.1 mm2) were used as bilateral tactile stimuli occupying the distal–radial region on the wrist
of each forelimb. The time it took to remove each stimulus from
the forelimbs was recorded on ﬁve trials per day. Individual trials
were separated by at least 5 min. Prior to surgery, the animals
were trained for 3 days. Once they were able to remove the dots
within 10 s, the rats were subjected to MCAO.
In all animals motor deﬁcits were assessed by an investigator
blind to the experimental groups both before MCAO and at 6 h,
24 h, 48 h, 72 h and 7 days after MCAO. A modiﬁcation of the
Bederson scale was used in order to score motor deﬁcits.50 Scoring was as follows: 0, no observable deﬁcit; 1, forelimb ﬂexion;
2, forelimb ﬂexion plus decreased resistance to lateral push; 3,
unidirectional circling; and 4, unidirectional circling plus
decreased level of consciousness.
Histological analyses and tissue processing
Ketamine (44 mg/kg) and xylazine (13 mg/kg) were used to deeply anaesthetize animals at 7 days post MCAO and animals were
perfused with 250 mL of NaCl (0.09%) (4°C) followed by
500 mL of 4% paraformaldehyde (4°C) in 0.1 mol/L phosphate
buffer saline (PBS, pH 7.4)23. The brain was rapidly dissected
out and post-ﬁxed in the same ﬁxative for 24 h at 4°C. The brain
tissue was cut into seven equally spaced (2 mm) coronal slices.
Specimens were processed in a citadel 2000 tissue processor
(Shandon) and embedded in parafﬁn wax.
Tissue staining

After MCA occlusion (MCAO), the rats were subdivided into
one of several experimental treatment groups:
1. Injured + vehicle treatment at 24 h after MCAO: 1 mL of
PBS was injected into the tail vein (n = 12).
2. Injured + BMSC treatment at 24 h after MCAO: 3 9 106
BMSCs in 1 mL of PBS were injected into the tail vein of each
rat29,30 (n = 12).
3. Injured + BMSCs labelled with BrdU treatment at 24 h after
MCAO: 3 9 106 BrdU labelled BMSCs in 1 mL of PBS were
injected into the tail vein of each rat (n = 4).

Parafﬁn-embedded brain slices were sectioned (slice thickness,
5 lm), placed on glass slides and stained with haematoxylin
and eosin in order to analyze the lesion. A Scan Jet (HewlettPackard Palo Alto, USA) ﬂatbed scanner was used for section
scanning. The images were analyzed with Motic image processing software.51 The total volume of infarction was determined
by integrating eight chosen sections. In this study, the infarct
size was expressed as a percentage of the total size of the ipsilateral hemisphere. The infarct volume was calculated using the
following formula:
Infarct volume ¼ ½volume of left hemisphere

Transplantation procedures
All transplantation procedures were performed under aseptic conditions. Randomly selected animals underwent transplantation at
24 h after MCAO. Animals were anaesthetized29,30 and a constant ﬂow of oxygen was supplied through a face mask. Approximately 3 9 106 BMSCs (3rd–5th passage) in 1 mL PBS were
injected into the tail vein. BMSCs were infused at 0.1 mL/min
through an infusion pump. In control animals, the same volume
(1 mL) of PBS was injected into a tail vein at 24 h after stroke.
Immunosuppressants were not used in any animals.

Neurological functional tests
An investigator who was blind to the experimental groups
assessed somatosensory deﬁcits pre-MCAO and at 1 and 7 days
post-MCAO. All rats were ﬁrst familiarized with the testing environment.29,30,49 In the initial tests, two small pieces of adhesive-

 ðvolume of right hemisphere
 measured infarct volumeÞ=
volume of left hemisphere:

BrdU immunostaining
Sections were ﬁxed with 4% PFA for 5 min. After one PBS
rinse, tissue sections were permeabilized with 0.3% Triton in
PBS for 15 min at RT. They were then rinsed 3 9 5 min in
PBS at 37°C, and further incubated in 2N HCl for 30 min at
37°C followed by 0.1 mol/L Na Tetraborate (pH 8.5) for 10 min
at 37°C. After three PBS rinses, sections were incubated in a
blocking buffer (1% BSA, 10% goat normal serum and 0.3%
Triton X-100 in PBS) for 1 h, and thereafter overnight at 4°C in
BrdU antibody diluted in the blocking buffer (now containing

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

Cell proliferation after stroke
3% normal goat serum). After three PBS rinses, the sections
were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody (1 : 200
dilution; Invitrogen) for 1 h at RT. Reaction product was
detected using 30 ,30 -diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB).
Negative controls were obtained by omission of the primary antibody. For quantitative measurements of the number of BMSCs
inserted in the ischemic brain, the total numbers of BrdU–
BMSCs both in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres were
counted.

1165

sity. The IBZ was subdivided into eight ﬁelds54 and was
imaged with a LEICA CME Light Microscope using an INFINITY Lite camera interfaced with a MCID using the INFINITY
CAPTURE application software. The total number of vessels
was divided by the total tissue-area to determine vascular density. Using the MCID imaging analysis system the area of aSMA-artery (mean diameter ≥ 10 lm) located in the IBZ was
measured in each section. The data are provided as the averaged
area from the eight ﬁelds and as the number of a-SMA-vessels
per mm2.

BrdU immunohistochemical assessment
Cerebral tissue was cut into 5 mm coronal parafﬁn blocks. A series of 6 lm-thick sections was generated at various levels
(50 lm intervals) from this block.52 Analysis of BrdU-positive
cells was based on the evaluation of an average of 10 histology
slides per brain. All BrdU-reactive cells, with BrdU clearly localized to the nucleus, were counted throughout all 10 coronal sections.52 The number of counted cells was then expressed as a
percentage of the total number of injected cells. The ischemic
core and its border zone were subdivided into eight ﬁelds and
were imaged with a LEICA CME Light Microscope using an
INFINITY Lite camera interfaced with a Micro Computer Imaging Device (MCID) using the INFINITY CAPTURE application
software.
Immunohistochemical assessment
A standard parafﬁn block was obtained from the centre of the
lesion (bregma  1 to + 1 mm)53 and 6-lm thick sections were
cut from the block. Every tenth coronal section, for a total of ﬁve
sections, was used for immunohistochemical staining. Antibodies
against: Alpha smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), a marker of
smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and pericytes45,54,55 (1 : 800 dilution; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark); Ki-67, a marker of proliferating
cells56 (1 : 300 dilution, Santa Cruz, Dallas, USA); NSE (neuron-speciﬁc enolase), a marker of the c-subunit of enolase present
mainly in neurons25 (1 : 100 dilution; Santa Cruz) and GFAP, a
marker of astrocytes56 (1 : 250 dilution; Santa Cruz), were used
for immunostaining. Tissue sections were ﬁxed with 4% PFA for
5 min, and then incubated in a 0.3% H2O2 solution in PBS for
20 min at RT to reduce endogenous peroxide activity. Sections
were then blocked in 3% normal serum and 1% BSA solution in
PBS + 0.2% triton for 1 h in order to prevent nonspeciﬁc binding. Sections were then incubated overnight at RT with the primary antibody. After three PBS rinses, they were incubated with
their respective secondary biotinylated antibodies (Invitrogen)
diluted in PBS with 1% BSA and 2% rat serum, for 1 h at RT.
Then sections were incubated 1 h with the avidin–biotin-peroxides complex (1 : 1000 dilution, Invitrogen), and the immunostaining was visualized with DAB. Control experiments involved
staining brain coronal tissue sections as outlined above, except
with the omission of the primary antibody.
Arteriolar density and area measurement
The total number of small diameter vessels of ﬁve slices from
the standard reference coronal section of each brain was digitized under a 910 objective for quantiﬁcation of vascular den-

Tissue damage evaluation and cell quantiﬁcation
The extent of tissue damage was evaluated on NSE-labelled tissue sections using INFINITY CAPTURE software, Lumenera
Co., Ottawa, Canada. An antibody against GFAP was used for
counting the number of reactive astrocytes. In order to analyze
SVZ cell proliferation, SVZ cells immunoreactive for Ki-67 were
counted. Quantiﬁcation was performed by ﬁrst subdividing the
brain sections on the side ipsilateral to stroke into eight ﬁelds,
starting from the SVZ up to the IBZ. Immunoreactive cells were
counted using a computerized non-biased setup for quantiﬁcation
driven by INFINITY CAPTURE software and a LEICA CME
light microscope (Leica Wetzlar, Germany). The optical fractionator method was used for quantifying the number of neuroblasts (Ki-67), reactive astrocytes (GFAP) and injured axons
(NSE).
Statistical analysis
Results are expressed as mean  SEM. Comparisons were made
using Student’s t test for unpaired observations. A probability
value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by a grant from the Electrophysiology
Research Centre of Neuroscience Institute of Tehran University
of Medical Sciences.

DISCLOSURE
The authors have no conﬂict of interests.

REFERENCES
1. Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M, Davis SM. Stroke. Lancet
2008; 371: 1612–23.
2. Sims NR, Muyderman H. Mitochondria, oxidative metabolism and
cell death in stroke. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2010; 1802: 80–91.
3. Yoo J, Seo JJ, Eom JH, Hwang DY. Enhanced recovery from
chronic ischemic injury by bone marrow cells in a rat model of
ischemic stroke. Cell Transplant. 2015; 24:167–82.
4. Chen J, Chopp M. Neurorestorative treatment of stroke: Cell and
pharmacological approaches. NeuroRx 2006; 3: 466–73.
5. Dharmasaroja P. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells for
the treatment of ischemic stroke. J. Clin. Neurosci. 2009; 16: 12–20.
6. Narasipura SD, Wojciechowski JC, Charles N, Liesveld JL, King
MR. P-Selectin coated microtube for enrichment of CD34+
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from human bone marrow.
Clin. Chem. 2008; 54: 77–85.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

1166

G Pirzad Jahromi et al.

7. Liu WG, Wang ZY, Huang ZS. Bone marrow-derived mesenchymal
stem cells expressing the bFGF transgene promote axon regeneration
and functional recovery after spinal cord injury in rats. Neurol. Res.
2011; 33: 686–93.
8. Terai S, Ishikawa T, Omori K et al. Improved liver function in
patients with liver cirrhosis after autologous bone marrow cell infusion therapy. Stem Cells 2006; 24: 2292–8.
9. Subrammaniyan R, Amalorpavanathan J, Shankar R et al. Application of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cells in six patients
with advanced chronic critical limb ischemia as a result of diabetes:
Our experience. Cytotherapy 2011; 13: 993–9.
10. Kastrup J. Stem cells therapy for cardiovascular repair in ischemic
heart disease: How to predict and secure optimal outcome? EPMA J.
2011; 2: 107–17.
11. De Feo D, Merlini A, Laterza C, Martino G. Neural stem cell transplantation in central nervous system disorders: From cell replacement to neuroprotection. Curr. Opin. Neurol. 2012; 25: 322–33.
12. Ramos-Cabrer P, Justicia C, Wiedermann D, Hoehn M. Stem cell
mediation of functional recovery after stroke in the rat. PLoS ONE
2010; 5: e12779.
13. Caplan AI, Dennis JE. Mesenchymal stem cells as trophic mediators.
J. Cell. Biochem. 2006; 98: 1076–84.
14. da Silva Meirelles L, Fontes AM, Covas DT, Caplan AI. Mechanisms involved in the therapeutic properties of mesenchymal stem
cells. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2009; 20: 419–27.
15. Uccelli A, Benvenuto F, Laroni A, Giunti D. Neuroprotective features of mesenchymal stem cells. Best Pract. Res. Clin. Haematol.
2011; 24: 59–64.
16. Van Poll D, Parekkadan B, Rinkes IB, Tilles A, Yarmush M. Mesenchymal stem cell therapy for protection and repair of injured vital
organs. Cell Mol. Bioeng. 2008; 1: 42–50.
17. Wislet-Gendebien S, Hans G, Leprince P, Rigo JM, Moonen G, Rogister B. Plasticity of cultured mesenchymal stem cells: Switch from
nestin-positive to excitable neuron-like phenotype. Stem Cells 2005;
23: 392–402.
18. Krampera M, Marconi S, Pasini A et al. Induction of neural-like differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells derived from bone
marrow, fat, spleen and thymus. Bone 2007; 40: 382–90.
19. Augello A, Kurth TB, De Bari C. Mesenchymal stem cells: A perspective from in vitro cultures to in vivo migration and niches. Eur.
Cell Mater. 2010; 20: 121–33.
20. Karussis D, Karageorgiou C, Vaknin-Dembinsky A et al. Safety and
immunological effects of mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in
patients with multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Arch. Neurol. 2010; 67: 1187–94.
21. Ma S, Xie N, Li W, Yuan B, Shi Y, Wang Y. Immunobiology of
mesenchymal stem cells. Cell Death Differ. 2014; 21: 216–25.
22. Pirzad Jahromi G, Seidi S, Sadr SS et al. Therapeutic effects of a
combinatorial treatment of simvastatin and bone marrow stromal
cells on experimental embolic stroke. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2012; 110: 487–93.
23. Albers GW, Easton JD, Sacco RL, Teal P. Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for ischemic stroke. Chest 1998; 114: 683S–98S.
24. Bharosay A, Bharosay VV, Varma M, Saxena K, Sodani A, Saxena
R. Correlation of brain biomarker neuron speciﬁc enolase (NSE)
with degree of disability and neurological worsening in cerebrovascular stroke. Indian J. Clin. Biochem. 2012; 27: 186–90.
25. Padalkar Ramchandra K, Bhagat MPSMD, Sonali S. Study of neuron–speciﬁc enolase as potential biomarker for assessing the severity
and outcome in patients with cerebrovascular accidents. Global J.
Med. Res. 2014; 14: 9–13.
26. Allen NJ, Barres BA. Neuroscience: Glia – more than just brain
glue. Nature 2009; 457: 675–7.
27. Sofroniew MV, Vinters HV. Astrocytes: Biology and pathology.
Acta Neuropathol. 2010; 119: 7–35.
28. Scholzen TGJ. The ki-67 protein: From the known and the
unknown. J. Cell. Physiol. 2000; 182: 311–22.

29. Chen J, Li Y, Katakowski M et al. Intravenous bone marrow stromal cell therapy reduces apoptosis and promotes endogenous cell
proliferation after stroke in female rat. J. Neurosci. Res. 2003; 73:
778–86.
30. Chen J, Li Y, Wang L et al. Therapeutic beneﬁt of intravenous
administration of bone marrow stromal cells after cerebral ischemia
in rats. Stroke 2001; 32: 1005–11.
31. Gutierrez-Fernandez M, Rodrıguez-Frutos B, Ramos-Cejudo J et al.
Effects of intravenous administration of allogenic bone marrow-and
adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells on functional recovery and brain repair markers in experimental ischemic stroke. Stem
Cell Res. Ther. 2013; 4(1): 11.
32. Chen CH, Toung TJ, Sapirstein A, Bhardwaj A. Effect of duration
of osmotherapy on blood–brain barrier disruption and regional
cerebral edema after experimental stroke. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 2006; 26: 951–8.
33. Hawkins BT, Egleton RD. Pathophysiology of the blood–brain barrier: Animal models and methods. Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 2008; 80:
277–309.
34. Persidsky Y, Ramirez SH, Haorah J, Kanmogne GD. Blood–brain
barrier: Structural components and function under physiologic and
pathologic conditions. J. Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2006; 1: 223–36.
35. Bhakta S, Hong P, Koc O. The surface adhesion molecule CXCR4
stimulates mesenchymal stem cell migration to stromal cell-derived
factor-1 in vitro but does not decrease apoptosis under serum deprivation. Cardiovasc. Revasc. Med. 2006; 7: 19–24.
36. Pavlichenko N, Sokolova I, Vijde S et al. Mesenchymal stem cells
transplantation could be beneﬁcial for treatment of experimental
ischemic stroke in rats. Brain Res. 2008; 1233: 203–13.
37. Villars F, Bordenave L, Bareille R, Amedee J. Effect of human
endothelial cells on human bone marrow stromal cell phenotype:
Role of VEGF? J. Cell. Biochem. 2000; 79: 672–85.
38. Rezaee F, Rellick SL, Piedimonte G et al. Neurotrophins regulate
bone marrow stromal cell IL-6 expression through the MAPK pathway. PLoS ONE 2010; 5: e9690.
39. Li Q, Turdi S, Thomas DP, Zhou T, Ren J. Intra-myocardial delivery of mesenchymal stem cells ameliorates left ventricular and cardiomyocyte contractile dysfunction following myocardial infarction.
Toxicol. Lett. 2010; 195: 119–26.
40. Zhen G, Xue Z, Zhao J et al. Mesenchymal stem cell transplantation
increases expression of vascular endothelial growth factor in papaininduced emphysematous lungs and inhibits apoptosis of lung cells.
Cytotherapy 2010; 12: 605–14.
41. Caplan A. Why are MSCs therapeutic? New data: New insight. J.
Path. 2009; 217: 318–24.
42. Van Royen N, Piek JJ, Buschmann I, Hoefer I, Voskuil M, Schaper
W. Stimulation of arteriogenesis; a new concept for the treatment of
arterial occlusive disease. Cardiovasc. Res. 2001; 49: 543–53.
43. Dringen R, Pfeiffer B, Hamprecht B. Synthesis of the antioxidant
glutathione in neurons: Supply by astrocytes of CysGly as precursor
for neuronal glutathione. J. Neurosci. 1999; 19: 562–9.
44. Anderson MF, Blomstrand F, Blomstrand C, Eriksson P, Nilsson M.
Astrocytes and stroke: Networking for survival?. Neurochem. Res.
2003; 28: 293–305.
45. Cui X, Chopp M, Zacharek A et al. Chemokine, vascular and therapeutic effects of combination Simvastatin and BMSC treatment of
stroke. Neurobiol. Dis. 2009; 36: 35–41.
46. Quertainmont R, Cantinieaux D, Botman O, Sid S, Schoenen J,
Franzen R. Mesenchymal stem cell graft improves recovery after
spinal cord injury in adult rats through neurotrophic and pro-angiogenic actions. PLoS ONE 2012; 7: e39500.
47. Shabanzadeh AP, Shuaib A, Wang CX. Reduction of ischemic brain
injury in rats with normothermic and hyperthermic conditions. J.
Neurosurg. 2008; 109: 522–9.
48. Shabanzadeh AP, Shuaib A, Wang CX. Simvastatin reduced
ischemic brain injury and perfusion deﬁcits in an embolic model of
stroke. Brain Res. 2005; 1042: 1–5.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

Cell proliferation after stroke
49. Zhang L, Chen J, Li Y, Zhang ZG, Chopp M. Quantitative measurement of motor and somatosensory impairments after mild (30 min)
and severe (2 h) transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. J.
Neurol. Sci. 2000; 174: 141–6.
50. Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski
H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: Evaluation of the model and
development of a neurologic examination. Stroke 1986; 17: 472–6.
51. Sadraie S, Kaka G, Moﬁd M, Torkaman G, Monfared MJ. Effects
of low intensity pulsed ultrasound on healing of denervated tibial
fracture in the rabbit. Iran. Red Crescent Med. J. 2011; 13: 34–41.
52. Bakhtiary M, Marzban M, Mehdizadeh M et al. Combination of
stem cell mobilized by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor and
human umbilical cord matrix stem cell: Therapy of traumatic brain
injury in rats. Iran. J. Basic Med. Sci. 2011; 14: 327–39.

1167

53. Paxinos G, Watson C. The Rat in Stereotaxic Coordinates. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, 1986.
54. Cui X, Chen J, Zacharek A, Roberts C, Savant-Bhonsale S, Chopp
M. Treatment of stroke with (Z)-1-[N-(2-aminoethyl)-N-(2-ammonioethyl) amino] diazen-1-ium-1, 2-diolate and bone marrow stromal
cells upregulates angiopoietin-1/Tie2 and enhances neovascularization. Neuroscience 2008; 156: 155–64.
55. Cui X, Chopp M, Zacharek A, Zhang C, Roberts C, Chen J. Role
of endothelial nitric oxide synthetase in arteriogenesis after stroke in
mice. Neuroscience 2009; 159: 744–50.
56. Shena LH, Lia Y, Chopp M. Astrocytes mediate bone marrow stromal cell transplantation enhanced glial cell derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) production in the ischemic boundary zone after stroke
in adult rats. Glia 2010; 58: 1074–81.

© 2015 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd

