Brief Communication

Progesterone reduces brain
mitochondrial dysfunction after transient
focal ischemia in male and female mice

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism
2016, Vol. 36(3) 562–568
! Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0271678X15610338
jcbfm.sagepub.com

Pauline Gaignard1,2, Magalie Fréchou1, Michael Schumacher1,
Patrice Thérond2, Claudia Mattern3, Abdelhamid Slama2 and
Rachida Guennoun1

Abstract
This study investigated the effect of intranasal administration of progesterone on the early brain mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction and oxidative damage after transient middle cerebral occlusion in male and female mice. We
showed that progesterone (8 mg/kg at 1 h post-middle cerebral occlusion) restored the mitochondrial reduced glutathione pool and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-linked respiration in both sexes. Progesterone also reversed the
decrease of the flavin adenine dinucleotide-linked respiration, which was only observed in females. Our findings point to
a sex difference in stroke effects on the brain respiratory chain and suggest that the actions of progesterone on
mitochondrial function may participate in its neuroprotective properties.

Keywords
Mitochondria, oxidative phosphorylation, oxidative stress, progesterone, sex difference
Received 5 June 2015; Revised 3 August 2015; Accepted 21 August 2015

Introduction
Neuroprotective approaches by progesterone are a promising way to reduce lesion volume and improve functional outcome after stroke. Progesterone has pleiotropic
eﬀects, and some targets have already been identiﬁed such
as inﬂammation, edema or apoptotic gene expression.1
We postulated that the mitochondrial respiratory chain
(RC) and oxidative stress could be targets of progesterone
or its metabolites and of their neuroprotective eﬀects after
cerebral ischemia. Indeed, RC impairments are centrally
involved in ischemia-induced cell death. The large reduction of blood ﬂow during ischemia limits the availability
of glucose and oxygen, which reduces the activity of the
oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) and leads
to a lack of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Moreover, as
a principal generator of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
RC largely participates in the reperfusion-induced injury.2
Progesterone has been shown to enhance brain mitochondrial energy metabolism and to decrease oxidative stress
in ovariectomized rats3 and reversed the decrease of mitochondrial respiration rate following traumatic brain
injury (TBI).4

Increasing evidence indicates that sex inﬂuences not
only the incidence but also the physiopathological mechanisms of stroke.5 Therefore, taking the sex eﬀect into
account in experimental studies is essential, especially as
sex-dependent diﬀerences have been described in brain
mitochondrial function.6
The aim of this study was to evaluate the eﬀect of
intranasal progesterone administration on mitochondrial RC function and oxidative stress after a transient
focal cerebral ischemia in males and females.

1

U1195 Inserm and University Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France
Biochemistry Laboratory, Bicêtre Hospital, Assistance-Publique
Hôpitaux de Paris, University Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre Cedex,
France
3
M et P Pharma AG, Emmetten, Switzerland
2

Corresponding author:
Rachida Guennoun, U 1195 Inserm and University Paris-Sud, 80 rue du
Général Leclerc, 94276 Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
Email: rachida.guennoun@inserm.fr

Gaignard et al.

Materials and methods
Animals and middle cerebral occlusion
Three-month-old female and male C57BL6J mice
(Janvier, le Genest-Saint-Isle, France) were housed in
a temperature-controlled room on a 12-h light, 12-h
dark cycle. The estrus cycle was assayed by vaginal
smear examination over 10 days to check cycling regularity. The classiﬁcation was proestrus, estrus, metestrus and diestrus. Females in the diestrus stage on the
day of the experiment were selected.
One-hour middle cerebral occlusion (MCAO) followed by reperfusion was realized according to
Frechou et al.7 The criterion of exclusion was a
decrease of blood ﬂow less than 50%. On this basis,
no animals were excluded. Sham-operated mice underwent the same surgical procedure except that no ﬁlament was inserted. Experimenters were blinded to the
experimental conditions of mice. Mice were randomly
and blindly assigned to either progesterone (8 mg/kg in
oleogel), or vehicle-treated (oleogel) groups (n ¼ 5/
group). Administrations were performed intranasally
immediately on reperfusion. This formulation of progesterone is eﬃcient to rapidly deliver progesterone to
blood and brain (13  2.5% and 9.5  0.9% of the initial dose respectively after 10 min of administration),
and the reached brain levels did not vary signiﬁcantly
over time (2–120 min).8

Ethical statement
Procedures concerning animal care and use were
carried out in accordance with national guidelines
(authorization 94-345 to R.G., animal facility approval
94-043-13), French ethical laws (Act 87-848 and
Act 2013-11) and European Communities Council
Directive (86/609/EEC); and have been approved by
the ethical committee of French Ministry of Higher
Education and Research C2EA-26 (project 2014_029).
All experiments were performed following the
ARRIVE guidelines (www.nc3rs.org.uk).

Isolation of mitochondria-enriched fraction
Mice were decapitated 6 h after MCAO (i.e. 5 h after reperfusion), and the forebrain minus the cerebellum was rapidly dissected on ice. The mitochondria-enriched fraction
was immediately isolated from the freshly dissected ischemic (ipsilateral) and contralateral hemispheres.6 Based on
the cytochrome c oxidase (also called complex IV, CIV)
activity pelleted in the mitochondrial fraction, the yield was
46%  7% of total mitochondria. Only 1.9  0.3% of the
total activity of CIV in presence of 2.5 mM laurylmaltoside
was measured in the absence of this detergent, indicating
that the mitochondrial outer membrane was intact.

563
The purity of the mitochondrial fraction (75  3%) was
evaluated by the percentage of a cytosolic enzyme activity
(the lactate dehydrogenase, LDH) in the mitochondrial
pellet fraction. The purity and yield of mitochondria isolation were consistent between contralateral and ischemic
hemispheres (T test, p > 0.05) and similar in all individual
mouse preparations (ANOVA, p > 0.05).

Mitochondrial oxygen consumption
Mitochondrial oxygen consumption was measured
polarographically in the freshly prepared mitochondriaenriched fraction.6 The rate of oxygen consumption
was calculated from the slope of the response of mitochondria to the successive administration of substrates
and expressed as nmol O2/min/mg protein.

Enzymatic activities
RC complexes (CI, CII, CIII and CIV), LDH, isocitrate
dehydrogenase (IDH), a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
(AKGDH), malate dehydrogenase (MDH) and pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc) activities were
spectrophotometrically measured at 37 C.6 All enzymatic activities were expressed as nmol/min/mg protein.

RC complexes quantity and integrity
Blue-Native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis followed by Western-Blot analysis was performed on a
part of mitochondria-enriched fraction.9 Solubilized
OXPHOS (5 mg) proteins were loaded on a 4–16% gradient acrylamide non-denaturing gel (Invitrogen, CA,
USA). Immunoblotting was performed with monoclonal antibodies (Abcam, MA, USA) against CI (subunit
GRIM19, 1:1200), CII (subunit SDHA, 1:2400), CIII
(subunit UQCRC2, 1: 3000) or CIV (subunit MT-CO1,
1:2000). The secondary antibody was a peroxidaseconjugated anti-mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG)
(1:4000, Sigma, MO, USA). Signals were detected using
an Amersham ECL plus revelation kit (GE Healthcare,
NJ, USA) with a G:BOX Chemi system (Syngene, MD,
USA). Quantiﬁcation was performed using ImageJ software (NIH, MD, USA).

Oxidative stress markers
Reduced glutathione (GSH) and oxidized glutathione
(GSSG) concentrations were measured by reverse phase
HPLC coupled with electrochemical detection.6 Limits of
quantiﬁcation were 0.6 mM for GSH and 0.9 mM
for GSSG. Activities of the mitochondrial tricarboxylic
acid (TCA) cycle enzymes aconitase and fumarase were
spectrophotometrically measured, and the ratio of the
activities of aconitase to fumarase was calculated.6

564
A decrease of the aconitase to fumarase activity ratio is a
functional indicator of ROS production: the iron–sulfur
cluster in the catalytic site of aconitase renders it very susceptible to inactivation by ROS whereas the activity of
fumarase is ROS-insensitive.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)

Statistical analysis
For each analysis, the ratio between the ipsilateral and
the contralateral hemisphere was calculated. Data were
expressed as mean  SEM and were analyzed by a commercially available program (GraphPad Prism 4.01,

Figure 1. Brain mitochondrial oxidative stress markers in three-month-old male and female mice: effect of 1-h MCAO and intranasal
progesterone administration. (a) Mitochondrial reduced glutathione (GSH) concentration and (b) aconitase to fumarase activity ratio.
Mitochondria were isolated 6 h after transient MCAO (i.e. 5 h after reperfusion), from ischemic and contralateral hemispheres. The
experimental groups were: Sham operation (Sham), MCAO þ placebo administration (MCAO), and MCAO þ progesterone administration (MCAO þ Prog).
Results are expressed in (a) as nmol/mg protein (GSH) and in (b) as a ratio of aconitase to fumarase activity and the ratio between
ischemic to contralateral hemispheres were calculated for each animal. Data represent the mean  SEM of the ratio ipsilateral/
contralateral (n ¼ 5 animals per group).
*Sham versus MCAO (*p < 0.05); $ MCAO versus MCAOþProg ($p < 0.05).

Gaignard et al.

565

Figure 2. Brain oxidative phosphorylation system function in three-month-old male and female mice: effect of 1-h MCAO and
intranasal progesterone administration. (a) NADH-linked stimulated respiration was measured by addition of pyruvate-malate þ ADP.
The pyr þ ADP oxidation rate depends on the activities of PDHc, TCA cycle enzymes, CI, CIII and CIV and on the phosphorylating
(continued)

566

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)

Graphpad Inc., CA, USA). One-way ANOVA analysis
followed by Tukey post-hoc test was performed, and p
values < 0.05 were considered statistically signiﬁcant.

proton leak was not modiﬁed. Progesterone administration after MCAO signiﬁcantly increased pyr þ m-Cl-CCP
oxidation rate ( þ 44%, p < 0.05 in males; þ 30% in
females p < 0.01 versus MCAO) (Figure 2(b)).

Results
Mitochondrial oxidative stress

FADH2-linked respiration. Succinate oxidation rates were
not modiﬁed by ischemia and by progesterone treatment
in males. By contrast, succ þ ADP and succ þ m-Cl-CCP
oxidation rates decreased after MCAO in females (25%,
p < 0.05 and 36%, p < 0.05 versus Sham). Progesterone
restored succ þ m-Cl-CCP oxidation rate ( þ 29%,
p < 0.05 versus MCAO) (Figure 2(c)).

Ischemia reduced the GSH mitochondrial pool in males
and females (respectively23%, p < 0.05 and24%,
p < 0.05 versus Sham) and progesterone treatment
restored it ( þ 23%, p < 0.05 in males and þ 22%,
p < 0.05 in females versus MCAO) (Figure 1(a)).
Mitochondrial GSSG was below the limit of quantiﬁcation for all samples. Ischemia-induced oxidative damages in males and females as shown by a decrease of
the aconitase to fumarase activities ratio (respectively
19%, p < 0.05 in males and 34%, p < 0.05 in
females versus Sham). Progesterone did not signiﬁcantly re-establish a normal ratio ( þ 13%, p ¼ 0.09 in
males and þ 25%, p ¼ 0.07 in females versus MCAO)
(Figure 1(b)).

PDHc and TCA cycle enzymes
PDHc activity, the ﬁrst step of pyruvate oxidation, was
not signiﬁcantly modiﬁed by ischemia or by progesterone administration. No signiﬁcant eﬀects were
observed for IDH, AKGDH and MDH activities, the
TCA cycle enzymes involved in NADH/NAD recycling
(Figure 2(d)).

RC complexes
Mitochondrial respiration
Mitochondrial oxygen consumptions using pyruvate
(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide(NADH)-linked respiration) and succinate (ﬂavin adenine dinucleotide
(FADH2)-linked respiration) were measured with
adenosine diphosphate (ADP) (stimulation), oligomycin (ATP-synthase inhibitor) and m-chlorophenylhydrazone (m-Cl-CCP, uncoupler) (Figure 2(a)).
NADH-linked respiration. Pyr þ ADP and pyr þ m-ClCCP oxidation rates were signiﬁcantly decreased after
ischemia in males (45%, p < 0.01 and 54%, p < 0.01
versus Sham) and in females (27%, p < 0.05 and
32%, p < 0.01 versus Sham). Pyr þ oligo oxidation
rates were not aﬀected by ischemia, indicating that

In males, neither activity nor quantity and integrity
of the CI, CII, CIII and CIV were modiﬁed by ischemia
and by progesterone treatment. In females, the CII
activity decreased after MCAO (17%, p < 0.05
versus Sham), without change in CII quantity and
integrity. Progesterone treatment did not signiﬁcantly
restore C II activity ( þ 15% versus MCAO, p ¼ 0.09)
(Figure 2(e)).

Discussion
This is the ﬁrst study reporting the eﬀect of progesterone treatment on mitochondrial respiration and
oxidative stress after stroke. Intranasal administration
was used because of its eﬀective and easy way of

Figure 2. continued.
apparatus efficiency. The ATP synthase (or complex V) was then inhibited by the addition of oligomycin, to evaluate proton leakage
(pyr þ oligo). Uncoupled respiration was measured by the addition of m-chlorophenylhydrazone (pyr þ m-Cl-CCP). FADH2-linked
stimulated respiration was measured by addition of succinate in presence of ATP, rotenone (CI inhibitor) and ADP. The succ þ ADP
oxidation rate depends on the activities of CII, CIII and CIV and of the phosphorylating apparatus efficiency. The ATP synthase was
then inhibited (succ þ oligo) and m-Cl-CCP was added (succ þ m-Cl-CCP). (b) Oxygen consumption rates in presence of pyruvate
(NADH-linked respiration), (c) Oxygen consumption rates in presence of succinate (FADH2-linked respiration), (d) PDHc, IDH,
AKGDH and MDH activities and (e) RC complexes activities and expression. Mitochondria were isolated 6 h after transient MCAO
(i.e. 5 h after reperfusion), from ischemic and contralateral hemispheres. The experimental groups were: Sham operation (Sham),
MCAO þ placebo administration (MCAO) and MCAO þ progesterone administration (MCAO þ Prog).
Results are expressed as nmol O2/min/mg protein and the ratio between ischemic to contralateral hemispheres was calculated for
each animal. Data represent the mean  SEM of the ratio ipsilateral/contralateral (n ¼ 5 animals per group).
* Sham versus MCAO (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01); $ MCAO versus MCAO þ Prog ($p < 0.05, $$ p < 0.01).
MDH: malate dehydrogenase; PHDc: pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; IDH: isocitrate dehydrogenase; AKGDH: a-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase; ATP: adenosine triphosphate; FADH: Flavin adenine dinucleotide; NADH: nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide.

Gaignard et al.
administration, compatible with an emergency
exigency.7
GSH is the major anti-oxidant factor in brain. The
mitochondrial pool of GSH is crucial for neuronal survival, and is selectively decreased after ischemia.10 We
demonstrated that progesterone signiﬁcantly restores
the mitochondrial GSH pool 6 h after a transient ischemia in both males and females. This restoration could
contribute to limit oxidative damages, and consequently may increase neuronal survival.
Progesterone restores NADH-linked respiration in
males and in females. Only the uncoupled respiration
(pyr þ m-Cl-CCP) was enhanced by progesterone,
indicating that progesterone acts on the oxidative capacity of the RC rather than on the phosphorylating
apparatus. The exploration of the activity of the
enzymes involved in pyruvate oxidation and NADH/
NAD recycling showed no eﬀect of stroke or progesterone. Western-Blot analysis in non-denaturing conditions excluded a modiﬁcation of the integrity and
the quantity of the RC complexes. Taken together,
our ﬁndings suggest that ischemia-induced oxidative
stress may alter respirasome (supercomplexes I-IIIIV) assembly and that progesterone administration
preserves it. Indeed, NADH-linked electron ﬂux eﬃcacy also depends on the respirasome organization. In
addition, it has been proposed that this organization is
altered by oxidative stress.11 Indeed, in heart ischemia,
a decrease of the respiration was associated with a
modiﬁcation of the respirasome assembly without
change of enzymatic activities.12 The anti-oxidant
eﬀect of progesterone could protect mitochondrial
membrane from lipid peroxidation, as already
described for cell membrane lipid peroxidation,13
and preserve respirasome assembly after stroke.11
It has also been suggested in a model of TBI that
anti-oxidant progesterone properties is a potential
mechanism to explain the inﬂuence of progesterone
on mitochondrial respiration.4
Our study also points to a sex diﬀerence in the eﬀects
of stroke on mitochondrial respiration. The FADH2linked stimulated and uncoupled respirations were
decreased speciﬁcally in females, and this decrease can
be attributed to a downregulation of the CII activity. In
some tissues, the activity of CII has been shown to be
increased by the deacetylase NAD-dependent Sirtuin 3
and the Fgr-kinase; and both systems can be stimulated
by oxidative stress.14–16 Nevertheless, most of the studies were performed in males. We could postulate that
a sex diﬀerence in the activities of Sirtuin 3 or Fgrkinase after ischemia could be involved in the observed
dimorphic eﬀect. Interestingly, an interaction between
Sirtuin 3 and the poly-ADP-ribose polymerase pathway
(PARP-1) was described in cortical neuron injury.14
PARP-1 is also a NAD-dependent enzyme and its

567
activation eﬀect showed a well-described sex diﬀerence
in stroke.5 In addition, we showed that progesterone
fully rescues the uncoupled FADH2-linked respiration.
The precise mechanism remains to be determined, as
progesterone has only a slight and statistically not signiﬁcant eﬀect on CII activity. Eﬀects of progesterone on
other targets (the quinone pool, assembly of the supercomplex III2-IV1-2) could be potential mechanisms.
The beneﬁcial eﬀects of post-ischemia progesterone
administration were most exclusively demonstrated in
males. Except one study which showed that progesterone acts diﬀerently on lesion volume and neurological
score in ageing and ovariectomized females.17 We
demonstrated a selective eﬀect of ischemia and progesterone treatment on FADH2-linked respiration. This
observation may contribute to explaining sex diﬀerences in stroke outcome. Further studies are necessary
to determine the exact impact of hormonal status on
this sex diﬀerence.
In conclusion, our ﬁndings indicate that mitochondria constitute an essential target for the neuroprotective eﬀect of progesterone and emphasize the necessity
to include both males and females in experimental
models of stroke.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: This work was supported by Inserm and the Mattern
Foundation.

Acknowledgements
We thank F. Rousseau and Y. Sandre for their technical help.
We thank Dr. Krzysztof Rajowski for critical reading and
English editing of the manuscript.

Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Authors’ contributions
AS and RG contributed equally to this work. PG: conception
and design, experimental procedures, analysis and interpretation of the results, writing the article. MF: experimental procedures, analysis and interpretation of the results, critical
revision of the article. MS: obtained funding, analysis and
interpretation of the results, critical revision of the article.
PT: obtained funding, analysis and interpretation of the
results, critical revision of the article. CM: conception and
design, experimental procedures, critical revision of the article. AS: conception and design, analysis and interpretation of
the results, critical revision of the article. Overall responsibility. RG: conception and design, analysis and interpretation of
the results, critical revision of the article. Overall
responsibility.

568
References
1. Gibson CL, Coomber B and Rathbone J. Is progesterone a
candidate neuroprotective factor for treatment following
ischemic stroke? Neuroscientist 2009; 15: 324–332.
2. Sims NR and Muyderman H. Mitochondria, oxidative
metabolism and cell death in stroke. Biochim Biophys
Acta 2010; 1802: 80–91.
3. Irwin RW, Yao J, Hamilton RT, et al. Progesterone and
estrogen regulate oxidative metabolism in brain mitochondria. Endocrinology 2008; 149: 3167–3175.
4. Robertson CL, Puskar A, Hoffman GE, et al. Physiologic
progesterone reduces mitochondrial dysfunction and hippocampal cell loss after traumatic brain injury in female
rats. Exp Neurol 2006; 197: 235–243.
5. McCullough LD, Zeng Z, Blizzard KK, et al. Ischemic
nitric oxide and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 in cerebral ischemia: male toxicity, female protection. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2005; 25: 502–512.
6. Gaignard P, Savouroux S, Liere P, et al. Effect of sex differences on brain mitochondrial function and its suppression by ovariectomy and in aged mice. Endocrinology 2015;
156: 2893–2904.
7. Frechou M, Zhang S, Liere P, et al. Intranasal delivery of
progesterone after transient ischemic stroke decreases mortality and provides neuroprotection. Neuropharmacology
2015; 97: 394–403.
8. Ducharme N, Banks Wa, Morley JE, et al. Brain distribution and behavioral effects of progesterone and pregnenolone after intranasal or intravenous administration. Eur J
Pharmacol 2010; 641: 128–134.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)
9. Wittig I, Braun H-P and Schägger H. Blue native PAGE.
Nat Protoc 2006; 1: 418–428.
10. Anderson MF and Sims NR. The effects of focal ischemia
and reperfusion on the glutathione content of mitochondria from rat brain subregions. J Neurochem 2002; 81:
541–549.
11. Lenaz G, Baracca A, Barbero G, et al. Mitochondrial
respiratory chain super-complex I-III in physiology and
pathology. Biochim Biophys Acta 2010; 1797: 633–640.
12. Rosca MG, Vazquez EJ, Kerner J, et al. Cardiac mitochondria in heart failure: decrease in respirasomes and
oxidative phosphorylation. Cardiovasc Res 2008; 80:
30–39.
13. Aggarwal R, Medhi B, Pathak A, et al. Neuroprotective
effect of progesterone on acute phase changes induced by
partial global cerebral ischaemia in mice. J Pharm
Pharmacol 2008; 60: 731–737.
14. Kim SH, Lu HF and Alano CC. Neuronal sirt3 protects
against excitotoxic injury in mouse cortical neuron culture. PLoS One 2011; 6: e14731.
15. Acı́n-Pérez R, Carrascoso I, Baixauli F, et al. ROS-triggered phosphorylation of complex II by Fgr kinase regulates cellular adaptation to fuel use. Cell Metab 2014; 19:
1020–1033.
16. Cimen H, Han MJ, Yang Y, et al. Regulation of succinate dehydrogenase activity by SIRT3 in mammalian
mitochondria. Biochemistry 2010; 49: 304–311.
17. Gibson CL, Coomber B and Murphy SP. Progesterone is
neuroprotective following cerebral ischaemia in reproductively ageing female mice. Brain 2011; 134: 2125–2133.

