Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710
DOI 10.1007/s12975-014-0360-z

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Platelet Lysate and Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor Serve
Safe and Accelerated Expansion of Human Bone Marrow Stromal
Cells for Stroke Therapy
Tomohiro Yamauchi & Hisayasu Saito & Masaki Ito &
Hideo Shichinohe & Kiyohiro Houkin & Satoshi Kuroda

Received: 20 March 2014 / Revised: 29 June 2014 / Accepted: 14 July 2014 / Published online: 26 July 2014
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2014

Abstract Autologous human bone marrow stromal cells
(hBMSCs) should be expanded in the animal serum-free
condition within clinically relevant periods in order to secure
safe and effective cell therapy for ischemic stroke. This study
was aimed to assess whether the hBMSCs enhance their
proliferation capacity and provide beneficial effect in the
infarct brain when cultured with platelet lysate (PL) and
granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). The hBMSCs
were cultured in the fetal calf serum (FCS)-, PL-, or PL/GCSF-containing medium. Cell growth kinetics was analyzed.
The hBMSCs-PL, hBMSC-PL/G-CSF, or vehicle was stereotactically transplanted into the ipsilateral striatum of the rats
subjected to permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion 7 days
after the insult. Motor function was assessed for 8 weeks, and
the fate of transplanted hBMSCs was examined using immunohistochemistry. As the results, the hBMSCs-PL/G-CSF
showed more enhanced proliferation than the hBMSCs-FCS
and hBMSCs-PL. Transplantation of hBMSCs expanded with
the PL- or PL/G-CSF-containing medium equally promoted
functional recovery compared with the vehicle group. Histological analysis revealed that there were no significant differences in their migration, survival, and neural differentiation in
the infarct brain between the hBMSCs-PL and hBMSCs-PL/
G-CSF. These findings strongly suggest that the combination
of PL and G-CSF may accelerate hBMSC expansion and

T. Yamauchi : H. Saito : M. Ito : H. Shichinohe : K. Houkin :
S. Kuroda
Department of Neurosurgery, Hokkaido University Graduate School
of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan
S. Kuroda (*)
Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan
e-mail: skuroda@med.hokudai.ac.jp

serve safe cell therapy for patients with ischemic stroke at
clinically relevant timing.
Keywords Bone marrow stromal cell . Cell therapy .
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) . Ischemic
stroke . Platelet lysate

Introduction
The bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) are believed as one
of promising donor cells to enhance functional recovery after
ischemic stroke. They can be harvested from the patients
themselves without ethical or immunological problems. In
addition, they have no tumorigenesis [1–4]. When the BMSCs
are transplanted into the rodent model of ischemic stroke, they
aggressively migrate toward the infarct rim through the chemokine system and express the phenotype of neural cells,
yielding therapeutic effects on motor function within 1month posttransplantation. They may also prevent excessive
inflammatory response and attenuate further tissue damage in
the infarct rim. Furthermore, the BMSCs release some neuroprotective molecules, including brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) and nerve cell growth factor (NGF), and ameliorate the neuronal damage in the host brain. Therefore, the
BMSCs may contribute to post-stroke functional recovery
through multiple mechanisms [3, 4].
However, several problems should be solved prior to clinical application of BMSC transplantation for ischemic stroke.
First of all, the quality of donor cells should strictly be controlled. Thus, the BMSCs harvested from the animals and
humans are cultured in the medium including fetal calf serum
(FCS) in the majority of animal experiments and even in some
of clinical trial [5–9]. However, the FCS may carry the potential risk of prion, viral, or zoonoses contamination and also
provoke immunological reactions against xenogenic serum

702

antigens. Recent studies have shown that human platelet
lysate (PL) may be a safe and effective substitute for FCS to
expand the human BMSCs (hBMSCs) to treat the disorders of
other organs and graft-versus-host disease. In fact, the
hBMSCs cultured with PL maintain their capacity of proliferation, migration, BDNF/NGF production, and neural differentiation. They significantly serve therapeutic effects when
transplanted into the infarct brain of rats [10–12].
Second, it is critical to transplant the donor cells into the
host brain within therapeutic time window after the onset of
ischemic stroke. Very recent study has shown that the beneficial effects of BMSC transplantation can be achieved when
they are engrafted within 4 weeks after the onset of cerebral
infarct in the rats [13]. However, in vitro cell expansion
usually requires at least 4 to 6 weeks to obtain efficient
number of autologous donor cells in previous clinical trials
[8, 9]. Especially, this issue is very serious when considering
clinical application of cell therapy for ischemic stroke, because the stem cells, including the BMSCs, suffer the effect of
aging and reduce their capacity of self-renewal and differentiation [14]. Therefore, it is quite important to develop novel
strategies to enhance biological features of the hBMSCs harvested from aged patients with ischemic stroke. Recent studies
have shown that granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF) would enhance the biological capacity of the BMSCs
from both young and aged rats [14, 15].
Based on these considerations, this study was aimed to
evaluate the hypothesis that the combination of PL and GCSF enhances in vitro proliferation of the hBMSCs and serve
beneficial effects on motor function when transplanted into
the infarct brain of rats.

Materials and Methods

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

(PBS). Cells were fed twice a week with fresh medium and
incubated until reaching 90 % confluence. At this time point,
the cultures were designed as P1. The hBMSCs were harvested after reaching 90 % confluence, passed by using 0.05 %
Trypsin-EDTA (Gibco) for 5 min at 37 °C, and replated for
expansion at a density of 1,500 cells/cm2. The adherent cells
were further passed three times.
Proliferation Kinetics
The hBMSC of three donors were cultured, using three different culture media. In the FCS group, the culture medium
contained Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium/low glucose
(D6046; Sigma-Aldrich), 1 % penicillin/streptomycin (P/S;
Sigma-Aldrich), and 10 % FCS (Fetal Bovine Serum Qualified; Gibco). In this study, pooled thrombocyte concentrates
were obtained from normal volunteers and were designed for
clinical use. The platelet lysate (PL) was prepared by
centrifuging at 200×g for 20 min. The platelet-rich plasma
was aliquoted into small portions, frozen at −80 °C, thus
obtaining PL, and thawed immediately before use. In the PL
group, the culture medium contained alpha-minimum essential medium (M0894; Sigma-Aldrich), 1 % P/S, 2 IU/ml
heparin (Mochida Pharmaceutical Co.), and 5 % PL. In the
PL+ G-CSF group, 0.1 μM of G-CSF was added to the culture
medium in the PL group.
At each passage, cumulative cell numbers were calculated
as described previously, using trypan blue [7]. The time taken
for the hBMSC culture to double in cell number (doubling
time) was calculated, using the following formula: doubling
time=(t2 −t1)×ln (n2)/ln (n2/n1), where t is consecutive time
points (days) and n is respective cell numbers at these time
points. The doubling time was determined from P2 to P4
where indicated. The cells harvested at P4 were used for
subsequent experiments.

Preparation and Culture of Human BMSC
Rat Permanent Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion Model
All experiments were approved by the Animal Studies Ethical
Committee of Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine. The human BMSCs (hBMSCs) of three donors were
purchased from Lonza Walkersville Inc. (Walkersville, USA).
Their age ranged from 22 to 25 years. According to the
manufacture’s manual, the vial of the frozen hBMSCs was
quickly thawed in a 37 °C water bath. Aseptically, the hBMSC
suspension was transferred to a 15-ml tube with 10 ml of
respective medium described below and was centrifuged at
200g for 5 min. After the supernatant was carefully removed,
the cell number was counted. The hBMSCs were plated in
non-coated 75-cm2 culture flask (EasyFlask 159910; Nunc) at
a density of 1,500 cells/cm2. The hBMSCs were cultured in
the culture medium (see below) at 37 °C in a humidified
atmosphere containing 5 % CO2. After 48 h, the nonadherent cells were washed off with phosphate-buffered saline

Male 9-week-old SD rats (n=27) were purchased from CLEA
Japan, Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). Permanent middle cerebral artery
(MCA) occlusion was induced as described previously. Briefly, anesthesia was induced by 4.0 % isoflurane in N2O/O2
(70:30), and was maintained with 2.0 % isoflurane in N2O/O2
(70:30). Core temperature was maintained between 36.5 and
37.0 °C through the procedures. The bilateral common carotid
arteries (CCAs) were exposed through a ventral midline incision of the neck. Then, a 1.5-cm vertical skin incision was
performed between the right eye and ear. The temporal muscle
was scraped from temporal bone, and a 5×5-mm temporal
craniotomy was performed, using a small dental drill. To
prevent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, the dura mater
was carefully kept intact, and the right MCA was ligated using
a 10-0 nylon thread through the dura mater. Then, the cranial

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

window was closed with the temporal bone flap. The temporal
muscle and the skin were sutured with 4-0 nylon threads,
respectively. Subsequently, the bilateral CCAs were occluded
by surgical microclips for 1 h. Only animals that circled
toward the paretic side after surgery were included in this
study [10, 12, 16, 17].
Stereotactic Transplantation of hBMSC
The animals were randomly assigned, and the hBMSCs-PL,
hBMSCs-PL/G-CSF, or vehicle (n=9 in each group) was
stereotactically transplanted into the ipsilateral striatum at
7 days after the onset of permanent MCA occlusion, as described previously [10, 12, 16, 17]. Briefly, the animals were
fixed to a stereotactic apparatus, and the cranium was exposed
through midline skin incision. A burr hole was made 3 mm
right to the bregma, using a small dental drill. Both the
hBMSCs-PL and hBMSCs-PL/G-CSF were washed three
times and suspended in phosphate buffered saline. A 25-μL
Hamilton syringe with 23s gauge needle was inserted 5 mm
into the brain parenchyma from the surface of the dura mater,
and 10 μL of cell suspension (5.0×105 cells) or vehicle (PBS)
was introduced into the striatum over a period of 5 min, using
an automatic microinjection pump. All animals, including the
vehicle-treated animals, were treated with 10 mg/kg of cyclosporine A (Novartis Pharma, Tokyo, Japan) subcutaneously
every day after transplantation for 7 weeks. As reported previously, there were no obvious adverse effects of cyclosporine
A [12, 18].
Behavioral Test
Motor function of the animals was serially assessed before and
at 1, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, and 56 days after the onset of
ischemia, using a Rotarod treadmill. The Rotarod was set to
the acceleration mode from 4 to 40 rpm for 3 min. The
maximum time that the animal stayed on the Rotarod was
recorded for each performance, as described previously [10,
12, 16, 17]. The researchers were blinded to the study groups.

703

described [10, 12, 16, 17]. The deparaffinized sections were
processed through antigen retrieval for 2 min by pressure
pot. For blocking nonspecific immune reaction, the sections were treated with 10 % goat serum for 30 min. Each
section was treated with a primary mouse antihuman
nuclei monoclonal antibody (MAB 1281, dilution 1:100,
Chemicon), which is specific for all human cell types, at
4 °C overnight [12]. Then, the sections were treated with
a rhodamine-conjugated goat antimouse antibody (dilution 1:200, Chemicon) as the secondary antibody at room
temperature for 1 h. Subsequently, the sections were treated with primary mouse IgG antibodies, conjugated with
Zenon Alexa Fluor 488 (Mouse IgG Labeling Kit; Molecular Probes Inc.), against neuronal nuclear antigen
(NeuN, dilution 1:200, Chemicon) and glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP, dilution 1:500, Chemicon) at 4 °C
overnight. The fluorescence emitted was observed
through an appropriate filter on a fluorescence microscope
(BX61, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) and was digitally
photographed using a cooled charge-coupled device camera connected to the microscope (model VB-6000/6010;
Keyence Co., Osaka, Japan). To semiquantitatively determine the migratory capacity of the engrafted cells toward
the peri-infarct area, the number of the MAB 1281positive cells were counted in the randomly selected five
regions of interest (ROIs, 280×370 μm) placed on the
areas adjacent to cerebral infarct. To analyze their capacity of neural differentiation, the randomly selected five
ROIs were placed on the same areas, and the percentages
of the cells doubly positive for MAB 1281 and NeuN or
GFAP were calculated as described previously [19].
Statistical Analysis
All data were expressed as mean±standard deviation (SD).
Continuous data were compared, using a paired t test between
two groups and one-factor ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s
test among three groups. P<0.05 was considered statistically
significant.

Histological Analysis
At 7 weeks after transplantation, the animals were deeply
anesthetized with 4.0 % isoflurane in N2O/O2 (70:30) and
transcardially perfused. The brain was removed, immersed
in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 2 days, and embedded in paraffin. The 4-μm-thick coronal sections were prepared for subsequent analysis.
To compare the effect of hBMSC transplantation on infarct
volume among three experimental groups, the total volume of
cerebral infarct was calculated as described previously [12].
To evaluate the fate of the engrafted hBMSC, double fluorescence immunohistochemistry was performed, as previously

Results
Platelet Lysate and G-CSF Enhance hBMSC Proliferation
Figure 1 shows representative microphotographs of
hBMSCs when cultured with FCS, PL, and PL/G-CSF.
Although they exhibited the various morphologies, they
became comparatively homogeneous in appearance,
which was the relatively elongated and fibroblast-like
morphology under all culture conditions, as the cells were

704

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

Fig. 1 Photomicrographs of
human bone marrow stromal cells
(hBMSCs) cultured in the fetal
calf serum (FSC, a and d), platelet
lysate (PL, b and e), or PL plus
granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor (G-CSF, c and f). Scale
bar=200 μm

The hBMSCs Enhance Functional Recovery after Ischemic
Stroke

passed. There were no significant differences in their
morphology among three groups.
Figures 2 and 3 summarizes the cumulative cell numbers of
hBMSCs and their doubling time in each subject, respectively.
As the results, the cells cultured with PL showed more enhanced growth than did cells cultured with FCS in two of three
subjects at P4. On the other hands, the cells cultured with PL/
G-CSF showed more enhanced growth than did cells cultured
with PL in all three subjects at P4.

All animals survived throughout the experiment and were
used for subsequent analysis. As shown in Fig. 4, all
animals exhibited severe neurological deficit during
1 week after the onset of focal cerebral ischemia. Vehicle,
hBMSCs-PL, or hBMSCs-PL/G-CSF was stereotactically
transplanted at 7 days post-ischemia. There was no

Fig. 2 The graph shows the cumulative cell number of hBMSCs cultured
in FCS (black), PL (blue), or PL plus G-CSF (red). Each graph shows the
data from the hBMSCs harvested from three donors, including a 25-year-

old male (a), a 22-year-old male (b), and a 25-year-old female (c).
**P<0.01 compared with hBMSC-FCS group. ††P<0.01 compared
with hBMSC-PL group

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

705

Fig. 3 The bar graph shows the doubling time (DT, days) of hBMSCs
cultured in FCS (white column), PL (blue column), or PL plus G-CSF (red
column). Each graph shows the data from the hBMSCs harvested from
three donors, including a 25-year-old male (a), a 22-year-old male (b),

and a 25-year-old female (c). *P<0.05 compared with hBMSC-FCS
group. **P<0.01 compared with hBMSC-FCS group. †P<0.05 compared with hBMSC-PL group. ††P<0.01 compared with hBMSC-PL
group

significant difference in motor function among three
groups during 2 weeks after transplantation. Subsequently, the vehicle-transplanted animals did not show any
significant improvement of motor function until the endpoint. However, the hBMSCs-PL-treated animals showed
significantly enhanced functional recovery at 4 to 7 weeks
posttransplantation, when compared with the vehicletreated animals (P<0.01). Likewise, the hBMSCs-PL/GCSF-treated animals showed significantly enhanced functional recovery at 3 to 7 weeks posttransplantation, when
compared with the vehicle-treated animals (P < 0.05 at
3 weeks and P<0.01 at 4 to 7 weeks). There were no
significant difference in motor function between hBMSCPL group and hBMSC-PL/G-CSF group throughout the
experiment except for at 6 weeks posttransplantation
(P<0.05).

Histological Analysis

Fig. 4 Rotarod treadmill
performance. Line graph shows
temporal profile of functional
recovery in vehicle- (black),
hBMSC-PL- (blue), or hBMSCPL/G-CSF-transplanted (red) rats
subjected to permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO). **P<0.01 (hBMSCPL vs. vehicle). †P<0.05
(hBMSC-PL/G-CSF vs. vehicle)
††P<0.01 (hBMSC-PL/G-CSF
vs. vehicle)

To evaluate the effect of hBMSC transplantation on infarct
volume, the brains were perfused and removed at 7 weeks
posttransplantation. As a result, infarct volume was 23±
3.9 %, 23±3.5 %, and 23±4.9 % in the vehicle-, hBMSCPL-, and hBMSC-PL/G-CSF-treated animals, respectively
(n=9 in each group). There was no significant difference in
infarct volume among three groups.
Fluorescence immunohistochemistry was performed to
define the distribution and fate of engrafted hBMSCs in
infarct brain. The MAB1281-positive cells were densely
found in the peri-infarct area. The number of the
MAB1281- positive cells in the peri-infarct area were 2.1±
0.6×102 and 2.6±0.8×102/mm2 in the hBMSC-PL- and the
hBMSC-PL/G-CSF-transplanted animals, respectively (n=9

706

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

Fig. 5 Photomicrograph of double fluorescence immunohistochemistry,
using monoclonal 1281 (MAB1281, a and d) and neuronal nuclear
antigen (NeuN, b and e), in the peri-infarct area of hBMSC-PL/G-CSFtransplanted rats at 8 weeks after permanent middle cerebral artery
occlusion. The merged image (c and f) shows the cells with the nuclei
doubly positive for MAB1281 and NeuN (arrows). The white square in

panel c represents the location of panels d-f. Dotted line indicates the
border between cerebral infarct (left) and peri-infarct area (right). Panel g
represents the photomicrograph of negative control for MAB1281 immunostaining. Very bright red dots on panels a and g indicate autofluorescence from the necrotic cells. Scale bar=200 μm

in each group). There was no significant difference in their
number between two groups (Fig. 5a).
Double fluorescence immunohistochemistry was
employed to assess the fate of engrafted hBMSC in the
infract brain. The MAB1281-positive cells were also positive for NeuN or GFAP in the peri-infarct area at 7 weeks
after transplantation. The percentages of cells doubly

positive for MAB1281 and NeuN were 45.2 ± 23.4 %
and 48.4±20.5 % in the hBMSC-PL- and hBMSC-PL/
G-CSF-treated animals, respectively (n=9 in each group,
Figs. 5 and 6). Likewise, the percentages of cells doubly
positive for MAB1281 and GFAP were 24.3±14.4 % and
26.1±16.9 % in the hBMSC-PL- and hBMSC-PL/G-CSFtreated animals, respectively (n=9 in each group, Fig. 7).

Fig. 6 High-power
photomicrograph of double
fluorescence
immunohistochemistry, using
monoclonal 1281 (MAB1281, a
and d) and neuronal nuclear
antigen (NeuN, b and e), in the
peri-infarct area of hBMSC-PL(a-c) or hBMSC-PL/G-CSFtransplanted rats (d-f) at 8 weeks
after permanent middle cerebral
artery occlusion. The merged
image (c and f) shows some of
MAB1281-positive cells also
express NeuN. Scale bar=25 μm

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

707

Fig. 7 High-power
photomicrograph of double
fluorescence
immunohistochemistry, using
monoclonal 1281 (MAB1281, a
and d) and glial fibrillary acid
protein (GFAP, b and e), in the
peri-infarct area of hBMSC-PL(a-c) or hBMSC-PL/G-CSFtransplanted rats (d-f) at 8 weeks
after permanent middle cerebral
artery occlusion. The merged
image (c and f) shows some of
MAB1281-positive cells also
express GFAP. Scale bar=25 μm

As the results, there were no significant differences in the
capacity to differentiate into the neural cells between the
two groups.

Discussion
This study clearly shows that PL can be a clinically
valuable and safe substitute for FCS in expanding the
hBMSCs for cell therapy. Furthermore, the addition of
G-CSF into the PL-containing medium further accelerates
their proliferation activity. The hBMSCs-PL or hBMSCsPL/G-CSF yields almost same therapeutic effects when
stereotactically transplanted into the infarct brain. Animal
protein-free culture medium may promote the clinical
testing of hBMSC transplantation for patients with ischemic stroke, because the presence of FCS in the culture
medium was one of major obstacles for their clinical use.
The PL/G-CSF-containing culture medium may also enhance the in vitro growth of hBMSCs harvested from the
patients and shorten the interval between the onset of
ischemic stroke and cell therapy. This is the first study
to prove the possibility to provide safe and effective cell
therapy in a clinically relevant period after the onset of
ischemic stroke, using the hBMSCs cultured under animal
protein-free condition.
Platelet Lysate—An Alternative to Fetal Calf Serum
There are no significant differences in the cell morphology among FCS group, PL group, and PL+ G-CSF group.
The finding partly correlates with previous data from the
authors’ laboratory. Thus, the hBMSCs-FCS and
hBMSCs-PL were morphologically similar and expressed
identical phenotypic markers [11, 12]. Their production of

BDNF, NGF, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) did not
differ between two groups. Furthermore, the hBMSCs-PL
maintains their capacity of in vitro differentiation into the
neurons and astrocytes [11].
Previously, several investigators have performed similar
studies. Thus, Meuleman et al. (2006) cultured the hBMSCs
in a commercial serum-free medium (UC) supplemented with
a serum substitute (ULROSER) [20]. All of these studies have
suggested that these media may be suitable for clinical scale
expansion of hBMSCs. Subsequent studies have also revealed
that PL increases cumulative cell numbers after expansion and
maintain all biological features of hBMSCs, including plastic
adherence, spindle-shaped morphology, surface marker expression, and differentiation capacity to multiple lineages
[21–24]. In fact, both PL and platelet-rich plasma include
much higher concentrations of growth factors including
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) than FCS [25, 26].
Ng et al. (2008) have recently shown that PDGF signaling is
one of essential pathways for the growth and differentiation of
hBMSCs [27].
In spite of these biological analyses, however, there are few
studies that denote whether the hBMSCs can serve therapeutic
effects in animal model of neurological disorders when cultured with animal serum-free medium. The authors have previously shown that transplantation of hBMSCs expanded with
the FCS- or PL-containing medium equally promotes functional recovery compared with the vehicle group. Histological
analysis also revealed no significant differences in their migration, survival, and neural differentiation in the infarct brain
between hBMSC-FCS and hBMSC-PL groups [12]. Using a
7.0-T MR apparatus, they have also demonstrated that the
hBMSCs-PL maintain their migratory capacity toward cerebral infarct in the living rodents. Histological analysis also
revealed that the engrafted hBMSCs-PL acquired the phenotypes of neural cells in the peri-infarct area. These therapeutic
effects were identical to those obtained with hBMSCs-FCS

708

[10]. In this study, therefore, therapeutic effects on motor
function were not compared between the hBMSCs-FCS and
hBMSCs-PL (Fig. 4).
The human PL can easily be obtained from human
platelet concentrates after freeze/thaw process [12]. Previous studies have clearly shown that allogeneic human
PL allows expansion and clinical grade production of
hBMSCs from small samples of bone marrow aspirates
[28]. Therefore, it would be practical to culture the
hBMSC harvested from the patients themselves with the
autologous or allogeneic PL. Transplantation of syngeneic
cells would be ide al, but human BMSCs w ere
transplanted into the rat brain under the use of cyclosporine A in this study, because this study was aimed to assess
whether human PL can be the substitute for FCS in donor
cell culture.

G-CSF—An Effective Promoter for hBMSC Expansion
G-CSF is a 20-kDa glycoprotein that stimulates the proliferation, survival, and maturation of cells committed to
the neutrophil precursors and mature neutrophils through
binding to specific G-CSF receptors [29]. The BMSCs
highly express the G-CSF receptor and significantly enhance their proliferation capacity and growth factor production when cultured with 0.1 μM of G-CSF. FACS
analysis confirms that G-CSF significantly increases the
population of BMSCs in S phase [15]. Furthermore, GCSF significantly improves the proliferation capacity and
BDNF production of BMSCs isolated from the aged rats.
G-CSF also accelerates their survival and functional recovery after BMSC transplantation into the infarct brain
of rats [14]. These findings strongly suggest that G-CSF
may pharmacologically modify the biological features of
BMSCs and improve clinical results of BMSC transplantation for ischemic stroke. Furthermore, the proliferation
capacity and BDNF/NGF production of hBMSCs-PL are
quite similar to those of hBMSCs-FCS [11, 12].
In this study, therefore, G-CSF was added to the FCS-free,
PL-containing medium to assess whether a combination of PL
with G-CSF further enhance the proliferation activity of
hBMSCs. As the results, the hBMSCs-PL/G-CSF show an
increased cumulative cell number and decreased doubling
time, compared with the hBMSCs-FCS and hBMSCs-PL.
There are no previous studies that evaluate the effects of a
combination of PL with G-CSF on in vitro expansion of
hBMSCs. Previous study only revealed that the addition of
1-ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) to PLcontaining medium did not significantly accelerate the growth
of hBMSCs [24]. Therefore, this new protocol of hBMSC
culture with PL and G-CSF may serve accelerated and safe
expansion of hBMSCs for their clinical scale use.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

Clinical Application of Cell Therapy for Ischemic Stroke
The present findings may provide valuable information to the
investigators who are considering translational testing of
BMSC transplantation for patients with ischemic stroke. Thus,
there are still surprising discrepancies of the protocols between animal experiments and clinical trials. In most of animal experiments, the BMSCs are transplanted into the infarct
brain within 24 h after the onset. However, the BMSCs are
transplanted several weeks after the onset in a majority of
previous clinical trials, because the expansion of BMSCs
requires several weeks for clinical use. However, there are
few studies that assess whether the BMSCs significantly
enhance functional recovery when transplanted into the infarct
brain several weeks after the insult. When considering to
scientifically applying cell therapy into clinical situation, we
should learn from a history of clinical development of neuroprotective agents for acute ischemic stroke [3, 30]. Thus, a
large number of neuroprotective agents have shown significant effects in animal experiments, but failed to achieve beneficial results when brought forward into clinical development. Despite encouraging preclinical data, none of agents
was shown to improve outcome in phase III clinical trials.
These disappointing data may partially result from the lack of
the guideline concerning how to perform preclinical development of purported neuroprotective agents for acute ischemic
stroke. Based on these observations, the first Stroke Therapy
Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR) meeting was organized and published the recommendations for preclinical
stroke drug development in 1999 [31, 32]. The guideline
strongly recommends careful assessment of therapeutic time
window, that is, the interval after the onset of ischemia when
the drug can be successfully administered, to obtain positive
results in clinical trials. Subsequently, similar recommendation has also been published in the field of cell therapy for
stroke [33].
From this viewpoint, the present results strongly suggest
that a combination of PL with G-CSF may be one of the useful
strategies to enable BMSC transplantation in clinical situation
within effective therapeutic time window in animal experiments by accelerating their proliferation. In this study, the
hBMSCs were transplanted into the brain at 7 days after the
onset of ischemia because of the following reasons. First,
Hofstetter et al. (2002) transplanted the BMSCs into the
injured spinal cord and found that the BMSCs given 1 week
after injury led to significantly larger numbers of surviving
cells and better functional outcome than immediate treatment
[34]. Second, Baksi et al. reported that BMSC transplantation
within 14 days of injury provided significantly greater grafting
efficacy than more delayed delivery [35]. Kawabori et al. also
transplanted the BMSCs into the infarct brain at 4 weeks postischemia, and concluded that higher dose of donor cells required to yield therapeutic effects similar to BMSC

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710

transplantation at 1 week [13]. In addition, the hBMSCs were
obtained from young volunteers. Further studies would be
warranted to confirm the present results by using the cells
obtained from elder volunteers at higher risk for ischemic
stroke, because adult stem cells, including BMSCs, suffer
the effect of aging and reduce their self-renewal and differentiation capacity [14].

Conclusion
In this study, the combination of PL and G-CSF may accelerate in vitro expansion of hBMSCs under the condition without
animal serum and serve safe cell therapy for patients with
ischemic stroke at clinically relevant timing. The present
knowledge would promote the clinical testing of safe and
effective hBMSC transplantation for patients with ischemic
stroke in very near future.
Acknowledgments This study was supported by Grant-in-Aids from
the Ministry of Education, Science and Culture of Japan (No.21390400,
No.233390342 and No.25293305).
Conflict of Interest Tomohiro Yamauchi, Hisayasu Saito, Masaki Ito,
Hideo Shichinohe, Kiyohiro Houkin, and Satoshi Kuroda declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
Compliance with Ethics Requirements All institutional and national
guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals were followed.

References
1. Azizi SA, Stokes D, Augelli BJ, DiGirolamo C, Prockop DJ.
Engraftment and migration of human bone marrow stromal cells
implanted in the brains of albino rats–similarities to astrocyte grafts.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95:3908–13.
2. Kopen GC, Prockop DJ, Phinney DG. Marrow stromal cells migrate
throughout forebrain and cerebellum, and they differentiate into
astrocytes after injection into neonatal mouse brains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1999;96:10711–6.
3. Abe K, Yamashita T, Takizawa S, Kuroda S, Kinouchi H, Kawahara
N. Stem cell therapy for cerebral ischemia: from basic science to
clinical applications. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32:1317–31.
4. Kuroda S. Bone marrow stromal cell transplantation for ischemic
stroke—its multi-functional feature. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars).
2013;73:57–65.
5. Mazzini L, Ferrero I, Luparello V, Rustichelli D, Gunetti M,
Mareschi K, et al. Mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a phase I clinical trial. Exp Neurol.
2010;223:229–37.
6. Pal R, Venkataramana NK, Bansal A, Balaraju S, Jan M, Chandra R,
et al. Ex vivo-expanded autologous bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells in human spinal cord injury/paraplegia: a pilot
clinical study. Cytotherapy. 2009;11:897–911.
7. Zhang ZX, Guan LX, Zhang K, Zhang Q, Dai LJ. A combined
procedure to deliver autologous mesenchymal stromal cells to patients with traumatic brain injury. Cytotherapy. 2008;10:134–9.

709
8. Bang OY, Lee JS, Lee PH, Lee G. Autologous mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation in stroke patients. Ann Neurol. 2005;57:874–82.
9. Lee JS, Hong JM, Moon GJ, Lee PH, Ahn YH, Bang OY. A longterm follow-up study of intravenous autologous mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation in patients with ischemic stroke. Stem Cells.
2010;28:1099–106.
10. Ito M, Kuroda S, Sugiyama T, Shichinohe H, Takeda Y, Nishio M,
et al. Validity of bone marrow stromal cell expansion by animal
serum-free medium for cell transplantation therapy of cerebral infarct
in rats—a serial MRI study. Transl Stroke Res. 2011;2:294–306.
11. Shichinohe H, Kuroda S, Sugiyama T, Ito M, Kawabori M, Nishio M,
et al. Biological features of human bone marrow stromal cells
(hBMSC) cultured with animal protein-free medium—safety and
efficacy of clinical use for neurotransplantation. Transl Stroke Res.
2011;2:307–15.
12. Sugiyama T, Kuroda S, Takeda Y, Nishio M, Ito M, Shichinohe H,
et al. Therapeutic impact of human bone marrow stromal cells expanded by animal serum-free medium for cerebral infarct in rats.
Neurosurgery. 2011;68:1733–42.
13. Kawabori M, Kuroda S, Ito M, Shichinohe H, Houkin K, Kuge Y,
et al. Timing and cell dose determine therapeutic effects of bone
marrow stromal cell transplantation in rat model of cerebral infarct.
Neuropathology. 2013;33:140–8.
14. Chiba Y, Kuroda S, Osanai T, Shichinohe H, Houkin K, Iwasaki Y.
Impact of ageing on biological features of bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSC) in cell transplantation therapy for CNS disorders: functional
enhancement by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF).
Neuropathology. 2012;32:139–48.
15. Hokari M, Kuroda S, Chiba Y, Maruichi K, Iwasaki Y. Synergistic
effects of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor on bone marrow
stromal cell transplantation for mice cerebral infarct. Cytokine.
2009;46:260–6.
16. Kawabori M, Kuroda S, Sugiyama T, Ito M, Shichinohe H, Houkin
K, et al. Intracerebral, but not intravenous, transplantation of bone
marrow stromal cells enhances functional recovery in rat cerebral
infarct: an optical imaging study. Neuropathology. 2012;32:217–26.
17. Miyamoto M, Kuroda S, Zhao S, Magota K, Shichinohe H, Houkin
K, et al. Bone marrow stromal cell transplantation enhances recovery
of local glucose metabolism after cerebral infarction in rats: a serial
18F-FDG PET study. J Nucl Med. 2013;54:145–50.
18. Shichinohe H, Kuroda S, Lee JB, Nishimura G, Yano S, Seki T, et al.
In vivo tracking of bone marrow stromal cells transplanted into mice
cerebral infarct by fluorescence optical imaging. Brain Res Protocol.
2004;13:166–75.
19. Shichinohe H, Kuroda S, Yano S, Hida K, Iwasaki Y. Role of SDF-1/
CXCR4 system in survival and migration of bone marrow stromal
cells after transplantation into mice cerebral infarct. Brain Res.
2007;1183:138–47.
20. Meuleman N, Tondreau T, Delforge A, Dejeneffe M, Massy M,
Libertalis M, et al. Human marrow mesenchymal stem cell culture:
serum-free medium allows better expansion than classical alphaMEM medium. Eur J Haematol. 2006;76:309–16.
21. Lange C, Cakiroglu F, Spiess AN, Cappallo-Obermann H, Dierlamm
J, Zander AR. Accelerated and safe expansion of human mesenchymal stromal cells in animal serum-free medium for transplantation
and regenerative medicine. J Cell Physiol. 2007;213:18–26.
22. Schallmoser K, Bartmann C, Rohde E, Reinisch A, Kashofer K,
Stadelmeyer E, et al. Human platelet lysate can replace fetal bovine
serum for clinical-scale expansion of functional mesenchymal stromal cells. Transfusion. 2007;47:1436–46.
23. Zaky SH, Ottonello A, Strada P, Cancedda R, Mastrogiacomo M.
Platelet lysate favours in vitro expansion of human bone marrow
stromal cells for bone and cartilage engineering. J Tissue Eng Regen
Med. 2008;2:472–81.
24. Perez-Ilzarbe M, Diez-Campelo M, Aranda P, Tabera S, Lopez T, del
Canizo C, et al. Comparison of ex vivo expansion culture conditions

710

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2014) 5:701–710
of mesenchymal stem cells for human cell therapy. Transfusion.
2009;49:1901–10.
Doucet C, Ernou I, Zhang Y, Llense JR, Begot L, Holy X, et al.
Platelet lysates promote mesenchymal stem cell expansion: a safety
substitute for animal serum in cell-based therapy applications. J Cell
Physiol. 2005;205:228–36.
van den Dolder J, Mooren R, Vloon AP, Stoelinga PJ, Jansen JA.
Platelet-rich plasma: quantification of growth factor levels and the
effect on growth and differentiation of rat bone marrow cells. Tissue
Eng. 2006;12:3067–73.
Ng F, Boucher S, Koh S, Sastry KS, Chase L, Lakshmipathy U, et al.
PDGF, TGF-beta, and FGF signaling is important for differentiation
and growth of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs): transcriptional profiling can identify markers and signaling pathways important in
differentiation of MSCs into adipogenic, chondrogenic, and osteogenic lineages. Blood. 2008;112:295–307.
Capelli C, Domenghini M, Borleri G, Bellavita P, Poma R, Carobbio
A, et al. Human platelet lysate allows expansion and clinical grade
production of mesenchymal stromal cells from small samples of bone
marrow aspirates or marrow filter washouts. Bone Marrow
Transplant. 2007;40:785–91.
Welte K, Platzer E, Gabrilove JL, Lu L, Levi E, Polivka A, et al.
Purification to apparent homogeneity and biochemical characterization

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

of human pluripotent hematopoietic colony-stimulating factor.
Haematol Blood Transfus. 1985;29:398–401.
Kuroda S, Houkin K. Translational challenge for bone marrow
stromal cell therapy after stroke. Front Neurol Neurosci.
2013;32:62–8.
Savitz SI, Fisher M. Future of neuroprotection for acute stroke:
in the aftermath of the SAINT trials. Ann Neurol. 2007;61:396–
402.
Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable. Recommendations
for standards regarding preclinical neuroprotective and restorative
drug development. Stroke. 1999;30:2752–8.
The STEPS Participants. Stem Cell Therapies as an Emerging
Paradigm in Stroke (STEPS): bridging basic and clinical science
for cellular and neurogenic factor therapy in treating stroke. Stroke.
2009;40:510–5.
Hofstetter CP, Schwarz EJ, Hess D, Widenfalk J, El Manira A,
Prockop DJ, et al. Marrow stromal cells form guiding strands in the
injured spinal cord and promote recovery. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
2002;99:2199–204.
Bakshi A, Barshinger AL, Swanger SA, Madhavani V, Shumsky JS,
Neuhuber B, et al. Lumbar puncture delivery of bone marrow stromal
cells in spinal cord contusion: a novel method for minimally invasive
cell transplantation. J Neurotrauma. 2006;23:55–65.

