Original Article

Long-term dynamics of somatosensory
activity in a stroke model of distal middle
cerebral artery oclussion

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism
2016, Vol. 36(3) 606–620
! Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0271678X15606139
jcbfm.sagepub.com

Juan A Barios1, Liudmila Pisarchyk1, Laura Fernandez-Garcia1,
Luis C Barrio2, Milagros Ramos1,4, Ricardo Martinez-Murillo3
and Daniel Gonzalez-Nieto1,4

Abstract
A constant challenge in experimental stroke is the use of appropriate tests to identify signs of recovery and adverse
effects linked to a particular therapy. In this study, we used a long-term longitudinal approach to examine the functional
brain changes associated with cortical infarction in a mouse model induced by permanent ligation of the middle cerebral
artery (MCA). Sensorimotor function and somatosensory cortical activity were evaluated with fault-foot and forelimb
asymmetry tests in combination with somatosensory evoked potentials. The stroke mice exhibited both long-term
deficits in the functional tests and impaired responses in the infarcted and intact hemispheres after contralateral and
ipsilateral forepaw stimulation. In the infarcted hemisphere, reductions in the amplitudes of evoked responses were
detected after contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation. In the intact hemisphere, and similar to cortical stroke patients, a
gradual hyperexcitability was observed after contralateral stimulation but no parallel evidence of a response was
detected after ipsilateral stimulation. Our results suggest the existence of profound and persistent changes in the
somatosensory cortex in this specific mouse cortical stroke model. The study of evoked potentials constitutes a feasible
and excellent tool for evaluating the fitness of the somatosensory cortex in relation to functional recovery after preclinical therapeutic intervention.

Keywords
Behavior, somatosensory evoked potentials, stroke neuroprotection and repair
Received 2 February 2015; Revised 27 July 2015; Accepted 28 July 2015

Introduction
Stroke is a leading cause of death and a major cause of
disability in the Western world. Embolisms of the cerebral arteries beyond the circle of Willis, account itself
for 15–30% of strokes.1 Currently, early revascularization by intravenous thrombolysis or intra-arterial
mechanical thrombolysis is the only accepted treatment
to promote early reperfusion to improve survival and
prevent long-term disability in patients. Preclinical
models are needed to investigate the pathogenesis of
stroke and the development of neuroprotective or
restorative therapies. Animal models of focal ischemia
induced by the occlusion of the MCA have been developed to reproduce the most frequent form of stroke in
humans.2 The proximal occlusion of the MCA results
in focal ischemia that causes an extensive damage in the
cortex and striatum. By contrast, the occlusion of the

distal part of the MCA (dMCAO) causes damage that
is primarily restricted to the frontal and parietal
1
Unit of Cellular and Animal models, Experimental Neurology
Laboratory, Center for Biomedical Technology, Universidad Politécnica,
Madrid, Spain
2
Unit of Experimental Neurology, Hospital Universitario Ramón y CajalIRYCIS, Madrid, Spain
3
Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology,
Instituto Cajal (CSIC), Madrid, Spain
4
Biomedical Research Networking Center in Bioengineering Biomaterials
and Nanomedicine (CIBER-BBN), Madrid, Spain

Corresponding author:
Daniel Gonzalez-Nieto, Unit of cellular and animal models, Experimental
Neurology Laboratory, Center for Biomedical Technology, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid. Campus de Montegancedo S/N, Pozuelo de
Alarcón, Madrid 28223, Spain.
Email: daniel.gonzalez@ctb.upm.es

Barios et al.
cortices, which results in infarct size reproducibility
across animals;3,4 however, the sensory deﬁcits are relatively minor, which limits the evaluation of the eﬀects
of chronic treatments for stroke and the ability to
examine possible long-term side eﬀects.
In this context, the use of electroencephalography
(EEG) and somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs)
has been shown to be useful for exploring the integrity
of the sensory pathways of the central nervous system.
The value of SSEPs in the prediction of functional
recovery after stroke has also been examined and
found to correlating well with the subsequent level of
disability and functional outcome.5 In cortical stroke
models that aﬀect the somatosensory area, SSEPs constitute an advantageous methodology for examining
spontaneous and therapy-induced functional recovery,
speciﬁcally when conventional behavioral tests are not
sensitive enough. In rats submitted to focal ischemia,
SSEPs have served to evaluate both the eﬃciency of
MCA occlusion during the surgery6,7 and the longterm sensory deﬁcits that follow various treatments
applied during the acute and chronic phases of
stroke.8 However, the use of SSEPs has been more
restricted in mouse models, despite the fact that genetically modiﬁed animals permit the exploration of the
contributions of diﬀerent genes to the physiopathology
of stroke and their implications in neuroprotection and
brain repair mechanisms. In few recent studies, the
activity of infarcted cortex has been examined in mice
with techniques with good temporal resolution such as
electrophysiology and voltage-sensitive dye (VSD) imaging.9,10 Chronic electrophysiological recordings enable
examination of the short- and long-term progression of
somatosensory function in the same animal even when
the ﬁeld potentials are relatively low in amplitude as
occurs, for example, after ipsilateral stimulation.
Therefore, the use of electrophysiological recordings
together with brain imaging might be useful for exploring the mechanisms of functional recovery that are
associated with neuroprotection, neurorestoration,
and cortical reorganization after diﬀerent pharmacologic or stem cell transplantation approaches.
The aim of this study was to examine the feasibility
of the use of long-term longitudinal electrophysiological recordings in mice to analyze the dynamic progression of somatosensory function in a speciﬁc model
of dMCAO. After stroke, the infarcted mice exhibited
permanent failures in the fault-foot and forelimb
asymmetry tests, and greater deﬁcits in both of these
behavioral tests were correlated with greater dysfunction in the somatosensory cortex. Our results highlight
the sensitivity and reproducibility of SSEPs in the
exploration of post-ischemic mechanisms of cortical
functionality in stroke and after preclinical therapeutic
interventions.

607

Materials and methods
Additional method details can be found in supplementary information (available on the JCBFM website; see
the supplementary information link at the top of the
online article).

Animals
Adult male C57BL/6 mice (20–28 g body weight; 8–10
weeks old) were bred and housed in the animal facility
of the Center for Biomedical Technology. The animals
were housed in individual cages with free access to food
and water in an animal room with a controlled temperature and a natural light cycle. Daily routines were
performed between 7 a.m. and 4 p.m. by authorized personnel. The experimental setup of this study is illustrated in Figure 1 and is also described in the
supplementary information. All procedures were
approved by the Technical University of Madrid
(Ethical Committee for Animal Research) before the
commencement of any of the studies. All procedures
were performed under the Spanish Regulations for
animal experimentation (Law 53/2013) and according
to the ARRIVE (animal research: reporting in vivo
experiments) guidelines.

Stereotaxic surgery and SSEPs recordings
Animals were anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/Kg)
and xylazine (10 mg/kg) prior to the stereotaxic
implantation of subdural electrodes for recording of
SSEPs. The mice were secured in a stereotaxic frame
(David Kopf Instruments, California, USA) and under
aseptic conditions a skin incision was made and four
small holes drilled through the skull. The electrodes
(0.2 mm diameter) were made with polyimide-insulated
stainless steel wires (PlasticsOne, Virginia, USA). Two
electrodes were implanted in the right and left somatosensory cortices (2.0 mm lateral and þ 0.5 mm rostrocaudal from bregma, depth 0.5 mm). Two screws were
placed over the visual cortex of both hemispheres and
served as the indiﬀerent and ground electrodes
(2.0 mm lateral and 3 mm rostrocaudal from
bregma). The electrodes were secured in place with cyanoacrylate-based glue and dental acrylate (Duraly,
Illinois, USA). The animals were allowed two weeks
to recover from surgery before experiments started.
The electrodes placement was assessed following the
recording of SSEPs from both hemispheres after ipsiand contra-lateral forelimb stimulation to obtain the
baseline scores. One week later, focal cerebral ischemia
was induced by direct occlusion of the distal MCA as
described below. Brain histology was also performed in
some mice to examine the relative position of the

608

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)

Figure 1. Experimental approach for the examination of the temporal progression of somatosensory cortical activity and sensorimotor function in mice submitted to permanent distal MCA occlusion. Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) and two
behavioral tests (grid-walking and cylinder tests) were used to evaluate the influence of cortical infarction on the progression of
sensorimotor deficits and the subsequent recovery. The functional tests and the SSEPs recordings were performed two weeks after
implantation of epidural electrodes (stereotaxic surgery) to obtain the baseline scores. One week later, we induced the cortical
infarction in the same mice by occlusion of the distal part of the middle cerebral artery (dMCAO). After stroke, the behavioral tests
were performed at 1, 3, 6, and 8 weeks post-stroke, while the SSEPs were performed every week during the first month after
ischemia, and every two weeks during the last month of study.

electrodes in the somatosensory cortex (Supplementary
Figure S3).
Electrical stimulation and SSEPs recordings were
performed under anesthesia with ketamine (100 mg/
kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). The SSEPs were recorded
during the ﬁrst 10–25 min after i.p. injection of anesthesia, a time period of stable SSEPs amplitudes
(Supplementary Figure S4). The depth of anesthesia
was assessed as a function of the loss of reﬂex tail
movement after pinch and the amplitude of the EEG
signal. For peripheral stimulation, a tape was used to
aﬃx a pair of silver electrodes over the ventral surface
of forelimb (distal to the elbow) along the median nerve
pathway. The stimuli were applied with a frequency of
1 Hz. In all the cases, the magnitude of applied electrical stimuli was twice the current level necessary to
obtain a supramaximal motor response (1–2 mA;
0.5 ms duration). This current level is deﬁned as the
value of intensity able to elicit a visually evident and
speciﬁc movement in the forepaw (palmar ﬂexion of
wrist), which is not signiﬁcantly modiﬁed after increasing the stimulation intensity. Signals were ampliﬁed
(103) and ﬁltered (band-pass, 10–2.000 Hz) using a
portable electromyography (EMG)-evoked potentials
(EP) device (Micromed, Mogliano Veneto, Treviso,
Italy); 30 to 60 responses were averaged for each trial,
and the procedure was repeated three times for each
forepaw.

Permanent MCA occlusion
Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by direct occlusion
of the distal part of the middle cerebral artery (MCA)

as we have described previously.11 Brieﬂy, mice were
anesthetized with ketamine (100 mg/kg) and xylazine
(10 mg/kg). A vertical skin incision (0.5 cm) was made
between the right eye and ear under a dissection microscope (Amscope, California, USA), and the temporal
muscle was cut and separated to expose the right lateral
aspect of the skull. The MCA was identiﬁed through
the semi-translucent skull, and a burr hole (0.8 mm
diameter) was made using a microdrill. After identiﬁcation, the dura mater was resected, and the artery was
ligated distal to the lenticulostriate branches. Sham
operated animals were subjected to an identical procedure with the exception that MCA was not ligated.

Infarct volume and area measurement
The infarcted area was evaluated with the 2, 3, 5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC; Sigma, St. Louis,
MO, USA) staining.12 Brieﬂy, the mice were sacriﬁced
by decapitation 24–72 h after MCA ligation. The brains
were removed and sliced in 1-mm-thick coronal sections by using a brain matrix (WPI, Florida, USA).
The brain slices were immersed in a solution containing
1% of TTC in phosphate-buﬀered saline (PBS) at room
temperature for 10 min and ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution in PBS. All coronal sections were digitalized, and the area of cerebral damage was traced
with a standard computer-assisted image analysis technique (Image J software; NIH). The volumes of the
healthy and ischemic tissues in both hemispheres were
calculated by measuring the infarcted and the undamaged areas on separate slices, multiplying the areas by
the slice thickness, and summing the values for all

Barios et al.
slices. The infarct percentages were calculated as percentages of the contralateral (intact) hemisphere to correct for edema.

Behavioral tests
Cylinder test. The cylinder test has been used to demonstrate long-term functional impairments in rats and
mice that have been subject to cortical ischemia aﬀecting the somatosensory area.13,14 To evaluate forepaw
asymmetry, the mice were placed in a clear Plexiglas
cylinder (15 cm in height  10 cm in diameter). During
normal vertical exploration, the animal supports its
weight on either or both of its forepaws. Twenty-ﬁve
contacts were counted and recorded per trial and the
paw or paws used for each contact were scored. Blinded
evaluation was performed on video recordings by
one investigator (L.P.). The mice were placed in the
cylinder for a maximum of 5 min. The laterality index
was calculated as (Contacts (Right)-Contacts (Left))/
(Contacts (Right) þ Contacts (Left) þ Contacts
(Right and left)); positive scores denote preferential
use of the right (unaﬀected) paw and negative scores
indicate preferential use of the left paw.14
Fault-Foot test. The grid test was performed to evaluate
the abilities of the mice to place the forepaws on a wire
while moving along a grid ﬂoor during spontaneous
exploration.15 We analyzed the frequencies of slips
with both forepaws, which are related to the mice’s
abilities to accurately grasp the grid wires. The mice
were placed on a circular grid with 13  13 mm2 grid
squares and allowed to freely explore for 5 min. The
animal behaviors were videotaped and the total numbers of right and left forepaws steps during locomotion
(typical range of 200–400 total steps) and the total
number of foot faults for each forelimb were scored.
Blinded evaluation was performed on video recordings
by L.P. A foot fault was considered positive when the
respective forepaw fell or slipped between the rungs
causing the animal to lose balance.

Statistical analysis
The R package and SigmaPlot (Systat, Germany) were
used for the statistical analyses. All values are expressed
as mean  the standard error of the mean (S.E.M.). To
examine signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the volume of infarct
at diﬀerent time points after surgery, we performed a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test. The temporal pattern of cortical activity (SSEPs) and sensorimotor function (behavioral tests) was analyzed using
a two-way ANOVA, followed in case of signiﬁcant
diﬀerences by Tukey’s post hoc test. The ANOVA
analysis was performed using deﬁcits, amplitudes or

609
inter-hemispheric ratios as dependent variables, and
time and groups (sham & stroke) as independent variables. For SSEPs responses after contralateral stimulation, multiple comparisons for diﬀerences between
diﬀerent weeks and the baseline values were determined
by Tukey’s test. For behavioral testing and SSEPs
responses after ipsilateral simulation, diﬀerences
between groups (for behavioral tests) or between hemispheres (for ipsilateral potentials) were analyzed for
each temporal point by Tukey’s post hoc test.
Correlations between diﬀerent variables were determined using the Pearson product-moment correlation
coeﬃcient. p-values below 0.05 were considered statistically signiﬁcant.

Results
Distal permanent MCAO
Permanent occlusions of the MCA were performed at
the distal level and resulted in relatively variable infarct
sizes between diﬀerent animals that involved the cortical areas of the distal territory of the MCA without
aﬀecting the subcortical regions as indicated by TTC
staining (Figure 2(a)). The analyses of the coronal brain
sections indicated that the infarcted areas were greater
in the sections that primarily contained the primary
somatosensory cortex (Figure 2(b)). The calculations
of infarct volumes corrected for swelling due to
edema that were used to examine the temporal progression of the lesions induced by dMCAO revealed no
signiﬁcant changes in the interval from 24 to 72 h
(Figure 2(c)).

Behavioral tests of somatosensory and motor
function
In the initial 6–12 h following surgery, the ischemic
mice exhibited contralateral hemiparesis, but 24 h
after focal ischemia, we did not detect obvious functional diﬀerences between the ischemic and sham animals. We performed a re-evaluation of diﬀerent
functional tests that have previously used in the
models of focal and global ischemia, speciﬁcally the
cylinder and the grid tests. To avoid a training eﬀect
of testing itself especially in the case of the grid test
(supplementary Figures S1 and S2), both behavioral
tests were performed in sham and ischemic mice in
spaced weeks apart (Figure 1). Under these conditions,
no habituation was observed in the sham mice across
the time after surgery (Figure 3(c) and 3(d)).
In our study, the cylinder test revealed the preferential use of the paw ipsilateral to the infarcted hemisphere, while the sham animals exhibited no
preference regarding the use of a particular paw

610

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)

Figure 2. Evaluation of brain damage after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCA). (a) Representative TTC staining images of
coronal sections 24 hours after MCA occlusion. The infarct area (in white) is mainly localized to cortical regions (scale bar represents
0.5 cm). (b) Regional distribution of the infarcted areas in coronal sections along the rostrocaudal axis as measured from bregma. (c)
Evolution of the infarct volume across time after focal ischemia induced by MCA occlusion. The infarct volumes are represented as
percentages of the total volume of the contralateral intact hemisphere. The data are shown as the means  the standard error of the
mean (SEM) of one experiment for each temporal point (24, 48, and 72 h) with a minimum of 5–7 mice for experiment. No significant
differences were found in the volume of infarct across the time (one-way ANOVA test).

across time after the craniotomies (Figure 3(a) and (b)).
In the ischemic mice, laterality was maximal one week
after stroke and gradually recovered and returned to
subnormal levels in the subsequent eight weeks

(Figure 3(b)). In the walking grid test, which allows
for the discrimination of ischemic from control mice
based on diﬀerent levels of motor coordination and
forepaw asymmetries, the percentage of footslips

Barios et al.

611

Figure 3. Focal ischemia induced by distal MCA occlusion causes long-term functional deficits in mice. (a) Cylinder test. Use of the
contralateral (left paw), ipsilateral (right paw) ,and both forelimbs in the cylinder test after MCA occlusion expressed as percentages of
total paw contacts. (b) Asymmetry in forelimb use in the cylinder test was scored as (Right – Left)/(Right þ Left þ Both). Higher
positive values of the laterality index indicate preferential use of the right, unaffected limb and therefore sensorimotor impairment.
The empty bars represent the sham group, and the solid bars represent the ischemic mice. For the grid-walking test, (c) and (d) show
the percentages of footslips for the left and right forepaws, respectively. The empty bars represent the sham group, and the solid bars
represent the stroke mice. The data are shown as the means  the SEM of two independent experiments with a minimum of 6–10
mice per group; sham or stroke; and temporal point. The asterisks denote significant differences between groups for each temporal
point (two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01).

using the left forepaw (contralateral to the damaged
hemisphere) was signiﬁcantly higher and remained elevated at eight weeks in the stroke compared to the sham
animals (Figure 3(c)). In the stroke group, the number
of footslips with the right forepaw was initially reduced
at one week and slowly returned to the basal values; in
the sham animals, the right footslips did not vary with
time in this study (Figure 3(d)).

Contralateral and ipsilateral EPs
The activity of the somatosensory cortex, including the
forepaw representation area, was examined with SSEPs

that were ﬁrstly recorded at baseline (two weeks after
the implantation of the electrodes). In response to electrical stimulation in each forepaw, several components
were present in the respective contralateral hemisphere,
but a large negative wave (N1) was particularly obvious
(Figure 4(a), left traces). This prominent wave reached
its maximal amplitude (peak) 20 ms after the constantcurrent stimulus and likely reﬂected the activities of
diﬀerent cell populations in the somatosensory
cortex.16 We analyzed the evolution of this somatosensory response (N1 peak) across eight weeks postinfarction and relative to the baseline condition. The
sham mice exhibited similar potential amplitudes in

612

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)

Figure 4. Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) were impaired after distal MCA occlusion. (a) Examples SSEPs recorded from
the left and right cortices in response to contralateral forepaw stimulation. The temporal evolution of the EP amplitudes in the sham
(panel i) and ischemic mice (panel ii & iii) in the baseline condition and two, four, and six weeks after surgery are shown. The black and
(continued)

Barios et al.
both hemispheres in response to contralateral stimulation both at baseline and after craniotomies (Figure
4(a), traces in panel i, and Figure 4(c)). In the ischemic
mice, the response of the damaged hemisphere to
contralateral stimulation involved a prolonged and
marked reduction of the N1 peak amplitude (Figure
4(a); black traces in panel ii and Figure 4(b); solid circles) compared to the corresponding contralateral
response in the healthy hemisphere, which exhibited a
progressive and substantially greater response compared to the baseline condition (Figure 4(a); blue lines
in panels ii and Figure 4(b); empty circles). The majority of the infarcted mice exhibited a complete abolition
of the EPs in the injured hemisphere that was irreversible across time (Figure 4(a), black traces in panel ii).
Exceptionally, 2 of 15 mice (N ¼ 3 experiments) exhibited a progressively increasing response that reached
amplitude values that were still considerably below
those recorded in the baseline condition (Figure 4(a),
black traces in panel iii), responses that were associated

613
with progressive better performance in both behavioral
tests (data do not shown). Interestingly, in the ischemic
mice, a positive correlation was found between the
amplitudes of SSEPs in the intact and infarcted hemispheres (Pearson correlation; r ¼ 0.52, p < 0.01). In
summary, after infarction and in response to contralateral stimulation, a progressive increment in the N1 peak
amplitude was observed in the intact hemisphere, and a
marked amplitude reduction was detected in the
damaged hemisphere (Figure 4(b)); in the sham animals, the amplitudes of the responses to contralateral
stimulation were similar between hemispheres and no
signiﬁcant changes were observed with the post-craniotomy time (Figure 4(c)). These results were translated into ratios (SSEPdamaged/SSEPintact) close to
100% in the sham animals; i.e. the values of the N1
peak amplitudes were similar among hemispheres,
and substantial reductions in these ratios were observed
in the group of ischemic animals (Figure 5(a)). The
reduction in the N1 peak with post-ischemia time was

Figure 5. Analysis of somatosensory responses after contralateral stimulation in mice with cortical infarctions. (a) Ratio of the
contralateral responses in the sham (empty circles) and stroke (solid circles) mice across time post-surgery. The ratios are expressed
as EP amplitude in the damaged hemisphere with respect the normal hemisphere (SEPdamaged/SEPintact). (b) The latencies of the N1
peaks in response to contralateral stimulation across time in the sham (empty circles) and infarcted (solid circles) mice. The solid and
dashed lines represent the latencies for the operated and non-operated hemispheres, respectively. The data are shown as the
means  the SEM of three independent experiments with a minimum of 10–15 mice per group; sham or stroke; and temporal point.
For every group, the asterisks denote significant differences with respect the corresponding baseline values (two-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey’s test; **p < 0.01).

Figure 4. (continued)
blue lines represent records from the affected and intact hemispheres, respectively. Normalized EP response amplitudes (N1 voltage
peak) after contralateral stimulation of the infarcted (b) and sham mice (c) across time post-surgery. The blue and black lines represent
values from the intact and affected hemispheres, respectively. The data are shown as the means  the SEM of three independent
experiments with a minimum of 10–15 mice per group; sham or stroke; and temporal point. The asterisks denote significant differences with respect the corresponding baseline values (two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test; *p < 0.05).

614
not accompanied by changes in the latency relative to
the pre-ischemic condition (the latency values were calculated from the amplitude peaks > 10 mV; Figure 5(b)).
To examine the relationship between the sensorimotor
function evaluated by the cylinder and grid tests and
the somatosensory cortical activity examined by SSEPs,
we performed a Pearson correlation analysis including
data from sham and stroke mice. The greater deﬁcits in
the two tests were associated with the lower ratios of
SSEPs responses (Figure 6(a) and (b)). When this analysis was performed exclusively in the stroke group, we
found a signiﬁcant correlation only in the case of the
grid test (grid test r ¼ 0.89; p < 0.01, cylinder test
r ¼ 0.39; p ¼ 0.17). In agreement with these results,
the activity of the intact hemisphere was related with
the degree of sensorimotor impairment, ﬁnding that the
higher amplitudes of SSEPs responses correlated with
the lower number of footslips of the aﬀected paw in the
grid test (r ¼ 0.55, p < 0.01). These results support the
sensitivity of the grid test to identify signs of sensorimotor deﬁcits that were associated with signiﬁcant
changes of evoked activity in the somatosensory
cortex of both hemispheres.
We also examined the ﬁeld potentials in the infarcted
and intact hemispheres in response to ipsilateral stimulation. The ipsilateral SSEPs exhibited a proﬁle similar
to that induced by the contralateral stimulation that
included a negative component of somewhat smaller
in amplitude and longer in latency (Table 1). In the
sham mice, the ipsilateral EP amplitudes in both

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)
hemispheres were similar and constant across time
before and after the craniotomy (data not shown). By
contrast, in the ischemic animals, the response to ipsilateral stimulation diﬀered between hemispheres along
the post-ischemia time (Figure 7(a)). The activities of
the infarcted and intact hemispheres in response to ipsilateral stimulation were nearly absent one week after
stroke; however, at later times (3–8 weeks) small but
signiﬁcant increases in activity, particularly in the
infarcted hemisphere were observed (Figure 7(b)).
Interestingly, in the ischemic mice, a positive correlation was found between the SSEPs amplitudes in the
infarcted and intact hemispheres after ipsilateral and
contralateral
stimulation
respectively
(r ¼ 0.53,
p < 0.01).

Discussion
Our results show the existence of profound functional
changes in the two hemispheres after unilateral cortical
stroke induced by a dMCAO approach. In the cylinder
and grid tests, the infarcted mice exhibited long-term
deﬁcits of varying degree, although some functional
recovery was observed in the case of the cylinder test.
A strong correlation was determined between the electrophysiological responses of the intact and infarcted
somatosensory cortices and the degree of functional
impairment.
In agreement with previous work, the resulting
infarcts were small and localized to the sensorimotor

Figure 6. Sensorimotor functional deficits correlate with reduced activity in the somatosensory cortex. Pearson correlation analyses of the ratio values (SSEP response) obtained after contralateral forepaw stimulation and the scores in the cylinder (a) and gridwalking (b) tests. The laterality index and percentage of left forepaw footslips were the parameters from the respective tests that were
used and are plotted against the ratio values (different symbols are used to unmask similar values). Equivalent numbers of mice from
the sham and ischemic groups, at one, three, six, and eight weeks after the craniotomies were included in these analyses. The
correlation values are shown at the top of each plot. Significant correlation values were observed in both functional tests but were
particularly strong in the grid-walking test.

Barios et al.

615

Table 1. Amplitudes and latencies of N1 wave of contralateral and ipsilateral SSEPs in sham mice.
Contralateral stimulation
Amplitude (mV)
Right hemisphere
Left hemisphere

65.09  5.45
70.59  5.92

Ipsilateral stimulation
Latency (ms)

(**)
(**)

21.23  1.20
19.75  0.42

(**)
(**)

Amplitude (mV)

Latency (ms)

42.21  6.01
49.01  6.21

27.65  1.15
28.53  1.20

The data are shown as the means  SEM of three independent experiments with a total of five sham mice per experiment. The asterisks denote
significant differences in amplitudes and latencies between contralateral and ipsilateral responses (student’s t-test; **p < 0.01). SSEPs: somatosensory
evoked potentials.

cortical region, and brain swelling was not obvious.3,4,11 The infarct areas were consistently restricted
to regions anterior to bregma and concentrated primarily in the somatosensory cortex in the barrel and forelimb receptive ﬁelds; the primary motor cortex was less
aﬀected. A similar regional distribution has previously
been demonstrated in the mouse models of the distal
occlusion by electrical coagulation.4
We have studied the short- and long-term eﬀects of
focal ischemia on sensorial and motor skills by combining functional tests and SSEPs. In the cylinder test, the
laterality index in the ischemic mice was maximal at the
ﬁrst week after MCA occlusion and subsequently
decreased over time towards values of sham mice,
which was most likely associated with partial and
slow recovery; however, this tendency did not reach
statistical signiﬁcance. Thus, in our hands, the cylinder
test seemed to be appropriate for the examination of
functional impairments as has been previously reported
with this dMCAO model14,17 and in photothrombotic
stroke models.9,13 In the foot-fault test, with respect to
the sham group, we detect an increased percentage of
slips in the paw contralateral to the infarcted hemisphere for at least eight weeks post-infarct, as has
been previously reported in rats with cortical infarction
over four weeks after surgery18 and more recently in
mice over eight weeks in a cortical photothrombotic
stroke model.13 In our study, the SSEPs of the infarcted
hemisphere were essentially impaired in the majority of
animals, and there was no statistical evidence of functional recovery; these observations might justify the
existence of the persistent deﬁcits in sensorimotor function exhibited in both tests, especially in the grid test.
The stroke mice did not recover when they performed
the grid test, but in the cylinder test, a trend of progressive recovery to a subnormal level was observed and
might have been related to the fact that the cylinder
test involves an easier task than that of the grid test
for which most likely required greater sensory and
motor coordination. Alternatively, the cylinder test
might not discriminate between ischemic animals with
diﬀerent degree of sensorimotor impairment after the
dMCAO approach.

Before ischemia, negative deﬂections (N1 wave) were
detected in both hemispheres in response to forepaw
contralateral stimulation. We believe that the N1
peak primarily represents the activity of the forepaw
representation area in the pre-stroke condition, because
this region is primarily activated 20 ms after contralateral forepaw stimulation.9 The main entrance of sensory information from the thalamus is the border of
cortical layer Vb/VI, the granular layer IV and the
lower part of layer III. In layer IV, axons of stellate
cells and axon-collaterals of pyramidal cells distribute
the somatosensory signals within cortical columns
establishing synapses on the apical dendrites of pyramidal cells in the supragranular layers II/III and the
infragranular layer Vb.19 In studies performed in
rodents with epidural electrodes, it has been proposed
that the N1 wave mostly reﬂects the activity of pyramidal cells in layer Vb resulting in depolarization of
apical dendrites of supragranular layer II/III pyramidal
cells.16 Similar to our results, nearly complete and durable abolitions of forelimb contralateral evoked potential responses in the infarcted hemisphere after cortical
ischemia are well known and have been previously
described in several species including humans.8,20
Imaging studies also support the absence of responses
in the damaged hemisphere after contralateral stimulation.21,22 In our study, only 2 of 15 mice showed progressive increases of the responses in the infarcted
hemisphere associated with possible functional recovery. At this point, it remains unclear to us whether these
small potentials in the damaged hemisphere (Figure
4(a); panel iii) represent portions of residual activity
within the forepaw cortical area8 or are associated
with new activity in the peri-infarct tissue, speciﬁcally
in portions of the motor area as has been previously
reported at longer times after forepaw ischemia, when
spontaneous functional recovery takes place.9
In the ischemic mice, progressively increasing amplitudes of responses were observed in the intact hemisphere after contralateral stimulation. In stroke
patients and in rodents, an enhanced activity in the
non-aﬀected hemisphere has been described after
contralateral stimulation of the non-aﬀected

616

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)

Figure 7. Potentials evoked by ipsilateral stimulation are impaired in mice after dMCAO. On the left side, cartoon showing the
experimental setup with the position of electrodes for ipsilateral recordings in relation with the infarcted area (gray spot) and the stimulated
forepaw. (a) Examples SSEPs recorded from both hemispheres after ipsilateral stimulation showing the temporal progression of the
ipsilateral EP amplitude in the intact (panel i, gray line) and affected (panel ii, black line) hemispheres at baseline and at one and four weeks
after dMCAO. Note that, after stroke, all responses in both hemispheres after ipsilateral stimulation were nearly completely abolished. (b)
Normalized amplitude of the EP response (N1 voltage peak) after ipsilateral stimulation in the infarcted mice across time post-ischemia. The
empty and solid circles represent the values from the intact and damaged hemispheres, respectively. The data are shown as the means  the
SEM of three independent experiments with a minimum of 10–15 mice per temporal point. The asterisks denote significant differences
between the hemispheres for each temporal point (two-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s test; *p < 0.05; #p < 0.08).

member,22–24 which has also been related to a larger
motor response from the non-aﬀected hand.25,26 This
hyperexcitability in the intact hemisphere (diaschisis)
has been commonly associated with better motor

recovery of the aﬀected member after hemiparetic
stroke.27 The hyperexcitability in the intact hemisphere
might be associated with a lack of inhibition between
homologous regions of the somatosensory cortex

Barios et al.
through the corpus callosum (CC).21,22 Whether this
hyperexcitability has a positive or a negative eﬀect on
recovery is an actual point of debate.24,27,28 In our
model of cortical infarction by MCAO, the increasing
excitability in the intact hemisphere persisted for longer
durations as has been observed in cortical stroke
patients.
We also examined the ipsilateral activations of the
somatosensory cortices in the intact and infarcted hemispheres. Ipsilateral activation is a mechanism that is
poorly understood; it has been proposed that an ipsilateral potential can be generated by inter-hemispheric
projections through the CC after contralateral hemisphere activation,29 via direct projections of ascending
non-decussating ﬁbers to the ipsilateral hemisphere30 or
via volume conduction from the contralateral hemisphere.31 Several studies have demonstrated that the
primary somatosensory cortex (S1) projects extensively
at the border between S1 and the secondary somatosensory cortex in the opposite hemisphere.32 Callosal
connections are probably required for integrating lateralized somatosensory input. In our study, in the prestroke condition, the short delay between the ipsilateral
and contralateral potentials (510 ms; table 1) was
compatible with inter-hemispheric CC conduction.33,34
However, after stroke, the ipsilateral activation of the
intact hemisphere was severely inhibited with respect to
the pre-infarct condition. This eﬀect was observed in
the ischemic but not in the sham animals, which indicates that this reduced response was dependant on the
changes in the infarcted hemisphere and might not be
related to the direct projections of ascending uncrossed
ﬁbers from the aﬀected paw. Thus, the reduced
response in the intact hemisphere after ipsilateral stimulation might be related with the abolition of SSEPs
potentials in the damaged hemisphere (contralateral
stimulation). In a recent study in mice, no ipsilateral
response was detected in the intact hemisphere after a
distal MCAO approach.23 By contrast, the ipsilateral
potentials of the damaged hemisphere were also
severely reduced after stroke. Although high evoked
responses were detected in the intact hemisphere after
contralateral stimulation, responses that were probably
transmitted through the CC to the opposite hemisphere
(damaged), a small conductivity of the extracellular
medium or the destruction of a considerable number
of cortical synapses, restricted to the infarcted region,
might attenuate the amplitude of the ipsilateral potentials in the aﬀected hemisphere. By contrast, transcallosal degeneration has been reported to occur in the
cortex opposite to the lesion after stroke35 and also
might explain the reduction of these ipsilateral SSEPs.
This initial and severe reduction of ipsilateral potentials
in the damaged hemisphere were followed by a progressive and slight increase in the response at later time

617
points, which might be related with the phenomena of
hyperexcitability that occurs in the intact hemisphere at
longer times after ischemia. In this context, the results
of the correlation analysis suggest a close relationship
between the amplitudes of SSEPs responses generated
in the intact and damaged hemispheres after contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation, respectively.
Several limitations of our study should be mentioned. First, housing the mice individually in cages
might be related with the poor functional recovery
that we have observed in our work, because social interaction in an enrichment environment have been shown
to improve neurobehavioral function after stroke in rat
models of photothrombosis36 or ligation of the MCA.37
The eﬀects of enrichment environment on functional
outcome can be explained by depression of the inﬂammatory response in the ischemic hemisphere, recovery
of neuronal functions and connectivity, and postischemia brain plasticity. Second, to minimize the
suﬀering of animals and to avoid movement artifacts,
the electrophysiological recordings were performed
under anesthesia with ketamine/xylazine. In humans,
it is a common practice to monitor EPs in patients
anesthetized during spinal cord surgery.38 In monkeys
and rats, the somatosensory cortex has been mapped
under anesthesia with ketamine and many similarities
to the awake state as well as certain diﬀerences have
been reported.39,40 Although it is commonly accepted
that diﬀerent anesthetics as ketamine or urethane produce consistent alterations in the cerebral evoked
response to forepaw stimulation, similar patterns of
activation have been found for example in the sensorimotor cortex between urethane-anesthetized and awake
mice.41 In addition, SSEPs have been performed in
rodents under anesthesia to evaluate the eﬀectiveness
of diﬀerent treatments or to examine the activity of
the somatosensory cortex after ischemia.10,42,43 In our
study, we chose ketamine/xylazine because it has been
largely documented that volatile and barbiturate anesthetics including isoﬂurane depress and/or abolish EPs
in humans and diﬀerent species of animals including
rodents.38,44 The electrophysiological recordings were
started 10 min after ketamine/xylazine injection and
we never used more than 10–15 min to complete a full
recording session of contra and ipsi-lateral potentials;
in this time frame, EP-amplitudes during deep anesthesia are relatively stable.45 Although ketamine might
modify the responsiveness of the cortex itself and the
sensory message along the aﬀerent pathway to the cerebral cortex, the same procedure was applied to all mice,
and in these speciﬁc conditions, the SSEPs were mostly
modiﬁed in the stroke mice while preserved in the sham
animals. Another point that deserves consideration
relates to the inﬂuence of ketamine in the performance
of the behavioral tests. Ketamine produces profound

618
behavioral deﬁcits, and this eﬀect is mediated in part by
the interruption of neurotransmission in diﬀerent structures of the limbic system as the amygdala and hippocampus. At the same doses as used in the present study,
the chronic daily administration of ketamine induces signiﬁcant behavioral deﬁcits, especially locomotor hyperactivity, that persisted several days after the withdrawal
of the drug.46 We always left 5 days between the application of a dose of ketamine/xylazine during the SSEPs
recordings and the subsequent functional test the next
week. Under this experimental paradigm, no signiﬁcantly
ﬂuctuations in the scores for both functional tests were
observed over time in the group of sham mice, which
suggests a reduced inﬂuence of the anesthesia in the performance of both behavioral tests across the study.
Although genetically modiﬁed mice are now becoming increasingly used, the employ of SSEPs recordings
has been more restricted in this specie, particularly in
this type of cortical infarction due to permanent distal
MCAO. The small size of the animals might constitute
a diﬃculty, but we have corroborated the feasibility of
making long-term chronic recordings in the same
animal using two separate surgeries. Our results demonstrate the reliability of SSEPs to examine functional
outcome in mice with damage in the somatosensorial
cortex, which is characteristic of this speciﬁc stroke
model, widely used to mimic human ischemic stroke.
The combined use of functional tests and SSEPs across
time post-ischemia can serve to examine the eﬀectiveness of neuroprotective drugs and the contributions of
diﬀerent genes in the evolution of cortical damage after
stroke by using genetically modiﬁed mice, helping us
identify new potential targets for medication development. We also have shown the usefulness of the SSEPs
to examine phenomena of brain plasticity in the intact
hemisphere after unilateral cortical stroke. In our
study, the correlation analysis indicates that the hyperexcitability was mostly observed in the mice with less
degree of impairment after the dMCAO approach. This
hyperexcitability in the intact hemisphere and the partial recovery observed exceptionally in some mice might
be linked with the phenomena of plasticity at the spinal
cord level. After stroke, the recovery of skilled forelimb
movements has been associated with the rewiring of
midline-crossing corticospinal ﬁbers from the intact
hemisphere to the denervated side of the spinal cord
in rats submitted to unilateral pyramidotomy,47 and
recently in a therapeutic model of stroke in rats using
antibodies against anti neurite-growth-inhibitory protein (Nogo-A) and subsequent rehabilitative training.48
Collectively, here we have identiﬁed the existence of
long-term deﬁcits in mice after cortical infarction
induced by ligation of the distal part of the MCA.
Sensorimotor skills were substantially aﬀected in parallel with impairments in the somatosensory cortices of

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)
the both the infarcted and non-infarcted hemispheres.
Long-term examinations of somatosensory and motor
cortical function enable the study of the mechanisms of
plasticity in peri-infarct areas9 or, alternatively, the
long-term reactivation of damaged representations.8
In the preclinical scenario, the sensitivity and reproducibility of SSEPs make them appropriate for a shortand long-term examination of cortical function after
stroke and for the evaluation of the eﬀectiveness of
drugs in neuroprotection and cell-therapy-based neurorestoration approaches.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: This study was supported by the Community of
Madrid Grant Neurotec-S2010/BMD-2460 (to D.G.-N.),
from Mexican National Committee of Science and
Technology (CONACyT to L.P) and funds from the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness
(Consolider CSD2008-00005 and BFU2013-33821 to
L.C.B.). We would like to thank Soledad Martinez for the
excellent technical assistance. We also express our gratitude
to Carlos Paino for his assistance with the histological images.

Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.

Authors’ contributions
JB and LP contributed equally to this work. JB and D G-N
designed the research; LP and JB performed the majority of
the experiments with the help of L F-G, R M-M and D G-N;
R M-M, LCB and MR provided crucial reagents; LP, JB and
D G-N analyzed the data; JB and D G-N interpreted the
results; JB, LCB, MR and R M-M helped write and revise
the manuscript and D G-N wrote the paper.

Supplementary material
Supplementary material for this paper can be found at http://
jcbfm.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data

References
1. Lhermitte F, Gautier JC and Derouesne C. Nature of
occlusions of the middle cerebral artery. Neurology 1970;
20: 82–88.
2. Brint S, Jacewicz M, Kiessling M, et al. Focal brain ischemia in the rat: methods for reproducible neocortical infarction using tandem occlusion of the distal middle cerebral
and ipsilateral common carotid arteries. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 1988; 8: 474–485.
3. Kuraoka M, Furuta T, Matsuwaki T, et al. Direct experimental occlusion of the distal middle cerebral artery
induces high reproducibility of brain ischemia in mice.
Exp Anim 2009; 58: 19–29.

Barios et al.
4. Lubjuhn J, Gastens A, von Wilpert G, et al. Functional
testing in a mouse stroke model induced by occlusion of
the distal middle cerebral artery. J Neurosci Methods
2009; 184: 95–103.
5. Olsen TS. Arm and leg paresis as outcome predictors in
stroke rehabilitation. Stroke 1990; 21: 247–251.
6. Sakatani K, Iizuka H and Young W. Somatosensory
evoked potentials in rat cerebral cortex before and
after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 1990; 21:
124––132.
7. Weaver M, Leshley K, Sands H, et al. LEX032, a novel
recombinant serpin, protects the brain after transient
focal ischemia. Microvasc Res 2002; 63: 327–334.
8. Ramos-Cabrer P, Justicia C, Wiedermann D, et al. Stem
cell mediation of functional recovery after stroke in the
rat. PLoS One 2010; 5: e12779.
9. Brown CE, Aminoltejari K, Erb H, et al. In vivo voltagesensitive dye imaging in adult mice reveals that somatosensory maps lost to stroke are replaced over weeks by
new structural and functional circuits with prolonged
modes of activation within both the peri-infarct zone
and distant sites. J Neurosci 2009; 29: 1719–1734.
10. Takatsuru Y, Fukumoto D, Yoshitomo M, et al.
Neuronal circuit remodeling in the contralateral cortical
hemisphere during functional recovery from cerebral
infarction. J Neurosci 2009; 29: 10081–10086.
11. Pozo-Rodrigalvarez A, Gradillas A, Serrano J, et al. New
synthesis and promising neuroprotective role in experimental ischemic stroke of ONO-1714. Eur J Med Chem
2012; 54: 439–446.
12. Isayama K, Pitts LH and Nishimura MC. Evaluation of
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining to delineate
rat brain infarcts. Stroke 1991; 22: 1394–1398.
13. Clarkson AN, Lopez-Valdes HE, Overman JJ, et al.
Multimodal examination of structural and functional
remapping in the mouse photothrombotic stroke model.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2013; 33: 716–723.
14. Jin K, Mao X, Xie L, et al. Transplantation of human
neural precursor cells in Matrigel scaffolding improves
outcome from focal cerebral ischemia after delayed postischemic treatment in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2010; 30: 534–544.
15. Hernandez TD and Schallert T. Seizures and recovery
from experimental brain damage. Exp Neurol 1988; 102:
318–324.
16. Jellema T, Brunia CH and Wadman WJ. Sequential activation of microcircuits underlying somatosensory-evoked
potentials in rat neocortex. Neuroscience 2004; 129:
283–295.
17. Roof RL, Schielke GP, Ren X, et al. A comparison of
long-term functional outcome after 2 middle cerebral
artery occlusion models in rats. Stroke 2001; 32:
2648–2657.
18. Stroemer RP, Kent TA and Hulsebosch CE. Neocortical
neural sprouting, synaptogenesis, and behavioral recovery after neocortical infarction in rats. Stroke 1995; 26:
2135–2144.
19. Castro-Alamancos
MA
and
Connors
BW.
Thalamocortical synapses. Prog Neurobiol 1997; 51:
581–606.

619
20. Weber R, Ramos-Cabrer P, Justicia C, et al. Early prediction of functional recovery after experimental stroke:
functional magnetic resonance imaging, electrophysiology, and behavioral testing in rats. J Neurosci 2008;
28: 1022–1029.
21. Dijkhuizen RM, Ren J, Mandeville JB, et al. Functional
magnetic resonance imaging of reorganization in rat
brain after stroke. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98:
12766–12771.
22. Mohajerani MH, Aminoltejari K and Murphy TH.
Targeted mini-strokes produce changes in interhemispheric sensory signal processing that are indicative of
disinhibition within minutes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2011; 108: E183–E191.
23. Johnston DG, Denizet M, Mostany R, et al. Chronic
in vivo imaging shows no evidence of dendritic plasticity
or functional remapping in the contralesional cortex after
stroke. Cereb Cortex 2013; 23: 751–762.
24. Nakashima K, Kanba M, Fujimoto K, et al.
Somatosensory evoked potentials over the non-affected
hemisphere in patients with unilateral cerebrovascular
lesions. J Neurol Sci 1985; 70: 117–127.
25. Liepert J, Hamzei F and Weiller C. Motor cortex disinhibition of the unaffected hemisphere after acute stroke.
Muscle Nerve 2000; 23: 1761–1763.
26. Traversa R, Cicinelli P, Pasqualetti P, et al. Follow-up of
interhemispheric differences of motor evoked potentials
from the ‘affected’ and ‘unaffected’ hemispheres in
human stroke. Brain Res 1998; 803: 1–8.
27. Schaechter JD and Perdue KL. Enhanced cortical activation in the contralesional hemisphere of chronic stroke
patients in response to motor skill challenge. Cereb
Cortex 2008; 18: 638–647.
28. Ward NS, Brown MM, Thompson AJ, et al. Neural correlates of outcome after stroke: a cross-sectional fMRI
study. Brain 2003; 126(Pt 6): 1430–1448.
29. Allison T, McCarthy G, Wood CC, et al. Human cortical
potentials evoked by stimulation of the median nerve. II.
Cytoarchitectonic areas generating long-latency activity.
J Neurophysiol 1989; 62: 711–722.
30. Kanno A, Nakasato N, Hatanaka K, et al. Ipsilateral
area 3b responses to median nerve somatosensory stimulation. Neuroimage 2003; 18: 169–177.
31. Kakigi R. Ipsilateral and contralateral SEP components following median nerve stimulation: effects of
interfering stimuli applied to the contralateral
hand. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1986; 64:
246–259.
32. Henry EC and Catania KC. Cortical, callosal, and thalamic connections from primary somatosensory cortex in
the naked mole-rat (Heterocephalus glaber), with special
emphasis on the connectivity of the incisor representation. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol 2006; 288:
626–645.
33. Caminiti R, Carducci F, Piervincenzi C, et al. Diameter,
length, speed, and conduction delay of callosal axons in
macaque monkeys and humans: comparing data from
histology and magnetic resonance imaging diffusion tractography. J Neurosci 2013; 33: 14501–14511.

620
34. Wang SS, Shultz JR, Burish MJ, et al. Functional tradeoffs in white matter axonal scaling. J Neurosci 2008; 28:
4047–4056.
35. Adkins DL, Voorhies AC and Jones TA. Behavioral and
neuroplastic effects of focal endothelin-1 induced sensorimotor cortex lesions. Neuroscience 2004; 128: 473–486.
36. Madinier A, Quattromani MJ, Sjolund C, et al. Enriched
housing enhances recovery of limb placement ability and
reduces aggrecan-containing perineuronal nets in the rat
somatosensory cortex after experimental stroke. PLoS
One 2014; 9: e93121.
37. Ohlsson AL and Johansson BB. Environment influences
functional outcome of cerebral infarction in rats. Stroke
1995; 26: 644–649.
38. Sloan TB and Heyer EJ. Anesthesia for intraoperative
neurophysiologic monitoring of the spinal cord. J Clin
Neurophysiol 2002; 19: 430–443.
39. Patel IM and Chapin JK. Ketamine effects on somatosensory cortical single neurons and on behavior in rats.
Anesth Analg 1990; 70: 635–644.
40. Stryker MP, Jenkins WM and Merzenich MM.
Anesthetic state does not affect the map of the hand representation within area 3b somatosensory cortex in owl
monkey. J Comp Neurol 1987; 258: 297–303.
41. Ferezou I, Haiss F, Gentet LJ, et al. Spatiotemporal
dynamics of cortical sensorimotor integration in behaving mice. Neuron 2007; 56: 907–923.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(3)
42. Bordi F, Pietra C, Ziviani L, et al. The glycine antagonist
GV150526 protects somatosensory evoked potentials and
reduces the infarct area in the MCAo model of focal
ischemia in the rat. Exp Neurol 1997; 145(2 Pt 1):
425–433.
43. Zhao LR, Berra HH, Duan WM, et al. Beneficial effects
of hematopoietic growth factor therapy in chronic ischemic stroke in rats. Stroke 2007; 38: 2804–2811.
44. Hayton SM, Kriss A and Muller DP. Comparison of the
effects of four anaesthetic agents on somatosensory
evoked potentials in the rat. Lab Anim 1999; 33: 243–251.
45. Zandieh S, Hopf R, Redl H, et al. The effect of ketamine/
xylazine anesthesia on sensory and motor evoked potentials in the rat. Spinal Cord 2003; 41: 16–22.
46. Chatterjee M, Ganguly S, Srivastava M, et al. Effect of
‘chronic’ versus ‘acute’ ketamine administration and its
‘withdrawal’ effect on behavioural alterations in mice:
implications for experimental psychosis. Behav Brain
Res 2011; 216: 247–254.
47. Starkey ML, Bleul C, Maier IC, et al. Rehabilitative
training following unilateral pyramidotomy in adult rats
improves forelimb function in a non-task-specific way.
Exp Neurol 2011; 232: 81–89.
48. Wahl AS, Omlor W, Rubio JC, et al. Neuronal repair.
Asynchronous therapy restores motor control by rewiring
of the rat corticospinal tract after stroke. Science 2014;
344: 1250–1255.

