1 3
Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
DOI 10.1007/s00221-013-3533-1
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Laterality affects spontaneous recovery of contralateral hand 
motor function following motor cortex injury in rhesus monkeys
Warren G. Darling · Nicole Helle · Marc A. Pizzimenti · 
Diane L. Rotella · Stephanie M. Hynes · Jizhi Ge · 
Kimberly S. Stilwell-Morecraft · Robert J. Morecraft
Received: 27 December 2012 / Accepted: 16 April 2013 / Published online: 8 May 2013
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
motor areas. These data may be extended to suggest that 
humans who exhibit weak hand dominance, and perhaps 
individuals who use both hands for fine motor tasks, may 
have a more favorable potential for recovery after a unilateral
stroke or brain injury affecting the lateral cortical 
motor areas than individuals with a high degree of hand 
dominance.
Keywords Brain injury · Hand · Dexterity · Hemispheric 
dominance
Introduction
Brain damage limited to one hemisphere may result 
in differing degrees of motor impairment and potential
for contralateral hand motor function recovery in 
humans (McCombe Waller and Whitall 2005; Langan 
and van Donkelaar 2008). For example, strokes affecting
the left hemisphere may cause greater impairments 
in hand motor function and learning of complex hand 
motor tasks than strokes affecting the right hemisphere 
(Kimura and Archibald 1974; Kimura 1977). Yet, when 
stroke survivors are grouped by pre-ictus hand preference
, more recent studies show that right-handed subjects
with left hemisphere damage have less impairment 
and more extensive motor recovery after rehabilitation 
than right-handed subjects with right hemisphere damage
(McCombe Waller and Whitall 2005; Harris and 
Eng 2006). However, these human studies have not controlled
for differences in hemispheric lesion location 
and size, white versus gray matter lesion involvement, 
or for magnitude of hand preference (dominance) prior 
to brain injury. Indeed, all of these factors may uniquely 
affect the motor recovery process, particularly when 
Abstract The purpose of this study was to test whether 
brain laterality influences spontaneous recovery of hand 
motor function after controlled brain injuries to arm 
areas of M1 and lateral premotor cortex (LPMC) of the 
hemisphere contralateral to the preferred hand in rhesus 
monkeys. We hypothesized that monkeys with stronger 
hand preference would exhibit poorer recovery of skilled 
hand use after such brain injury. Degree of handedness 
was assessed using a standard dexterity board task in 
which subjects could use either hand to retrieve small 
food pellets. Fine hand/digit motor function was assessed 
using a modified dexterity board before and after the M1 
and LPMC lesions in ten monkeys. We found a strong 
negative relationship between the degree of handedness 
and the recovery of manipulation skill, demonstrating 
that higher hand preference was associated with poorer 
recovery of hand fine motor function. We also observed 
that monkeys with larger lesions within M1 and LPMC 
had greater initial impairment of manipulation and 
poorer recovery of reaching skill. We conclude that monkeys
with a stronger hand preference are likely to show 
poorer recovery of contralesional hand fine motor skill 
after isolated brain lesions affecting the lateral frontal 
W. G. Darling (*) · N. Helle · D. L. Rotella · S. M. Hynes
Department of Health and Human Physiology, Motor Control 
Laboratories, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
e-mail: warren-darling@uiowa.edu
M. A. Pizzimenti
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Carver College 
of Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
J. Ge · K. S. Stilwell-Morecraft · R. J. Morecraft
Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences, Laboratory 
of Neurological Sciences, Sanford School of Medicine, 
The University of South Dakota, Vermillion, SD 57069, USA
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1151673183)
10 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
considering the effects of hemispheric dominance on 
recovery potential.
Hemispheric specialization for control of fine movements
may be an important consideration in terms of 
recovery after motor cortex injury. Clear evidence for 
such specialization has been demonstrated in right-handed 
subjects for upper limb pointing movements with the left 
(dominant) hemisphere being specialized for coordination 
and right hemisphere for accuracy of movements by both 
upper limbs (Duff and Sainburg 2007; Schaefer et al. 2007, 
2009). Similarly, coordination of multi-finger production 
of rapid isometric force pulses was better for the dominant 
hand, but there was no evidence of specialization of the 
right hemisphere for accuracy of force pulses or stabilization
of force steps (Zhang et al. 2006). In contrast, coordination
of grip and load forces and minimizing grip/load 
force ratio appeared to be better for the non-dominant hand 
in bimanual load force production tasks, suggesting specialization
of the right hemisphere for such coordination in 
right-handed subjects (de Freitas et al. 2007).
Most humans have a very strong tendency to use one 
hand for many gross and fine motor tasks such as throwing, 
writing, and picking up small objects. However, humans 
also show differing degrees of hand preference (Dassonville
et al. 1997), and some individuals may use their 
dominant hand less than others for some tasks. Therefore, 
understanding how the degree of handedness affects recovery
from hemiplegia, as a result of unilateral brain injury, 
may influence the design and implementation of rehabilitation
methods.
In humans, blood oxygen level–dependent functional 
imaging of the motor cortex was previously shown to be 
more lateralized to the hemisphere contralateral to the 
moving hand with increasing degrees of handedness in both 
right-handed and left-handed subjects (Dassonville et al. 
1997). This suggests that a greater degree of hand preference
in a fine motor task may be associated with a greater 
degree of cerebral dominance and interhemispheric inhibition
(IHI) for such tasks on the side of the brain contralateral
to the preferred hand. Recovery of fine hand motor 
function after damage to the dominant side of the brain may 
therefore be closely related to the degree of handedness 
that existed before damage because IHI would be reduced 
more after damage to a highly dominant hemisphere than 
to a weakly dominant hemisphere. That is, a large decrease 
in IHI to the undamaged hemisphere may result in more 
skillful movements of the non-dominant hand and greater 
learned non-use of the dominant hand, thereby causing 
poor recovery of the dominant hand.
Observations of monkeys and apes indicate a large range 
of degree of hand preference in fine motor tasks (Spinozzi 
et al. 2007; Schmitt et al. 2008; Zhao et al. 2012). This is 
ideal for studying effects of handedness on recovery of fine 
motor skills after brain damage because this wide gradation 
of hand preference can be assessed, which is not the case 
for human studies. Study of motor recovery in animal models
with hand function similar to humans following selective
injury to the hemisphere opposite the preferred hand 
may provide important insight into how the degree of hand 
preference affects motor recovery in patients with stroke 
or lateral cortical brain trauma. This information may also 
provide some insight into the issue of lateralization of cortical
motor control in these animals.
The purpose of this study was to test whether laterality
in the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta), as indicated 
by degree of hand preference in a unimanual fine motor 
task, influences spontaneous recovery of hand motor function
after controlled brain injury to lateral frontal lobe 
motor areas of the hemisphere contralateral to the preferred
hand. We hypothesized that monkeys with a high 
degree of hand preference will be slower to recover use 
of the preferred hand and exhibit a longer lasting impairment
of skilled hand use after such injury than monkeys 
with a low degree of hand preference. We also examined 
the effects of lesion volume on recovery of dexterity in 
these lesions limited to M1 and LPMC because our previous
work showed the effects of lesion volume on recovery 
for a wide range of lesion types (M1 alone, M1 + LPMC, 
M1 + LPMC + supplementary motor area, and larger nonfocal
lesions). We hypothesized that spontaneous recovery 
of dexterity would be poorer with increased lesion size 
within M1 and LPMC.
Methods
Animals
Ten adult rhesus monkeys (M. mulatta) with a wide range 
of hand preferences served as subjects for these experiments
(Table 1). The post-lesion duration over which monkeys
were studied varied, because an important purpose of 
this research was to examine the time-course of reorganization
of corticofugal connections in response to brain injury 
(McNeal et al. 2010) and cellular/molecular events which 
characterize the recovery process (Nagamoto-Combs et al. 
2007, 2010). The monkeys were housed and maintained 
in a United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)-
approved and inspected facility. All behavioral protocols 
were approved by the University of South Dakota Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee and performed 
according to USDA, National Institutes of Health and Society
for Neuroscience guidelines for the ethical treatment of 
animals. Prior to testing, each monkey was evaluated by a 
primate veterinarian and judged to be healthy and free of 
any neurological deficits.
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
11 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
Apparatus
The monkeys were tested on three different tasks that 
involved reaching and manipulating food targets: a standard 
dexterity board (sDB—described in Pizzimenti et al. 2007), 
a modified dexterity board (mDB—Pizzimenti et al. 2007), 
and a modified movement assessment panel (mMAP—
Darling et al. 2006). The sDB task allowed the monkey to 
choose which hand to use for acquiring the food targets 
and was implemented to test magnitude of hand preference 
(see below). The other two tasks (mDB and mMAP) were 
used to test motor performance of both hands with devices 
designed to allow experimenter control over which hand 
was used to grasp and manipulate food targets without putting
restraints on the monkey. We do not report on recovery
in the mMAP task in this paper because previous work 
has shown that strength and direction (right/left) of hand 
preference may vary with task in rhesus monkeys (Lehman 
1980). Thus, we focused on recovery in mDB task which is 
very similar to the sDB task on which hand preference was 
evaluated.
Behavioral procedures
Behavioral assessments of upper limb and hand movements 
for the sDB and mDB tasks have been described previously 
(Darling et al. 2006; Pizzimenti et al. 2007). Briefly, hand 
preference was assessed before training began in the mDB 
task by tabulating hand use data on initial reaches and successful
acquisitions of pellets from each well of the sDB 
task with opportunity to acquire 50 food pellets on each 
of three consecutive days (Nudo et al. 1992). The monkey 
could use either hand to retrieve the pellet in this task. A 
handedness index was derived from the ratio of right hand 
reaches to left hand initial reaches and a ratio of right hand 
to left hand retrievals for each of the four wells (Eq. 1—
Nudo et al. 1992). The preference score indicates the percentage
of trials in which the preferred hand was used on 
more than 50 % of the trials—i.e., a score of 100 indicates 
only the preferred hand was used on every trial (100 % of 
the trials), a score of 50 would mean that the preferred hand 
was used on 50 % more trials than the non-preferred hand, 
and a score of 0 would mean each hand was used on 50 % 
of the trials.
where HI = handedness index, P average percentage of 
responses (average of initial reaches and retrievals) made 
with the preferred hand.
The mDB task was performed every 0.5–3 weeks prelesion.
The final five pre-lesion experiments were conducted
over a 6- to 11-week period and demonstrated relatively
stable levels of performance (e.g., Fig. 1—note that 
average mDB performance scores were consistently over 
400 in the last 5 pre-lesion tests) before lesions were made 
to cortical motor areas. Post-lesion data were collected 
from both limbs during weekly experimental sessions after 
the surgery for the first 8 weeks. After the 8th post-lesion 
week, experiments were performed every other week. 
Each monkey was food-restricted for 18–24 h prior to 
(1) HI = (P − 50) × 2
Table 1 Characteristics of monkeys (in order of ascending degree of hand preference)
LPMC lateral premotor cortex
a Age at time of lesion
b Gray matter lesion volume
c White matter lesion volume
d M1—primary motor cortex
e Lateral premotor cortex
f Performed bimanual task before and after lesion
Monkey Agea (years) Sex Handedness 
index
Lesion location GMLVb WMLVc Post-lesion 
duration (months)
SDM78 10.6 M 2.4 R M1d + LPMCe 203.7 55.7 1
SDM70 7.2 M 4.4 R M1 + LPMC 143.27 7.76 6
SDM48 6.8 F 6.0 R M1 + LPMC 220.31 23.12 12
SDM79 9.8 M 14.0 L M1 + LPMC 157.20 34.49 1
SDM55 11.8 M 20.0 L M1 + LPMC 207.64 20.51 12
SDM45 4.9 M 21.3 R M1 + LPMC 212.64 23.02 6
SDM49 3.5 M 65.0 R M1 + LPMC 202.91 53.64 1
SDM80 8.8 M 75.7 L M1 + LPMC 150.72 10.47 3
SDM74f 8.6 M 93.2 R M1 + LPMC 192.56 16.26 3
SDM64 13.6 F 95.3 L M1 + LPMC 217.92 43.04 6
( 8.0.0.2542.1989985257 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
12 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
testing sessions to ensure sufficient motivation for the foodretrieval
tasks. This schedule of post-lesion testing was 
designed to permit study of spontaneous (natural) recovery
, rather than more intense daily post-lesion training/task 
practice as carried out in some previous non-human primate
work (e.g., Murata et al. 2008; Kaeser et al. 2011).
For the mDB task, the monkey retrieved small fruit-flavored
food pellets from each of 5 wells of the dexterity board. 
Full testing sessions included five trials for each well (A–E) 
for both limbs (Pizzimenti et al. 2007). Order of performing 
with each hand on the different wells was varied among monkeys
and on different testing days in pre-lesion tests, but the 
contralesional hand was always tested first in post-lesion tests.
Surgical procedures
To examine the effects of an isolated injury to frontal cortical
motor areas on fine motor control, lesions were made 
to the arm areas of primary motor cortex (M1) + the adjacent
lateral premotor cortex (LPMC) in the hemisphere 
contralateral to the preferred hand (Table 1). The lesions 
were created using subpial aspiration to resect the arm 
areas of M1 and LPMC that were localized using intracortical
microstimulation. Extreme care was taken during the 
aspiration process to avoid extensive, unintended postoperative
subcortical white matter damage. This is of particular
concern in the white matter territory located beneath 
the superior precentral sulcus and central sulcus because 
motor pathways from medial wall origin travel to cortical 
and subcortical targets in this immediate region (Morecraft 
et al. 2002; Schmahmann and Pandya 2006). Thus, in each 
case, at the edge of the lesion site, a portion of the motor 
cortex residing in close proximity to the superior precentral 
sulcus and the lower anterior bank of the central sulcus was 
intentionally spared. In addition to minimizing subcortical 
injury and sparing medial motor area axons, this approach 
was taken to ensure a similar lesion design across all cases 
studied (limited to M1 and LPMC) that would produce a 
similar experimental state from which each case could 
recover motor function. Each monkey was administered an 
antibiotic 24 h prior to surgery and after surgery for 9 consecutive
days. Details of the surgical procedures have been 
outlined previously (Pizzimenti et al. 2007; McNeal et al. 
2010).
Data acquisition and analysis
Calibrated video data were acquired from 4 cameras during 
the mDB task to enable three-dimensional (3D) measurements
of positions and motions of the thumb and index tips 
(Pizzimenti et al. 2007). Locations of the tips of the index 
finger and thumb were manually digitized using SIMI 
motion analysis software and used to compute measures 
of grip aperture (as a measure of finger–thumb coordination
) and distance of fingertip and thumb tip from pellet (as 
measures of reach accuracy) when the finger first touched 
the dexterity board or food pellet (identified by visual 
inspection of the video records). Temporal data were used 
to compute reach duration (time from hand exit of portal to 
first contact of dexterity board), duration of first manipulation
(time from contact with pellet until pellet is acquired 
in grasp or contact with the pellet is broken), number of 
manipulation attempts, and total manipulation duration 
(time from first contact with pellet until pellet is acquired 
and hand movement toward cage begins).
These 3D measurements, along with temporal data, 
were then normalized and used to compute an overall 
Fig. 1 Performance scores for SDM55 on mDB best well (a) and 
2nd well (b) tasks. Each plotted point is the mean performance score 
for one test session. Error bars are 1 SD. The different symbols refer 
to overall (filled circle), manipulation (triangle), and reach (open circle) performance scores. The horizontal lines represent mean overall, 
manipulation, and reach performance scores for the last 5 pre-lesion 
tests
(8.0.0.2542.261657647 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
13 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
performance score (see Pizzimenti et al. 2007), which provides
a relative measure of the monkey’s ability to complete
the task on each well. A performance score of zero 
occurred when no attempt was made to retrieve the pellet. 
The highest performance scores occurred on successful trials
when the subject performed with the lowest reach and 
manipulation durations, highest accuracy (smallest distance 
between index tip and pellet at initial contact), smallest grip 
aperture at contact, and fewest numbers of lost contacts of 
the digit with the pellet with either hand (i.e., 1,000 if a 
single trial had the best score for each component among 
pre-lesion trials for both hands). To ensure discrimination 
between trials where no attempt was made (performance 
score = 0) and where a failed attempt occurred, failed 
attempts received a minimum score of 50. We also computed
separate reach and manipulation performance scores 
to assess whether these aspects of the movements were 
affected differently following brain lesions (see Pizzimenti 
et al. 2007).
Computation of dependent measures of performance, skill, 
and recovery
There were five measures of performance scores in the 
mDB task (one for each of 4 wells and one for the pellet on 
the flat panel). An overall performance score was computed 
using scores from the well that the monkey performed with 
the highest skill during the last 25 pre-lesion trials (i.e., 
best well) and a 2nd smaller well, in which the monkey 
performed at about 1/2 the skill level observed with the best 
well. Skill was measured as the mean performance score 
divided by the standard deviation of performance scores for 
25 consecutive trials (over 5 test sessions—see Pizzimenti 
et al. 2007). Thus, high skill was demonstrated by high performance
scores with low variability. Separate reach and 
manipulation skill scores were computed (see Pizzimenti 
et al. 2007).
A recovery score was computed to reflect the recovery
in hand fine motor skill in the mDB task during postlesion
testing. The recovery score was computed by taking 
the ratio of highest post-lesion skill (computed from the 
mean and standard deviation of 25 consecutive post-lesion 
trials over 5 consecutive post-lesion testing sessions in 
the mDB best well and 2nd well tasks) to pre-lesion skill 
(i.e., over the last 5 consecutive pre-lesion testing sessions). 
A recovery score of zero indicates that the monkey showed 
no recovery (i.e., no attempts to acquire food targets in 
the mDB task), a score <1.0 indicates that the monkey 
recovered to a lower skill than in pre-lesion testing and a 
recovery score >1.0 indicates that the monkey recovered 
to perform better than pre-lesion skill levels (in terms of 
higher mean performance scores or lower variability of 
scores, or both).
We also investigated measures of impairment duration 
to examine whether recovery began sooner in monkeys 
with lower degree of hand preference. These measures 
were post-lesion week of 1st attempt (the week of the first 
trial in which the monkey reached and touched the food 
target in the mDB task); post-lesion week of 1st success 
(the week of the first trial in which the monkey successfully
retrieved the food target in the same tasks); and postlesion
week of 5 successes (the first week in which the 
monkey completed 5 successful consecutive retrievals of 
the food targets in the same tasks). These measures indicate
the duration of severe impairment (i.e., no attempt 
to acquire the food) and moderate impairment (until successful
acquisitions were made). We assessed whether 
duration and degree of initial impairment and recovery of 
motor function depended on magnitude of hand preference 
(handedness index) and lesion volume (total, gray matter, 
white matter) using linear correlation analyses. For the 
correlation analyses with lesion volume as the independent 
variable, we simply assessed which of total, gray matter 
and white matter lesion volumes had the highest correlation
with each dependent variable. We did not apply Bonferroni
corrections for the p values from the correlation 
analyses because we wished to assess possible relationships
between the important variables in this small group 
(10 monkeys for analysis of initial impairment, 7 for analysis
of recovery because only 4 weeks for recovery was 
permitted in three monkeys).
Histological tissue preparation and lesion site analysis
Nissl-stained tissue sections through the lesion site were 
prepared using standard histochemical methods as formerly 
described (Morecraft et al. 1992, 2004, 2012). Briefly, to 
analyze the lesion, Nissl-stained tissue sections spaced 
500 µm apart through the lesion site were evaluated using 
an Olympus BX51 microscope (Leeds Precision, Minneapolis
, MN, USA) for gray matter removal and underlying 
white matter fiber bundle involvement. The subcortical bundles
were defined according to the atlas of Schmahmann and 
Pandya (2006), and gray matter regions (cytoarchitectonic 
areas 6, 4, 3, 2, and 1) were defined according to the criteria 
of Morecraft et al. (2004, 2012). After detailed microscopic 
analysis, the cortical and subcortical limits of each lesion site 
were plotted onto anatomically homologous Nissl-stained 
tissue sections from the non-lesioned hemisphere (see Figs. 1 
and 3 of Darling et al. 2011) using the microscope and an 
attached MAC 5000 motorized stage (Ludl Electronic Products
, Hawthore, NY, USA) which was attached to Neurolucida
data collection software (MBF Bioscience, Williston, 
VT, USA). Gray matter and white matter lesion site volumes 
were then calculated using Neurolucida software as previously
described (Pizzimenti et al. 2007; Darling et al. 2009).
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-680813684)
14 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
Results
Lesion site analysis
The descriptions and accompanying figures of the lesion 
site analysis for all cases except SDM49, SDM74, SDM78, 
SDM79 and SDM80 have been presented in our previous
reports (Darling et al. 2009; McNeal et al. 2010; 
Nagamoto-Combs et al. 2010). Thus, an account of the 
histological lesion analysis for these five unreported cases 
is provided below.
SDM49
With respect to case SDM49, the lesion site was similar
to all other animals evaluated in this study in that the 
gray matter resection was restricted to the arm region of 
the primary motor cortex (M1) and dorsolateral premotor 
cortex (LPMCd) (Fig. 2). Specifically, the arm region of 
M1 was fully removed with the exception of cortex lining 
the depths of the anterior bank of the central sulcus. The 
face and leg areas of M1 were fully spared. The lesion 
from M1 extended rostrally to involve the inferior portion 
Fig. 2 Line drawings of the lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres
of case SDM49 which received an M1 + LPMC lesion. 
Representative coronal sections through the lesion site are located 
immediately below the lateral views. The left hemisphere illustrates
the location of the cortical lesion (blackened area) and the 
right hemisphere the location of the superimposed lesion (outlined 
area) that was used to calculate the respective gray and white matter
lesion volumes using Nissl-stained tissue sections. Coronal panelsa–d are all through the lesion site on the left hemisphere. In each 
coronal section, the major region of extirpated cortex is identified 
by the bold italicized conventions. Pertinent Brodmann’s cytoarchitectonic
areas are indicated on the coronal sections immediately 
below or within the gray matter (small italicized numbers/letters), 
and the respective boundaries are identified by the arrow heads. 
Identified in the subcortical white matter region are the putative 
locations of the fronto-occipital fasciculus (FOF) and superior longitudinal
fasciculus subcomponent II (SLFII). The pullout illustrates
the microstimulation map on the left hemisphere. On the 
map, each black dot represents a stimulation point with the affiliated
movement(s) observed following stimulation. A arm of M1, 
ac anterior commissure, Amy amygdala, as spur of arcuate sulcus, 
Ca caudate nucleus, cgs cingulate sulcus, cl claustrum, cs central 
sulcus, ecs ectocalcarine sulcus, El elbow, GP globus pallidus, Fa
face of M1, H hip, Hp hippocampus, HL hindlimb of M1, Hy hypothalamus
, ic internal capsule, ilas inferior limb of arcuate sulcus, 
ios inferior occipital sulcus, ips intraparietal sulcus, L leg, lf lateral 
fissure, LPMCd dorsal lateral premotor cortex, ls lunate sulcus, M1
primary motor cortex, NR no response, OT optic tract, ots occipitotemporal
sulcus, ps principal sulcus, Pu putamen nucleus, rs rhinal 
sulcus, Sh shoulder, slas superior limb of arcuate sulcus, spcd superior
precentral dimple, sts superior temporal sulcus, Th thalamus, 
UL upper lip, v ventricle, Wr wrist
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
15 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
of cytoarchitectonic area 6DC of the dorsal lateral premotor
cortex. A small portion of the dorsal part of area 6Va of 
the ventral lateral premotor cortex was removed, whereas 
cortex lining the banks of the arcuate sulcus was largely 
spared. This case sustained greater subcortical white matter 
damage than all other cases reported in this study except 
SDM78 (Table 1). The additional white matter damage in 
SDM49 occurred specifically at mid-levels of the resection
, where the lesion site dipped inferiorly to involve the 
lateral part of the frontal occipital fasciculus (FOF) and 
medial part of subsector II of the superior longitudinal fasciculus
(SLF II) (Fig. 2b, c). From this location, the lesion 
extended inferiorly ending above the body of the caudate 
nucleus, sparing Muratoff’s bundle (MB) located directly 
above the caudate. Further caudally, subcortical white matter
located below the extirpated gray matter was spared 
(Fig. 2d).
SDM 74
On the lateral surface, the lesion site involved area 6DC 
anterior to the precentral sulcus and extended rostrally to 
involve the caudal part of area 6DR above the superior limb 
of the arcuate sulcus (Fig. 3). The ablation also included 
cortex forming part of the dorsal bank of the arcuate sulcus. 
From this location, the lesion extended slightly inferiorly 
to involve cortex forming the banks of the arcuate spur, 
caudal bank of the upper part of the inferior limb of the 
Fig. 3 Line drawings of the lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres
of case SDM74 which received an M1 + LPMC lesion. 
Representative coronal sections through the lesion site are located 
immediately below the lateral views. The left hemisphere illustrates 
the location of the cortical lesion (blackened area) and the right
hemisphere the location of the superimposed lesion (outlined area) 
that was used to calculate the respective gray and white matter lesion 
volumes. Coronal panelsa–d are all through the lesion site on the left
hemisphere. In each coronal section, the major region of extirpated 
cortex is identified by the bold italicized conventions. Pertinent Brodmann
’s cytoarchitectonic areas are indicated on the coronal sections 
immediately below, within, or above the gray matter (small italicized 
numbers/letters), and the respective boundaries are identified by the 
arrow heads. The pullout illustrates the microstimulation map on the 
left hemisphere. On the map, each black dot represents a stimulation 
point with the affiliated movement(s) observed following stimulation. 
H hip, LL lower lip, OC optic chiasm, To tongue. For other abbreviations
, see Fig. 2
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1870497649)
16 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
arcuate sulcus, and a small part of adjacent area 6Va. The 
lesion extended caudally to effectively remove all of area 4 
located on the lateral surface. At the level of the central sulcus
, area 4 forming the convexity of the precentral gyrus, 
including the upper one-third to one-half of the anterior 
bank of the sulcus, was removed. This case sustained very 
little white matter damage that was limited to the region 
directly below the gray matter resection avoiding involvement
of all major subcortical white matter bundles.
SDM78
Gray matter removal was restricted to the arm regions 
of M1 and LPMC as determined by comparing the 
reconstructed lesioned hemisphere with the superimposed 
intracortical stimulation map (Fig. 4). Caudally, the lesion 
involved the upper part of area 4 lining the anterior bank 
of the central sulcus but spared part of area 4 in the lower 
half of the sulcus (Fig. 4d). Rostrally, gray matter removal 
involved the entire portion of area 4 on the gyral surface 
and the inferior part of area 6DC including the caudal and 
inferior most part of area 6DR. The gray matter lesion abutting
the arcuate sulcus extended into the sulcus to include 
a small portion of cortex lining the dorsal part of the sulcus.
Subcortical white matter damage was mostly limited 
to the general region directly below the gray matter resection.
However, at coronal levels just caudal to the anterior 
commissure, the white matter lesion extended inferiorly to 
Fig. 4 Line drawings of the lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres
of case SDM78 which received an M1 + LPMC lesion. 
Representative coronal sections through the lesion site are located 
immediately below the lateral views. The left hemisphere illustrates
the location of the cortical lesion (blackened area) and the 
right hemisphere the location of the superimposed lesion (outlined 
area) that was used to calculate the respective gray and white matter
lesion volumes. Coronal panelsa–d are all through the lesion 
site on the left hemisphere. In each coronal section, the major 
region of extirpated cortex is identified by the bold italicized conventions.
Pertinent Brodmann’s cytoarchitectonic areas are indicated
on the coronal sections immediately below, within, or above
the gray matter (small italicized numbers/letters), and the respective
boundaries are identified by the arrow heads. Identified in 
the subcortical white matter region are the putative locations of 
the FOF and SLFII. The pullout illustrates the microstimulation 
map on the left hemisphere. On the map, each black dot represents
a stimulation point with the affiliated movement(s) observed 
following stimulation. An ankle, D digit. For other abbreviations, 
see Fig. 2
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.493541930)
17 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
involve the white matter territory corresponding to the dorsomedial
part of the SLF II, as well as the mid-sector of the 
fronto-occipital fasciculus (FOF) (Fig. 4a, b).
SDM79
Gray matter removal in case SDM79 was limited to the 
arm regions M1 and LPMC (Fig. 5). Specifically, the lesion 
involved removal of area 4 on the lateral surface, sparing
part of area 4 in the lower region of the central sulcus 
(Fig. 5b–d). Rostrally, the lesion involved the inferior half 
of area 6DC and spread anteriorly to involve a small section
of caudal area 6DR. Cortex lining the arcuate sulcus 
was spared. Subcortical white matter damage was largely 
limited to the adjacent underlying white mater with the 
exception of some involvement anteriorly of the superior 
longitudinal fasciculus II (SLF II). Specifically, the lesion 
occupied the dorsomedial sector of the SLF II territory 
(Fig. 5a, b).
SDM80
The gray and white matter lesions in case SDM80 formed 
the second smallest lesion of all cases studied (only SDM70 
had a smaller lesion) (Fig. 6; Table 1). The gray matter of 
the M1 and LPMC arm areas was removed on the lateral 
Fig. 5 Line drawings of the lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres
of case SDM79 which received an M1 + LPMC lesion. 
Representative coronal sections through the lesion site are located 
immediately below the lateral views. The right hemisphere illustrates
the location of the cortical lesion (blackened area) and the 
left hemisphere the location of the superimposed lesion (outlined 
area) that was used to calculate the respective gray and white matter 
lesion volumes. Coronal panelsa–d are all through the lesion site 
on the right hemisphere. In each coronal section, the major region 
of extirpated cortex is identified by the bold italicized conventions. 
Pertinent Brodmann’s cytoarchitectonic areas are indicated on the 
coronal sections immediately below, within, or above the gray matter
(small italicized numbers/letters), and the respective boundaries
are identified by the arrow heads. Identified in the subcortical 
white matter region are the putative locations of the FOF and SLFII. 
The pullout illustrates the microstimulation map on the right hemisphere.
On the map, each black dot represents a stimulation point 
with the affiliated movement(s) observed following stimulation. LL
lower lip, stn subthalamic nucleus, T tail. For other abbreviations, 
see Figs. 2 and 3
(8.0.0.2542.142170039 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
18 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
convexity sparing the cortex in both the central sulcus caudally
and arcuate sulcus rostrally. White matter involvement
was very minimal, involving only the subjacent white 
matter layer located immediately below the vacated gray 
matter region. All major subcortical bundles (i.e., SLF and 
FOF) were spared.
Behavioral analysis
As we have shown previously, performance scores on the 
mDB task were fairly stable before the lesions and declined 
immediately after the lesion, but then gradually increased 
as the monkeys recovered upper limb function (e.g., Fig. 1, 
also see Fig. 4C of Darling et al. 2009). Similar to our 
previous reports (Darling et al. 2009; McNeal et al. 2010), 
all monkeys in the present study were clearly impaired with 
flaccid paresis of the contralateral upper limb for the first 
few days post-lesion and then started to gradually recover 
hand function. They were all able to perform the motor 
tasks successfully after the lesion, with varying levels of 
skill, including cases SDM49, SDM78, and SDM79 with 
only 4 post-lesion weeks for recovery (Table 2).
Impairment over the first few weeks after the lesion was 
dependent on lesion volume but not degree of hand preference.
Correlation analysis showed that the post-lesion 
duration until the first attempt on any well (and 2nd well) 
was positively correlated with total (gray + white matter) 
lesion volume (p < 0.029), indicating that larger lesions 
Fig. 6 Line drawings of the lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres
of case SDM80 which received an M1 + LPMC lesion. 
Representative coronal sections through the lesion site are located 
immediately below the lateral views. The right hemisphere illustrates
the location of the cortical lesion (blackened area) and the left
hemisphere the location of the superimposed lesion (outlined area) 
that was used to calculate the respective gray and white matter lesion 
volumes. Coronal panelsa–d are all through the lesion site on the 
right hemisphere. In each coronal section, the major region of extirpated
cortex is identified by the bold italicized conventions. Pertinent 
Brodmann’s cytoarchitectonic areas are indicated on the coronal sections
immediately below or above the gray matter (small italicized 
numbers/letters), and the respective boundaries are identified by the 
arrow heads. The pullout illustrates the microstimulation map on the 
right hemisphere. On the map, each black dot represents a stimulation
point with the affiliated movement(s) observed following stimulation. ipcd Inferior precentral dimple. For other abbreviations, see 
Figs. 2, 3 and 4
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1683225895)
19 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
were associated with longer duration of severe impairment
as expected. However, this correlation was due primarily
to a threshold effect as all monkeys with total lesion 
volume below 236 mm3 had their first attempt at the first 
post-lesion week, while those with larger lesion volumes 
(243–260 mm3) had their first attempt in the 2nd (SDM48, 
SDM78, SDM49) or 4th (SDM64) post-lesion week 
(Fig. 7a). There were trends, but no significant correlations, 
of lesion volume with post-lesion duration until the first 
success (p = 0.07) or until consistent success (p = 0.09). 
There were also no significant correlations of handedness
index with post-lesion weekly duration until the first 
attempt and first success (best well, 2nd well, any well) 
(p > 0.14). Most monkeys were successful at least once in 
the first post-lesion week in which they made an attempt, 
indicating that the monkeys did not attempt the task until 
there was a high probability of success. Duration of recovery
to consistent successful performance was also not correlated
with handedness index in the mDB best well and 
2nd well tasks (p > 0.299).
Performance score deficits over the first 4 post-lesion 
weeks depended on lesion volume but not degree of hand 
preference. Average reach and manipulation performance 
scores over the first 4 post-lesion weeks decreased relative 
to the last 5 pre-lesion tests by variable amounts among 
the 10 monkeys. Ratios of post to pre-lesion reach (mDB 
best well task, p = 0.05) and manipulation (mDB best 
well, p = 0.05 and 2nd well tasks, p = 0.033, Fig. 7b) 
mean performance scores over the first four post-lesion 
weeks were negatively correlated with total lesion volume
, indicating greater performance deficits with larger 
lesion volumes. However, these deficits were not correlated
with handedness index (Fig. 8, p > 0.36). Although 
the monkey with the highest handedness index (SDM64) 
showed the largest initial performance score declines 
(77–98 % in reach and manipulation performance scores), 
another monkey with a slightly lower handedness index 
(SDM74—HI = 93.2) had little change in average reach 
and manipulation performance scores during the first 
4 post-lesion weeks (6 % decline to 5 % improvement). 
Notably, SDM74 had a much smaller white matter lesion 
volume than SDM64, which may account for the lower 
motor impairment experienced by this monkey. However
, SDM49 also had a large white matter lesion volume 
and relatively high handedness index (65), but had much 
lower post-lesion declines (i.e., 32–41 %) in mDB reach 
Fig. 7 Scatterplots showing post-lesion week of first attempt (with 
touch of the pellet) in the mDB task on any well (a) and initial postlesion
manipulation performance score deficits on the mDB (b) tasks 
(best and 2nd well) versus total lesion volume. Each plotted point in 
b is the ratio of average performance score over the first 4 post-lesion 
weeks divided by average performance score over the last 5 prelesion
weeks for a single monkey. The dashed vertical line in a shows 
total lesion volume of 240 mm The plotted lines in b (dashed line for 
best well, solid line for 2nd well) show best fit linear regression lines. 
Circles show data for monkeys with right hand preference (Rpref), 
and squares for monkeys with left hand preference (Lpref) in b
Table 2 Post-lesion duration of impairment in the mDB task for each 
monkey (listed in order of ascending degree of hand preference)
Monkey 1st attempt Post-lesion week 
of 1st success
Consistent 
success
Any 
well
2nd 
well
Best 
well
2nd 
well
Best 
well
2nd 
well
SDM78 2 2 2 2 2 2
SDM70 1 1 1 2 2 4
SDM48 2 2 2 3 5 6
SDM79 1 2 2 2 2 NA
SDM55 1 2 2 2 4 4
SDM45 1 1 1 1 1 1
SDM49 2 2 2 2 2 2
SDM80 1 1 2 2 2 3
SDM74 1 1 1 1 1 1
SDM64 4 4 4 4 6 5
( 8.0.0.2542.2102381932 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
20 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
and manipulation performance scores over the first four 
post-lesion weeks than SDM64.
Recovery of skill in reaching, but not manipulation, 
depended on lesion volume, but only recovery of manipulation
skill depended on degree of hand preference. Notably, 
all 7 monkeys with recovery durations longer than 4 weeks 
(i.e., excluding SDM49, SDM78, SDM79) showed good 
recovery in that the ratio of post-lesion to pre-lesion reaching
and manipulation skill exceeded 40 % in both best and 
2nd well mDB tasks. SDM49 also showed good recovery 
of skill in the mDB task as mean performance scores at 
1 month after the lesion were comparable to those in the 
last 5 pre-lesion tests, but this monkey is not included in 
the correlation analyses presented here due to the short 
recovery time. Recovery of reaching skill in the mDB best 
well task was negatively correlated with white (Fig. 9a, 
r = −0.82, p = 0.013) but not gray (Fig. 9b, p = 0.16) 
matter lesion volume. However, there was no evidence of 
dependence of recovery of manipulation skill in the mDB 
best well or 2nd well tasks on gray or white matter lesion 
volume (p > 0.15). Recovery of reaching skill in the mDB 
task was not correlated with handedness index (Fig. 10a, 
p > 0.17). However, recovery of manipulation skill was 
strongly negatively correlated with handedness index in 
the mDB 2nd well task (Fig. 10b, r = −0.9, p = 0.003), 
but not in the mDB best well task (Fig. 10b—p = 0.138). 
Although this high negative correlation with handedness 
index in the difficult mDB 2nd well task was essentially 
a two-point correlation (Fig. 10b), it demonstrates that 
the three monkeys with high handedness indexes (75–95) 
Fig. 8 Scatterplots showing performance deficits in the first 4 postlesion
weeks in the mDB best well (filled symbols) and 2nd well 
(open symbols) tasks for reaching (a) and manipulation (b) versus 
handedness index. Each plotted point is the ratio of average performance
score over the first 4 post-lesion weeks divided by average 
performance score over the last 5 pre-lesion weeks for a single monkey. Circles are data for monkeys with right hand preference (Rpref) 
and squares for monkeys with left hand preference (Lpref)
Fig. 9 Scatterplots showing recovery of reaching skill versus whitea
and grayb matter lesion volume. Each plotted point is the ratio of 
highest post-lesion skill over any period of 5 consecutive tests to skill 
to the last 5 pre-lesion tests in one monkey on the best well (filled 
symbols) and 2nd well (open symbols). The plotted line in a shows 
the best fit linear regression line for the relationship between recovery 
of reaching skill on the best well task and white matter lesion volume. 
Circles are data for monkeys with right hand preference (Rpref), and 
squares for monkeys with left hand preference (Lpref)
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1751010041)
21 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
recovered relatively poorly (i.e., to 60–80 % of pre-lesion 
manipulation skill) in comparison with the four monkeys 
with low handedness indexes (2–21) that all recovered to 
higher than pre-lesion manipulation skill.
Discussion
The results of this study show that pre-lesion degree of 
hand preference strongly influences recovery of contralesional
hand fine motor skill in a difficult task after a 
lesion to the upper limb areas of M1 and LPMC. Specifically
, a clear negative relationship was observed between 
handedness index and recovery of manipulation skill in 
the mDB 2nd well task, which required greater manipulation
ability than for the mDB best well task due to smaller 
diameter of the 2nd well, making it more difficult to manipulate
and grasp the food pellet. Importantly, the finding that 
recovery of manipulation skill did not depend on lesion 
volume emphasizes the important role of handedness and, 
presumably, of associated hemispheric dominance and IHI. 
Notably, recovery of manipulation skill in monkeys with 
high pre-lesion hand preference was very good in that they 
recovered to near pre-lesion levels in the 2nd well task, 
but was clearly poorer than in monkeys with a low hand 
preference as they recovered to better than pre-lesion skill. 
Lesion volume also influenced recovery in terms of duration
of persistence of a severe deficit in the mDB task (i.e., 
no attempt to perform the motor task to acquire food targets 
despite high motivation due to pre-testing food restriction) 
and recovery of reaching skill.
The ten monkeys in our study exhibited a wide range of 
handedness indexes and lesion volumes (Table 1). In particular
, one monkey (SDM64) exhibited a high handedness 
index of 95.3 and also showed the longest duration impairment
(i.e., until 1st attempts, successful acquisitions, and 
consistent success in these motor tasks) after the lesion and 
the poorest recovery in these fine motor tasks. This provides
some support for our hypothesis that monkeys with a 
high degree of handedness would be more incapacitated in 
use of the preferred hand after damage to the contralateral 
motor areas than those with a very low degree of handedness.
However, the larger lesion in this monkey suggests an 
important role for lesion size also. Several other findings 
provide additional support for the conclusion that degree 
of hand preference is important in recovery. For example, 
SDM49 and SDM78 both had larger white matter lesions 
than SDM64 but showed faster recovery in terms of postlesion
duration until consistent successful acquisitions in 
the mDB best well and 2nd well tasks. This suggests that, 
despite large lesions, a lower hand preference may allow 
faster recovery of hand function after cortical motor injury. 
Moreover, we observed previously that a monkey with 
much larger gray and white matter lesions than SDM64, 
but lower handedness index, recovered to higher skill levels 
in the mDB 2nd well task [see data for SDM50 in Tables 1 
and 2 of (Darling et al. 2009)]. Such findings provide additional
support for the idea that lower motor-related hemispheric
dominance may allow better recovery of upper limb 
motor function.
We were surprised that recovery of manipulation 
skill was not inversely correlated with lesion volume 
as we observed previously in a group of monkeys with 
a larger range of lesion volumes spanning more cortical
motor areas (i.e., lesions of M1 only, M1 + LPMC 
(M1 + LPMC + SMA, multi-focal lesions affecting also 
Fig. 10 Scatterplots showing post/pre-lesion skill ratios of the mDB 
best well (filled circles) and 2nd well (open circles) tasks for reaching
(a) and manipulation (b) versus handedness index. Each plotted
point is the ratio of highest post-lesion skill over any period of 5 consecutive
tests to skill over the last 5 pre-lesion tests in one monkey 
(filled symbols for best well, open symbols for 2nd well). The plotted 
line in b shows best fit linear regression line for the 2nd well task. 
Note that data for SDM74 are not shown in b for the best well task 
because of the very high ratio (7.4) showing substantially better skill 
was achieved after the lesion. Circles are data for monkeys with right
hand preference (Rpref) and squares for monkeys with left hand preference
(Lpref)
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
22 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
pre-SMA and cingulate motor areas) (Darling et al. 2009). 
Kaeser et al. (2011) also reported an inverse relationship 
between lesion volume within motor cortex and recovery 
of performance in a similar task, although their Fig. 4a 
shows that recovery was similar for lesions larger than 
40 mm3 (i.e., three monkeys with lesions of 15–40 mm3
showed the expected inverse relationship but two other 
monkeys with lesion volumes of 60 and 100 mm3 exhibited
similar recovery to the monkey with the 40 mm3
lesion). All of the lesion volumes in our monkeys greatly 
exceeded 100 mm3 and extended into LPMC, thus our 
results do not contradict those of Kaeser et al. (2011). 
Interestingly, greater white matter lesion volume appeared 
to be associated with more lasting deficits in reaching 
skill in the present work (Fig. 9), indicating a doubledissociation
between recovery of skill in reaching versus 
manipulation and their dependence, respectively, on lesion 
size versus strength of hand preference. Thus, for lesions 
confined to the regions of M1 and LPMC controlling the 
contralateral upper limb, it appears that increasing lesion 
volume has remarkably little effect on lasting impairment 
of hand fine motor function but does negatively impact 
gross upper limb motor function (reaching). This lack of 
effect of lesion volume in M1 and LPMC on recovery of 
manipulation skill may be partially due to the fact that 
these lesions spared the caudal M1 hand area located deep 
in the central sulcus, as we have discussed previously 
(Darling et al. 2009). These findings suggest that response 
to rehabilitation of the upper limb after damage to the 
motor cortex contralateral to the preferred/dominant hand 
may not be predictable from lesion size because strength 
of pre-lesion hand/hemispheric dominance appears to play 
an important role in recovery of grasping skill, which is a 
primary goal of upper limb rehabilitation.
Research suggesting lasting impairment of upper 
limb motor function after M1 lesions that damage the 
caudal M1 hand region has used cynomolgus macaques 
rather than rhesus macaques and report lower success 
rate and slower task performance after M1 lesions (Liu 
and Rouiller 1999; Kaeser et al. 2011). The slower task 
performance is possibly due to slower and less accurate 
reaching as well as poorer manipulation skills (separate 
reaching and manipulation performance scores were not 
reported). However, given that the cynomolgus macaques 
were able to acquire some of the food pellets from the 
wells of the dexterity board, there was apparently some 
recovery of grasping ability despite the damage to the 
caudal M1 hand area. It should also be noted that cynomolgus
macaques use a different form of precision grip, 
actually more like key grip between the thumb pad and 
radial side of the index, than rhesus macaques which 
mostly use precision grip between the pads of the thumb 
and index.
Previous work suggests that a high degree of handedness
is correlated with a greater degree of cerebral dominance
in the hemisphere contralateral to the preferred 
hand in humans (Dassonville et al. 1997). If this is also 
the case for rhesus monkeys, a higher degree of hand preference
may be a disadvantage for recovery of fine motor 
skill after an injury to a potentially more dominant hemisphere
(as shown in this report), because this hemisphere 
was relied on heavily for coordinating fine motor tasks of 
the contralesional arm. However, of 26 rhesus monkeys on 
which we have tested hand preference with the sDB task 
(some of these data are unpublished), 16 exhibited handedness
indexes of 60 (i.e., used the preferred hand 60 % more 
often than the non-preferred hand in a fine motor task) or 
below, suggesting lower hemispheric lateralization in this 
species than in humans who, on a fine motor task, would 
most likely use the same hand for all trials unless instructed 
to use the other hand. Moreover, IHI, which may help to 
maintain hemispheric dominance in motor tasks by suppressing
undesired activity of the opposite hemisphere (Pal 
et al. 2005), is lower when hand preference is weak (Dassonville
et al. 1997) and is also lower in musicians who are 
trained to use both hands at high skill levels (Ridding et al. 
2000) but exhibit a strong hand preference for daily fine 
motor tasks (Hughes and Franz 2007). Like rhesus monkeys
, musicians may also recover high levels of hand function
after damage to cortical motor areas (Wohrle and Haas 
2007) or damage to the descending fibers of those areas 
(Toole et al. 2007) perhaps because of lower IHI. Collectively
, these observations indicate that lower IHI may result 
in activity of both hemispheres during unimanual motor 
activities (i.e., less laterality in hemispheric activation), 
leading to less cerebral dominance and less interference 
with recovery of hand function after a lesion affecting one 
hemisphere or its descending motor output pathways. However
, it should also be recognized that reduced laterality can 
be characteristic of neurological disorders such as autism 
and schizophrenia (e.g., Dragovic and Hammond 2005; 
Anderson et al. 2011), suggesting that reduced laterality is 
not always beneficial and may be a factor in neurological 
disorders.
Although performance scores on the motor tasks 
decreased immediately following the lesion, all of the 
monkeys recovered ability to successfully perform the 
tasks in the weeks following the brain injury. The fact that 
most monkeys were able to successfully perform the tasks 
at near pre-lesion (or higher) skill levels after recovery 
suggests that there may be residual input from other areas 
of the brain that help to control arm and hand movements. 
One possible mechanism is accessing motor memory for 
the learned task, which may be located in undamaged 
areas of cortex or subcortical structures, and can be preserved
over time (Walton et al. 2008). Although the stored 
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1563738287)
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq190
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.11.013
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.07.034
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-007-1064-3
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00221-007-1064-3
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.2005.00519.x
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.3200/JMBR.39.1.3-8
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1227/NEU.0b013e31820c02c0
23 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
motor commands for a task would presumably be based 
on use of the damaged cortical areas in movement control, 
it is possible that these commands can be implemented 
through other brain areas as recovery occurs. Motor areas 
of the non-human primate brain immediately adjacent 
to or even relatively distant from the lesion may be taking
on duties of the lesioned area to compensate for the 
damage inflicted by the lesion (Nudo et al. 1996; McNeal 
et al. 2010). Such functional reorganization of the undamaged
motor cortical areas may take place regardless of the 
level of cerebral dominance. Another possible mechanism 
is that residual input from the undamaged contralesional 
hemisphere may assist in the recovery of the contralesional
arm motor control. Dassonville et al. (1997) found 
an inverse relationship between the degree of handedness 
and the extent of ipsilateral activation in the motor cortex.
In other words, a high degree of handedness is subserved
by activation of the motor cortex, which is mostly 
contralateral to the moving hand, whereas a low degree 
of handedness is associated with activation of motor cortices
in hemispheres both contralateral and ipsilateral to 
the moving hand. Thus, monkeys with lower handedness 
indexes are likely to have greater residual input from the 
ipsilateral motor areas and may therefore show a faster 
and greater recovery.
The interpretations of the current study rely on handedness
index as a valid measure of hand and hemispheric 
dominance. Previous studies of handedness in rhesus monkeys
have used both gross (e.g., reaching) and fine motor 
tasks (Lehman 1978a, b, 1980; Hopkins et al. 1989, 1992), 
but it has been suggested that only fine motor tasks, as we 
used here, produce reliable hand preferences (Hopkins 
et al. 1989, 1992). Since all tasks involved in the current 
study required fine hand/digit movements, including the 
test of hand preference, it is likely that the measured handedness
indexes are reliable and can be considered measures 
of cerebral dominance at least in terms of fine hand/digit 
movement control.
In conclusion, we found that monkeys with stronger 
laterality, as indicated by hand preference in a dexterity 
board task, tend to show poorer recovery of hand motor 
function after a lesion to the arm areas of primary motor 
cortex (M1) and the adjacent lateral premotor cortex contralateral
to the preferred hand. These findings support our 
initial hypothesis that recovery following frontal motor 
cortex injury would be inversely correlated with magnitude
of hand preference. These observations also suggest 
that humans with weaker hemispheric dominance, and perhaps
individuals who use both hands for some fine motor 
tasks (e.g., musicians—Toole et al. 2007; Wohrle and Haas 
2007), may have a more favorable prognosis for recovery 
of motor function after a stroke than humans with strong 
hemispheric dominance.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by National Institutes 
of Health Grant NS 046367.
References
Anderson JS, Druzgal TJ, Froehlich A et al (2011) Decreased interhemispheric
functional connectivity in autism. Cereb Cortex 
21:1134–1146. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhq190
Darling WG, Peterson CR, Herrick JL, McNeal DW, Stilwell-Morecraft
KS, Morecraft RJ (2006) Measurement of coordination of 
object manipulation in non-human primates. J Neurosci Methods 
154:38–44. doi:10.1016/j.jneumeth.2005.11.013
Darling WG, Pizzimenti MA, Rotella DL et al (2009) Volumetric 
effects of motor cortex injury on recovery of dexterous movements. 
Exp Neurol 220:90–108. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.07.034
Darling WG, Pizzimenti M, Hynes SM, Rotella, DL, Headley G, Ge J, 
Stilwell-Morecraft KS, McNeal DW, Solon-Cline KM, Morecraft 
RJ (2011) Volumetric effects of motor cortex injury on recovery 
of ispsilesional dexterous movements. Exp Neurol 231:56–71
Dassonville P, Zhu XH, Uurbil K, Kim SG, Ashe J (1997) Functional 
activation in motor cortex reflects the direction and the degree of 
handedness. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94:14015–14018 [erratum 
appears in Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1998 Sep 15;95(19):11499]
de Freitas PB, Krishnan V, Jaric S (2007) Force coordination in 
static manipulation tasks: effects of the change in direction 
and handedness. Exp Brain Res 183:487–497. doi:10.1007/
s00221-007-1064-3
Dragovic M, Hammond G (2005) Handedness in schizophrenia: a 
quantitative review of evidence. Acta Psychiatr Scand 111:410–
419. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2005.00519.x
Duff S, Sainburg R (2007) Lateralization of motor adaptation reveals 
independence in control of trajectory and steady-state position. 
Exp Brain Res 179:551
Harris JE, Eng JJ (2006) Individuals with the dominant hand affected 
following stroke demonstrate less impairment than those with 
the nondominant hand affected. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 
20:380–389
Hopkins WD, Washburn DA, Rumbaugh DM (1989) Note on hand 
use in the manipulation of joysticks by rhesus monkeys (Macaca 
mulatta) and chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes). J Comp Psychol 
103:91–94
Hopkins WD, Washburn DA, Berke L, Williams M (1992) Behavioral
asymmetries of psychomotor performance in rhesus monkeys 
(Macaca mulatta): a dissociation between hand preference and 
skill. J Comp Psychol 106:392–397
Hughes CM, Franz EA (2007) Experience-dependent effects in unimanual
and bimanual reaction time tasks in musicians. J Mot 
Behav 39:3–8. doi:10.3200/JMBR.39.1.3-8
Kaeser M, Brunet JF, Wyss A et al (2011) Autologous adult cortical 
cell transplantation enhances functional recovery following unilateral
lesion of motor cortex in primates: a pilot study. Neurosurgery
68:1405–1416. doi:10.1227/NEU.0b013e31820c02c0; 
discussion 1416–1407
Kimura D (1977) Acquisition of a motor skill after left-hemisphere 
damage. Brain 100:527–542
Kimura D, Archibald Y (1974) Motor functions of the left hemisphere.
Brain 97:337–350
Langan J, van Donkelaar P (2008) The influence of hand dominance 
on the response to a constraint-induced therapy program following
stroke. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 22:298–304
Lehman RA (1978a) The handedness of rhesus monkeys—I. Distribution.
Neuropsychologia 16:33–42
Lehman RA (1978b) The handedness of rhesus monkeys: II. Concurrent
reaching. Cortex 14:190–196
( 8.0.0.2542.1982894324 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cne.22218
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.12.005
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.12.005
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.01001.2007
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.01001.2007
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/neu.2009.0966
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn.00354.2007
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13576500701757532
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajp.20352
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.03.016
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/0000102881
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.048
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.22038
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.22038
24 Exp Brain Res (2013) 228:9–24
1 3
Lehman RA (1980) The handedness of rhesus monkeys. III. Consistency
within and across activities. Cortex 16:197–204
Liu Y, Rouiller EM (1999) Mechanisms of recovery of dexterity following
unilateral lesion of the sensorimotor cortex in adult monkeys.
Exp Brain Res 128:149–159
McCombe Waller S, Whitall J (2005) Hand dominance and side 
of stroke affect rehabilitation in chronic stroke. Clin Rehabil 
19:544–551
McNeal DW, Darling WG, Ge J et al (2010) Selective long-term reorganization
of the corticospinal projection from the supplementary 
motor cortex following recovery from lateral motor cortex injury. 
J Comp Neurol 518:586–621. doi:10.1002/cne.22218
Morecraft RJ, Geula C, Mesulam MM (1992) Cytoarchitecture and 
neural afferents of orbitofrontal cortex in the brain of the monkey. 
J Comp Neurol 323:341–358
Morecraft RJ, Herrick JL, Stilwell-Morecraft KS, Louie JL, Schroeder 
CM, Ottenbacher JG, Schoolfield MW (2002) Localization of 
arm representation in the corona radiata and internal capsule in 
the non-human primate. Brain 125:176–198
Morecraft RJ, Cipolloni PB, Stilwell-Morecraft KS, Gedney MT, Pandya
DN (2004) Cytoarchitecture and cortical connections of the 
posterior cingulate and adjacent somatosensory fields in the rhesus
monkey. J Comp Neurol 469:37–69
Morecraft RJ, Stilwell-Morecraft KS, Cipolloni PB, Ge J, McNeal 
DW, Pandya DN (2012) Cytoarchitecture and cortical connections
of the anterior cingulate and adjacent somatomotor fields in 
the rhesus monkey. Brain Res Bull 87:457–497. doi:10.1016/j.bra
inresbull.2011.12.005
Murata Y, Higo N, Oishi T, Yamashita A, Matsuda K, Hayashi 
M, Yamane S (2008) Effects of motor training on the recovery
of manual dexterity after primary motor cortex lesion in 
macaque monkeys. J Neurophysiol 99:773–786. doi:10.1152
/jn.01001.2007
Nagamoto-Combs K, McNeal DW, Morecraft RJ, Combs CK (2007) 
Prolonged microgliosis in the rhesus monkey central nervous system
after traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma 24:1719–1742
Nagamoto-Combs K, Morecraft RJ, Darling WG, Combs CK (2010) 
Long-term gliosis and molecular changes in the cervical spinal 
cord of the rhesus monkey after traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma
27:565–585. doi:10.1089/neu.2009.0966
Nudo R, Jenkins W, Merzenich M, Prejean T, Grenda R (1992) Neurophysiological
correlates of hand preference in primary motor 
cortex of adult squirrel monkeys. J Neurosci 12:2918–2947
Nudo RJ, Wise BM, SiFuentes F, Milliken GW (1996) Neural substrates
for the effects of rehabilitative training on motor recovery 
after ischemic infarct. Science 272:1791–1794
Pal PK, Hanajima R, Gunraj CA, Li JY, Wagle-Shukla A, Morgante 
F, Chen R (2005) Effect of low-frequency repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimulation on interhemispheric inhibition. J Neurophysiol
94:1668–1675
Pizzimenti MA, Darling WG, Rotella DL et al (2007) Measurement 
of reaching kinematics and prehensile dexterity in nonhuman primates.
J Neurophysiol 98:1015–1029. doi:10.1152/jn.00354.2007
Ridding MC, Brouwer B, Nordstrom MA (2000) Reduced interhemispheric
inhibition in musicians. Exp Brain Res 133:249–253
Schaefer SY, Haaland KY, Sainburg RL (2007) Ipsilesional motor 
deficits following stroke reflect hemispheric specializations for 
movement control. Brain 130:2146–2158
Schaefer SY, Haaland KY, Sainburg RL (2009) Hemispheric specialization
and functional impact of ipsilesional deficits in movement 
coordination and accuracy. Neuropsychologia 47(13):2953–2966
Schmahmann JD, Pandya DN (2006) Fiber pathways of the brain. 
Oxford University Press, New York
Schmitt V, Melchisedech S, Hammerschmidt K, Fischer J (2008) 
Hand preferences in Barbary macaques (Macaca sylvanus). Laterality
13:143–157. doi:10.1080/13576500701757532
Spinozzi G, Lagana T, Truppa V (2007) Hand use by tufted capuchins 
(Cebus apella) to extract a small food item from a tube: digit 
movements, hand preference, and performance. Am J Primatol 
69:336–352. doi:10.1002/ajp.20352
Toole JF, Flowers DL, Burdette JH, Absher JR (2007) A pianist’s 
recovery from stroke. Arch Neurol 64:1184–1188
Walton A, Scheib JL, McLean S, Zhang Z, Grondin R (2008) Motor 
memory preservation in aged monkeys mirrors that of aged 
humans on a similar task. Neurobiol Aging 29:1556–1562. 
doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.03.016
Wohrle JC, Haas F (2007) Hans von Bulow: creativity and neurological
disease in a famous pianist and conductor. Front Neurol Neurosci
22:193–205. doi:10.1159/0000102881
Zhang W, Sainburg RL, Zatsiorsky VM, Latash ML (2006) Hand 
dominance and multi-finger synergies. Neurosci Lett 409:200–
204. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2006.09.048
Zhao D, Hopkins WD, Li B (2012) Handedness in nature: first evidence
on manual laterality on bimanual coordinated tube task in 
wild primates. Am J Phys Anthropol 148:36–44. doi:10.1002/a
jpa.22038
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
