Poor Outcome of Experimental Ischemic Stroke in Type 2
Diabetic Rats: Impaired Circulating Endothelial Progenitor
Cells Mobilization
HongNa Yang, MD, PhD,* Shuang Ma, MD,† Ying Liu, MD,† Yi Li, MD,†
Wei Wu, MD, PhD,† EnJi Han, MD, PhD,† GuoYong Jia, MD,†
and CuiLan Wang, MD, PhD†‡

Background: It is well accepted that type 2 diabetic mellitus (T2DM) results in the
poor outcome of ischemic stroke. However, the mechanisms by which T2DM causes
aggravated cerebral ischemic/reperfusion (I/R) injury are not clear. Recently, endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are considered to be related with the outcome of
ischemic stroke. More importantly, T2DM can affect the function of circulating
EPCs. This study tried to investigate whether T2DM worsens the cerebral I/R injury
via affecting circulating EPCs. Methods: We used high-fat diet-fed and low-dose
streptozotocin-treated male rats receiving middle cerebral artery occlusion surgery
as animal model of focal cerebral I/R injury with T2DM (diabetic operated). And the
rats were divided into 4 groups: normal sham, diabetic sham, normal operated, and
diabetic operated. We measured the circulating EPCs counts and the levels of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase
(eNOS) in peripheral plasma of 4 groups. Results: We found that diabetic rats subjected to I/R exhibited significantly severe deterioration in neurologic deficits
compared with nondiabetic counterparts, which manifested higher infarct volume
and cell apoptosis as well as lower neurologic defective score. There was no significant difference on the plasma glucose of groups before cerebral I/R injury
compared with that of the groups posterior to cerebral I/R injury despite cerebral
I/R injury had the tendency to increase the plasma glucose no matter in the presence
or the absence of T2DM. In addition, there were the marked downregulation of
circulating EPCs counts and the levels of VEGF and eNOS in diabetic rats before
the cerebral I/R injury. Despite I/R injury without T2DM, there was a significant increase in the circulating EPCs counts, the circulating EPCs counts in I/R injury with
T2DM group were significantly decreased compared with those in the other 3
groups. We also observed that the level of eNOS was significantly improved by
I/R injury without considering the presence of T2DM. Conclusions: Thus, our
present study suggested that it might be the impaired EPCs mobilization into
the blood that contributed to the worse outcome of cerebral I/R injury with
T2DM. Key Words: Ischemic stroke—type 2 diabetes mellitus—endothelial
progenitor cells—mobilization.
Ó 2015 by National Stroke Association

From the *Department of Critical-Care Medicine, Qilu Hospital of
Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province; †Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province; and ‡Brain
Science Research Institute, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong
Province, China.
Received November 1, 2014; revision received December 16, 2014;
accepted December 17, 2014.

980

This research is supported by Shandong Province Natural Science
Foundation (Y2007C087) and Shandong Province Science and Technology Program (2014GSF118053 and 2009GG20002023).
Address correspondence to CuiLan Wang, MD, PhD, Department
of Neurology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China. E-mail: qlyywcl@163.com.
1052-3057/$ - see front matter
Ó 2015 by National Stroke Association
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2014.12.022

Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases, Vol. 24, No. 5 (May), 2015: pp 980-987

IMPAIRED EPC MOLIBILIZATION IN T2DM CAUSED THE WORSE CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC OUTCOME

Ischemic stroke is the most prevalent cause of mortality
and adult disability worldwide. More and more evidence
indicates that diabetes, especially type 2 diabetic mellitus
(T2DM) is an independent risk factor for ischemic stroke.
In addition, T2DM not only contributes to the higher mortality or recurrence of ischemic stroke1 but also results in
more insidious ischemic damage to brain, which manifests as small-vessel damages and increases the risk of
cognitive decline and dementia.2 However, there is controversy whether pretreatment with antidiabetic agents
(sulfonylureas) can result in the less-severe outcome of
stroke.3,4 Those risk factors including aging, obesity, and
dietetic/sedentary life style are not only involved in the
development of T2DM but also in the development of
ischemic stroke.5 But, these mutual risk factors cannot
be simply considered to be the cause of poor outcome of
ischemic stroke. In the last decade, some indicated that
dysfunctional cerebral neovascularization, exaggerated
neutrophil-mediated reperfusion injury, exacerbated
brain inflammation, or augmentation of endoplasmic
reticulum stress after acute ischemic stroke may worsen
the outcome of ischemic stroke with T2DM.6-9 But, not
all of these investigations were performed in animal
models that closely mimic human T2DM. Thus, it is
urgent to understand the probable mechanism by which
T2DM results in the poor outcome of ischemic stroke.
It is not new that endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs)
take part in the re-endothelialization and neovascularization of ischemic regions. A clinical trial suggested that
circulating EPC counts of ischemic stroke patients in
large-artery atherosclerosis and small-vessel disease etiologic subtypes correlated positively with functional
outcome of ischemic stroke.10 In addition, the number
of circulating EPCs arrived the peak at day 7 after acute
stroke, although circulating EPCs were rarely detected.10
However, the number and the function of circulating
EPCs in T2DM is impaired.11 More importantly, myocardial dysfunction with T2DM is related to the depletion
of EPCs.12 In addition, it has been demonstrated that
the impaired mobilization of EPCs contributed to the
worse outcome in acute myocardial infarction with
T2DM.13 Thus, these reminded us whether the impaired
function or counts of circulating EPCs contributed to the
poor outcome of experimental ischemic stroke rat models
with T2DM.
Thus, in the present study, we used high-fat diet
(HFD)-fed and low-dose streptozotocin (STZ)-treated
rats as animal model of T2DM. We tried to disclose the
relationship between circulating EPCs and the outcome
of ischemic stroke with T2DM.

Materials and Methods
Induction of Type 2 Diabetes
Male Sprague-Dawley rats (n 5 90) weighing110-140 g
were purchased from Animal Research Center of Shan-

981

dong Traditional Medicine University (Jinan, China).
The animals were maintained in temperature- and
humidity-controlled rooms on a 12 hour/12 hour light/
dark cycle. All animal protocols and procedures were
reviewed and approved by the guidelines of the Ethical
Committee for Animal Experiments of Shandong University. Type 2 diabetes of rats were induced by combination
of HFD (41% fat, 17% protein, 42% carbohydrate; Beijing
HFK Bio-Technology, China) and low-dose STZ according
to previously reported data.5 Briefly, the diabetic groups
of rats (n 5 50 per group) were fed with HFD for 2 weeks,
and then, given single low-dose STZ (Sigma; 32.5 mg/kg,
in .1 mol/L citrate buffer, pH 4.5) by intraperitoneal injection. Normal chow groups (n 5 40 per group) were fed
with normal diet and given vehicle citrate (pH 5 4.5,
1 mL/kg) buffer by intraperitoneal injection at the same
time as diabetic groups. The body weight and fasting
biochemical parameters of blood (including plasma
glucose [PGL], plasma triglycerides, plasma total cholesterol, and plasma insulin) were tested after 2 weeks of
STZ or vehicle injection. Only rats with PGL greater
than 11.1 mmol/L in 2 consecutive analyses were considered the diabetic rat models and selected for further
study. The rats continued to be fed on their respective
diets until the end of the study.

Induction of Cerebral Ischemia/Reperfusion of Rats
The normal rats and type 2 diabetic rats were randomly
divided into 4 groups: type 2 diabetic sham, type 2 diabetic cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), normal chow
sham, and normal chow cerebral I/R. We applied middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) as the model of focal
cerebral I/R. MCAO of normal rats and type 2 diabetic
rats were induced according to the previous method
with modifications.14 In brief, the rats were anesthetized
by 10% of chloral hydrate (3 mL/kg body weight (BW),
intraperitoneal injection (i.p.), and a ventral neck incision
was made to expose the right carotid bifurcation, the right
common carotid artery, the right internal carotid artery,
and the right external carotid artery. The monofilament
nylon with a silicone-beaded tip (Sunbio Biotech, Beijing),
.28 mm in diameter, was inserted into the right internal
carotid artery until resistance was felt at 16-20 mm from
the bifurcation of the right common carotid artery. The
monofilament nylon was then fixed and carefully withdrawn after 90 minutes of MCAO to permit reperfusion.
In normal sham-operated group and type 2 diabetic
sham-operated group, the same surgical procedures
were performed without suture insertion. We measured
neurologic defective–related indicators, including PGL
level, neurologic defect score, cerebral ischemic volume,
flow cytometry for EPCs, Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) test for vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS),
after 6 hours of reperfusion onset.

H. YANG ET AL.

982

Assessment of PGL Level, Neurologic Defect Score, and
Cerebral Ischemic Volume
Six hours after reperfusion onset, the fast PGL level of 4
groups was measured before assessing the neurologic
defect score in a blind manner. Data of 20 rats from
each group were averaged and expressed as the
mean 6 standard error of the mean (SEM). Analysis of
variance was used to analyze the data.
The 21-point behavioral scale (normal and maximum
score, 21) was applied to evaluate neurologic defects.15 A
lower score correlated with the worst neurologic defects.
Data of 20 rats from each group were averaged, expressed
as the mean 6 SEM, and compared between 2 groups.
After assessment of neurologic defective score, rats
from normal cerebral I/R and type 2 diabetic cerebral
I/R (n 5 5 per group) were killed using overdose of
10% of chloral hydrate (4 mL/kg BW, i.p.) to measure
the cerebral ischemic volume in a blind manner using
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. The
brains were immediately removed and stored at 220 C
for 20 minutes, then, 5 coronal sections were dissected.
All sections were incubated in 2% TTC at 37 C for 30 minutes. After incubation, all sections were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde buffer. After 24 hours, IPP6.0 system
(Media Cybernetics, USA) was used to calculate the cerebral ischemic volume. The total ischemic volume was
expressed as a percentage of cerebral ischemic volume
in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the lesion. Data from 4
rats were averaged, expressed as the mean 6 SEM, and
compared between 2 groups.

TUNEL Staining
Rats were randomly selected from 4 groups (n 5 5 per
group) after completing neurologic function assessment.
Rats were anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate
(3 mL/kg BW, i.p.) and perfused transcardially with ice
phosphate buffer saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. The 10-mm thickness of brain coronal sections
was sliced on a cryostat (Leica CM1850, Germany). Ten
serial sections with an interval of 50 mm were randomly
obtained from each rat. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining (Boster, China) was applied according to the
manufacturers’ instructions. After incubating in .025% 3,
3-diaminobenzidine plus .033% H2O2 in PBS for 10 minutes, the sections were counter stained with hematoxylin. After that, the sections were dehydrated, covered
with neutral balsam, and examined with a light microscope (Olympus, Japan). IPP6.0 was supplied to calculate
TUNEL staining positive cells. Five regions within the
cortex and penumbra per section were randomly selected
for cell counting on the cerebral ischemia hemisphere at
20 3 magnification. The total cell numbers and TUNELpositive cells were obtained in each region. The percentage of TUNEL-positive cells is described as the

percentage of the numbers of TUNEL-positive cells to
the total numbers of cells in each region. Data from 5
regions of 10 sections were averaged, expressed as the
mean 6 SEM, and compared between 2 groups.

Flow Cytometry Analysis
After 6 hours of reperfusion onset, peripheral blood
(n 5 5 per group) was taken from the left ventricle of heart
into a syringe containing .02% EDTA (Beyotime, China).
A volume of 3 mL EDTA–blood was centrifuged at
1000 rpm for 10 minutes, the supernatant were stored at
280 C for further ELISA tests of VEGF and eNOS. Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were isolated from the left
EDTA-blood samples (about 8 mL) according to the previous protocol with modifications.16 The blood was diluted
by the same volume of .9% saline and gently layered over
the equal volume of lymphocytes separation of rats
(Solarbio, China) for centrifugation (2000 rpm, 30 minutes). MNCs were transferred to a new tube from the
interface and washed twice by PBS (1000 rpm, 10 minutes). The staining procedures of flow cytometry for isolated MNCs were according to our previous protocols
with several modifications.17 The antibodies for EPC
staining were PerCP-labeled anti-CD34 antibody (Abcam,
UK), CY7 conjugated anti-CD133 antibody (Univ Bio,
China), and FITC-labeled anti-KDR/VEGFR2 antibody
(Abcam). In brief, the cells were incubated with these
antibodies at 4 C for 30 minutes, then, harvested by
centrifugation (1000 rpm*, 10 minutes). After that, the
cells were resuspended in PBS with .2 FBS for flow analysis (LSRFortessa cell analyzer; BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ).

Elisa Analysis for VEGF and eNOS in the Blood Plasma
The ELISA kits for VEGF and eNOS were purchased
from Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute. The protocols of
ELISA for detecting VEGF and eNOS were according to
the manufacturers’ instructions. Absorbance was recorded
at 450 nm using a microplate reader (Bio-Rad, USA). The
standards and blood plasma samples from 4 groups
(n 5 5 per group) were run in duplicate. Data from every
sample were averaged and expressed as the mean 6 SEM.

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad
Prism 5 (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA). Data
were expressed as means with SEM. Analysis of variance
and 2-sample t test were used for data analysis. Significance was set at P less than .05.

Results
The Effects of Combination Consecutive HFD and
Single Low-Dose STZ on Rats
Table 1 illustrated that consecutive HFD and single
low-dose STZ successfully induced type 2 diabetic rats.

IMPAIRED EPC MOLIBILIZATION IN T2DM CAUSED THE WORSE CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC OUTCOME

Table 1. Body weight and biochemical parameters of
normal and type 2 diabetic rats
Parameter

Normal

Diabetic

Body weight (g)
PGL (mmol/L)
PTG (mmol/L)
PTC (mmol/L)
PI (mmol/L)

220 6 8.1
4.4 6 0.7
1.2 6 0.4
1.0 6 .15
14.3 6 1.1

250 6 6.8*
19.2 6 5.4**
4.1 6 .3**
4.6 6 .3**
18.1 6 .8*

Abbreviations: PGL, plasma glucose; PI, plasma insulin; PTC,
plasma total cholesterol; PTG, plasma triglycerides; STZ, streptozotocin.
The combination of consecutive high-fat diet and low-dose STZ
treatment significantly elevated the levels of body weight, PGL,
PTG, PTC, and PI after 2 weeks of STZ injection compared with
those of normal diet-fed rats.
All the values (n 5 30 each group) are expressed as mean 6
standard error of the mean.
*P , .05; **P , .01 versus normal rat group.

These type 2 diabetic rats were characterized by significant increases in body weight, PGL, plasma triglycerides,
plasma total cholesterol, and plasma insulin compared
with normal diet-fed rats. Previously mentioned data
indicated that we successfully induced the rat models of
type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Significantly Accelerated
Cerebral Infarct Volume, Neurologic Defective Score,
and Cellular Apoptosis of Rats Subjected to Focal
Cerebral I/R Injury
We used MCAO as the model of focal cerebral I/R
injury. To clarify the effect of type 2 diabetes mellitus
on focal cerebral I/R injury, we applied TTC staining to
measure the cerebral infarct volume. As illustrated in
Figure 1, A,D, we found that type 2 diabetic rats subjected to cerebral I/R injury showed significantly
increased cerebral infarct volume compared to those
normal rats subjected to cerebral I/R injury. In addition,
we used 21-point behavioral scale to test the neurologic
defect of normal and type 2 diabetic rats resulting from
cerebral I/R injury. Statistical analysis demonstrated
that the neurologic defect score of type 2 diabetic cerebral
I/R rats was significantly decreased compared with that
of normal cerebral I/R rats (Fig 1, C). To further confirm
whether the distinction of cell apoptosis resulted in the
difference of neurologic defect of 2 groups, we applied
TUNEL staining to measure cell apoptosis of cerebral
ischemic hemisphere. As illustrated in Figure 1, B,E,
type 2 diabetic rats after cerebral I/R injury exhibited
more TUNEL-positive cells in cerebral ischemic hemisphere compared with normal rats. However, we barely
observed TUNEL-positive cells in normal and type 2 diabetic sham-operated rats.

983

The Effect of Focal Cerebral I/R Injury on the PGL
To test whether the change of the PGL caused by focal
cerebral I/R injury was related to the worsening outcome
of focal cerebral I/R injury with T2DM, we measured the
level of the PGL at 6 hours after reperfusion onset. As
shown in Figure 2, A, we observed that there was no significant difference on the PGL level between groups
before ischemic insult and groups posterior to ischemic
insult no matter the presence or the absence of T2DM,
although focal cerebral I/R injury had the tendency to
improve the level of the PGL.

Type 2 Diabetic Mellitus Significantly Decreased the
Circulating EPCs Counts, VEGF, and eNOS in the
Peripheral Blood Plasma of Rats Subjected to Focal
Cerebral I/R Injury
To clarify whether the effects of T2DM on EPCs, VEGF,
and eNOS contributed to the aggravating neurologic
defect of focal cerebral I/R injury, we applied flow cytometry to test the frequency of circulating EPCs and ELISA to
measure the levels of VEGF and eNOS in the peripheral
blood plasma. As illustrated in Figure 2, B, we observed
that focal cerebral I/R injury significantly increased the frequency of circulating EPCs in normal rats (**P ,.01). However, we found the opposite tendency in T2DM. And, focal
cerebral I/R injury significantly decreased the frequency of
circulating EPCs in normal rats (Fig 2, B, *P , .05). We also
noticed that circulating EPCs were not detectable in all
type 2 diabetic cerebral I/R injury rats. In addition, we
found there was significantly decreased frequency of circulating EPCs in type 2 diabetic cerebral I/R injury compared
with that in other 3 groups (Fig 2, B, **P , .01, *P , .05).
More importantly, the frequency of circulating EPCs in
T2DM sham-operated group was significantly decreased
compared with that in normal sham-operated group
(Fig 2, B, *P ,.05). In addition, statistical analysis indicated
that T2DM significantly decreased the levels of VEGF and
eNOS in peripheral blood plasma compared with normal
sham-operated rats without considering the presence of
cerebral I/R injury (Fig 2, C,D, **P , .01, *P , .05). We
also observed that cerebral I/R injury significantly
increased the level of eNOS in peripheral blood plasma
compared with that in sham-operated rats without considering the presence of T2DM (Fig 2, C,D, *P , .05). The
normal cerebral I/R injury rats exhibited significantly
increased level of VEGF in the peripheral blood plasma
compared with that in normal sham-operated rats whereas
there was no significant difference on the level of VEGF
between type 2 diabetic sham-operated group and type 2
diabetic cerebral I/R injury group.

Discussion
In this study, we used HFD-fed and low-dose
STZ-treated male rats receiving MCAO surgery as animal

984

H. YANG ET AL.

Figure 1. Effects of type 2 diabetic mellitus on cerebral infarct volume, neurologic defective score, and cell apoptosis of rats subjected to focal cerebral I/R injury.
(A) Representative TTC staining image at 6 hours after reperfusion onset of 4 groups (n 5 4 per group). Normal sham: normal rats receiving sham-operation;
normal I/R: normal rats subjected to cerebral I/R injury; diabetic sham: type 2 diabetic rats receiving sham-operation; diabetic I/R: type 2 diabetic rats subjected to
cerebral I/R injury. (B) Representative TUNEL staining in cerebral ischemic hemisphere at 6 hours after reperfusion onset in 200 3 magnification from normal I/R
group and diabetic I/R group (n 5 3 per group). (C, D and E) The bar graphs demonstrating that the number of TUNEL-positive cells (E) in cerebral ischemic
hemisphere and cerebral infarct volume (D) of type 2 diabetic rats following cerebral I/R injury at 6h after reperfusion onset were significantly increased while their
neurological defective score (C) on 6h after reperfusion onset was significantly decreased according to the 21-point score, compared with normal rats receiving focal
cerebral I/R injury. *P , .05; **P , .01; 2-sample t test. Abbreviations: I/R, ischemia/reperfusion; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; TUNEL, terminal
deoxynucleotidyl tranferase–mediated dUTP nick end labeling.

model of focal cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury with
T2DM. These HFD and low-dose STZ-treated rats were
considered to better mimic the natural history and exhibit
characters of clinical T2DM.5 As illustrated in Table 1, the
HFD and low-dose STZ-treated rats we induced manifested obesity, hyperlipemia, hyperglycemia, and insulin
resistance. Studies showed that brain infarct volume by
TTC staining was reliable between 6 and 72 hours after
ischemia.18 So, we selected 6 hours after reperfusion onset
to measure neurologic defect–related indicators. Consistent with previous results from different T2DM animal
models,7,9 our data also showed that T2DM significantly
exacerbated the neurologic defect of cerebral I/R injury,
which manifested higher infarct volume and lower
neurologic score (Fig 1, A,C,D). In addition, we also
observed that diabetic rats subjected to cerebral I/R
injury displayed more TUNEL-positive cells in the
ischemic hemisphere than cerebral I/R injury alone while
we barely observed TUNEL-positive cells in diabetic rats

before cerebral I/R injury (Fig 1, B,E). These data suggested that more TUNEL-positive cells in diabetic cerebral I/R injury were not caused by T2DM before
cerebral I/R injury. And there were other mechanisms
that contributed to exacerbate the neurodefective function
of cerebral I/R injury with T2DM.
It is estimated that hyperglycemia arises in 30%-40% of
people with acute ischemic stroke.2 Consistent with the
previous research, we observed that cerebral I/R injury
had the tendency to increase the PGL of normal group
and T2DM group (Fig 2, A). But there was no significant
difference between groups before cerebral I/R injury and
groups posterior to cerebral I/R injury no matter the presence or the absence of T2DM (Fig 1, E). Now, most scientists think that hyperglycemia is more often the result of
an acute stress response, typically named stress hyperglycemia, except for pre-existing but unrecognized diabetes.2
Thus, hyperglycemia in normal group or T2DM group
may be the result of an acute stress response, not simply

IMPAIRED EPC MOLIBILIZATION IN T2DM CAUSED THE WORSE CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC OUTCOME

985

Figure 2. The effect of focal cerebral I/R injury on the plasma glucose and effects of type 2 diabetic mellitus on the number of circulating EPCs and the expressions of VEGF and eNOS in the peripheral blood plasma of sham-operated rats and cerebral I/R–injured rats. (A) The bar graph showing that there was no significant difference on the plasma glucose level between the normal sham group and normal cerebral I/R injury group although cerebral I/R injury had the tendency
to increase the plasma glucose level. In addition, we also noticed that there was no significant difference on the plasma glucose level between the diabetic sham
group and diabetic cerebral I/R injury group although cerebral I/R injury had the tendency to increase the plasma glucose level (2-sample t test). (B) The bar graph
showing that type 2 diabetic sham-operated rats exhibited significantly decreased number of circulating EPCs compared with normal sham-operated rats or
normal cerebral I/R injury rats (n 5 5 per group). In addition, statistic analysis also showed that cerebral I/R injury significantly increased the number of circulating EPCs of normal rats whereas the number of circulating EPCs of type 2 diabetic rats after cerebral I/R injury was significantly decreased compare with that of
type 2 diabetic sham-operated rats. *P ,.05; **P ,.01; ANOVA. (C and D) The bar graphs indicating that normal cerebral I/R injury rats exhibited significantly
increased levels of VEGF and eNOS in the peripheral blood plasma compared with normal sham-operated rats. In addition, the levels of VEGF and eNOS in the
peripheric blood plasma of type 2 diabetic sham-operated rats were significantly decreased compared with those of normal sham-operated rats whereas we found the
same tendency on the levels of VEGF and eNOS in the peripheral blood plasma of type 2 diabetic cerebral I/R injury rats compared with those of normal cerebral I/R
injury rats. The bar graphs showing that cerebral I/R injury also significantly increased the level of eNOS in the peripheral blood plasma of type 2 diabetic mellitus.
However, there was no significant difference on the level of VEGF in the peripheral blood plasma between type 2 diabetic sham group and type 2 diabetic cerebral
I/R injury group. n 5 5 per group, *P , .05; **P , .01; ANOVA. Abbreviations: ANOVA, analysis of variance; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase; EPC,
endothelial progenitor cell; I/R, ischemia/reperfusion; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.

considered to be the cause of worse outcome of cerebral
I/R injury with T2DM. In T2DM group, chronic hyperglycemeia as the pre-existing risk factor may be the initial
cause resulting into the cascade, such as abnormalities
in blood vessels and eNOS,19 which contributed to the
worse outcome of cerebral ischemic I/R injury with
T2DM.
It is well known that circulating EPCs as bone marrow–
derived circulating immature cells with the ability to
differentiate into mature endothelial cells take part in
vascular homeostasis and angiogenesis.20 In addition, it
has been confirmed that acute ischemic stroke can result
in the increase of circulating EPCs counts. And the frequency of circulating EPCs negatively correlates to the
outcome of acute ischemic stroke.21-23 Some scientists
proposed that transplantation of EPCs might be an
effective strategy to protect against neurologic defect of
experimental ischemic stroke.24 But, the number and/or
function of circulating EPCs in T2DM were impaired,
which might result in the vessels-related complications
of diabetic mellitus.25-27 Now, CD34, CD133, and
VEGFR2 as markers of EPCs were well accepted.20
Thus, we used flow cytometry to detect and analysis the
ratio of CD341, CD1331, and VEGFR21 EPCs in CD341
cells. As illustrated in Figure 2, A, rats without T2DM
after cerebral I/R injury exhibited significantly increased
circulating EPCs counts, which was consistent with data
from clinical research.10 But, the circulating EPCs count
in cerebral I/R injury rats with T2DM was significantly decreased compared with that in diabetic shamoperated rats (Fig 2, B). In addition, we also found that

the circulating EPCs counts in T2DM before cerebral
I/R injury were significantly decreased compared with
those in normal sham rats (Fig 2, B), which was consistent
with previous clinical investigations.25,26 These indicated
that the cerebral I/R injury with T2DM could not cause
EPCs mobilization into the peripheral blood. Thus,
EPCs mobilization in T2DM was impaired before
cerebral I/R injury. However, we did not test the ability
of circulating EPCs into new vessels in cerebral I/R
injury rats with T2DM, which was deserved to be
further investigated extensively.
It is well known that the activation of eNOS in the presence of several mobilizing factors, such as VEGF and
placental growth factor was considered to play an important role in the EPCs mobilization from bone marrow into
the peripheral circulation.28 The effect of VEGF in angiogenesis was downstream of its effect to enhance either
mobilization or survival of circulating EPCs.29 More
importantly, more and more evidences indicated that
VEGF and eNOS associated with EPCs growth and differentiation played an important role in angiogenesis, which
was positive with the outcome of ischemic stroke.30 In
addition, EPCs take part in the progress of neovasculogenesis by secreting angiogenic cytokines, such as VEGF
and eNOS.20 Our data showed that T2DM significantly
decreased the plasma level of VEGF before cerebral
ischemic I/R injury compared with that of normal group
(Fig 2, C,D). In addition, we also observed that cerebral
I/R injury could not cause a significant increase of the
plasma VEGF in T2DM rats despite cerebral I/R injury
could result in the significant increase of the plasma

986

VEGF in normal rats. More importantly, the plasma levels
of VEGF in cerebral I/R injury rats with T2DM were still
significantly decreased compared with those in normal
rats after cerebral I/R injury (Fig 2, C). The bioactivity
of eNOS is to produce NO as an important endogenous
vasodilator, which confronted the cerebral ischemic
injury.31 In diabetic mellitus, reduced bioactivity of
eNOS caused endothelial dysfunction, which resulted in
diabetic nephropathy.32 Our data indicated that the
plasma level of eNOS in diabetic cerebral I/R injury rats
was significantly decreased compared with that in normal
cerebral I/R injury rats, although cerebral I/R injury
significantly increased the plasma level of eNOS without
considering the presence of T2DM. Thus, the impaired
EPCs mobilization in T2DM may result from the significantly decreased plasma levels of VEGF and eNOS.
Thus, our present study suggested that it might be
the impaired EPCs mobilization into the blood that
contributed to the poor outcome of cerebral I/R injury.
Thus, these data also indicated that strategies targeting
on improving EPCs mobilization into the blood by
improving the plasma levels of VEGF and eNOS may be
the effective interventions to improve the outcome of
ischemic stroke with T2DM.

References
1. Toyoda K, Okada Y, Kobayashi S. Early recurrence of
ischemic stroke in Japanese patients: the Japan standard
stroke registry study. Cerebrovasc Dis 2007;24:289-295.
2. Luitse MJA, Biessels GJ, Rutten GEHM, et al. Diabetes,
hyperglycaemia, and acute ischaemic stroke. Lancet Neurol 2012;11:261-271.
3. Weih M, Amberger N, Wegener S, et al. Sulfonylurea
drugs do not influence initial stroke severity and inhospital outcome in stroke patients with diabetes. Stroke
2001;32:2029-2032.
4. Kunte H, Schmidt S, Eliasziw M, et al. Sulfonylureas
improve outcome in patients with type 2 diabetes and
acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 2007;38:2526-2530.
5. Srinivasan K, Viswanad B, Asrat L, et al. Combination of
high-fat diet-fed and low-dose streptozotocin-treated rat:
a model for type 2 diabetes and pharmacological
screening. Pharm Res 2005;52:313-320.
6. Prakash R, Li W, Qu Z, et al. Vascularization pattern after
ischemic stroke is different in control versus diabetic rats:
relevance to stroke recovery. Stroke 2013;44:2875-2882.
7. Srinivasan K, Sharma SS. Augmentation of endoplasmic
reticulum stress in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury
associated with comorbid type 2 diabetes. Neurol Res
2011;33:858-865.
8. Ritter L, Davidson L, Henry M, et al. Exaggerated
neutrophil-mediated reperfusion injury after ischemic
stroke in a rodent model of type 2 diabetes. Microcirculation 2011;18:552-561.
9. Tureyen K, Bowen K, Liang J, et al. Exacerbated brain damage, edema and inflammation in type-2 diabetic mice subjected to focal ischemia. J Neurochem 2011;116:499-507.
10. Martı-Fabregas J, Crespo J, Delgado-Mederos R, et al.
Endothelial progenitor cells in acute ischemic stroke.
Brain and Behavior 2013;3:649-655.

H. YANG ET AL.
11. Menegazzo L, Albiero M, Avogaro A, et al. Endothelial
progenitor cells in diabetes mellitus. Biofactors 2012;
38:194-202.
12. Zhao CT, Wang M, Siu CW, et al. Myocardial dysfunction
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: role of endothelial progenitor cells and oxidative stress. Cardiovasc Diabetol 2012;11:147.
13. Fadini GP, Ling L, Shen Y, et al. Worse clinical outcomes
in acute myocardial infarction patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: relevance to impaired endothelial progenitor cells mobilization. PLoS One 2012;7:e50739.
14. Jensen MB, Yan H, Krishnaney-Davison R, et al. Survival
and differentiation of transplanted neural stem cells
derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells
in a rat stroke model. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2013;
22:304-308.
15. Hunter AJ, Hatcher J, Virley D, et al. Functional assessments in mice and rats after focal stroke. Neuropharmacology 2000;39:806-816.
16. Chen J, Chen S, Chen Y, et al. Circulating endothelial progenitor cells and cellular membrane microparticles in
db/db diabetic mouse: possible implications in cerebral
ischemic damage. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2011;
301:E62-71.
17. Yang H, Xie Z, Wei L, et al. Systemic transplantation of
human umbilical cord derived mesenchymal stem cellseducated T regulatory cells improved the impaired cognition in AbetaPPswe/PS1dE9 transgenic mice. PLoS One
2013;8:e69129.
18. Sicard KM, Fisher M. Animal models of focal brain
ischemia. Exp Transl Stroke Med 2009;1:7.
19. Huang SS, Lu YJ, Huang JP, et al. The essential role of
endothelial nitric oxide synthase activation in insulinmediated neuroprotection against ischemic stroke in diabetes. J Vasc Surg 2014;59:483-491.
20. Urbich C. Endothelial progenitor cells: characterization
and role in vascular biology. Circ Res 2004;95:343-353.
21. Bogoslovsky T, Chaudhry A, Latour L, et al. Endothelial
progenitor cells correlate with lesion volume and growth
in acute stroke. Neurology 2010;75:2059-2062.
22. Yip HK, Chang LT, Chang WN, et al. Level and value of
circulating endothelial progenitor cells in patients after
acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 2007;39:69-74.
23. Navarro-Sobrino M, Rosell A, Hernandez-Guillamon M,
et al. Mobilization, endothelial differentiation and functional capacity of endothelial progenitor cells after
ischemic stroke. Microvasc Res 2010;80:317-323.
24. Iskander A, Knight RA, Zhang ZG, et al. Intravenous
administration of human umbilical cord blood-derived
AC1331 endothelial progenitor cells in rat stroke model
reduces infarct volume: magnetic resonance imaging
and histological findings. Stem Cells Transl Med 2013;
2:703-714.
25. Lombardo MF, Iacopino P, Cuzzola M, et al. Type 2 diabetes mellitus impairs the maturation of endothelial progenitor cells and increases the number of circulating
endothelial cells in peripheral blood. Cytometry Part A
2012;81A:856-864.
26. van Ark J, Moser J, Lexis CPH, et al. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with an imbalance in circulating endothelial and smooth muscle progenitor cell numbers.
Diabetologia 2012;55:2501-2512.
27. Fadini GP, Miorin M, Facco M, et al. Circulating endothelial progenitor cells are reduced in peripheral vascular
complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus. J Am Coll Cardiol 2005;45:1449-1457.

IMPAIRED EPC MOLIBILIZATION IN T2DM CAUSED THE WORSE CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC OUTCOME
28. Leone AM, Valgimigli M, Giannico MB, et al. From
bone marrow to the arterial wall: the ongoing tale
of endothelial progenitor cells. Eur Heart J 2008;30:
890-899.
29. Li B. VEGF and PlGF promote adult vasculogenesis
by enhancing EPC recruitment and vessel formation at
the site of tumor neovascularization. FASEB 2006;20:
1495-1497.

987

30. Yoo SY, Kwon SM. Angiogenesis and its therapeutic
opportunities. Mediators Inflamm 2013;2013:1-11.
31. Tsai SK, Hung LM, Fu YT, et al. Resveratrol neuroprotective effects during focal cerebral ischemia injury via nitric
oxide mechanism in rats. J Vasc Surg 2007;46:346-353.
32. Takahashi T, Harris RC. Role of endothelial nitric oxide
synthase in diabetic nephropathy: lessons from diabetic
eNOS knockout mice. J Diabetes Res 2014;2014:590541.

