Involvement of the Paraventricular Nucleus in the Occurrence
of Arrhythmias in Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion Rats
Shuwei Jia, MD,* Qing Xia, MS,† Benping Zhang, MD,‡ and Ling Wang, MD, PhD*

Background: Ischemic stroke complicating with arrhythmia is one of the main causes
of sudden death. To investigate the association between ischemic stroke–induced
arrhythmia and the activity of paraventricular nucleus (PVN), we used Fos protein
as an objective indicator to illustrate the functional state of PVN neurons in middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rats, in single intracerebroventricular injection of
L-glutamate rats and in application of MK-801 before L-glutamate injection and
MCAO rats. Methods: The standard limb II electrocardiography was continuously
recorded by a biological signal collecting and processing system. The experimental
cerebral ischemic animal model was established by occluding the right middle cerebral artery. The Fos protein expression was detected by immunohistochemistry and
Western blot. Results: The incidence of arrhythmia was significantly higher than that
of controls (75.89% versus 0%), and Fos protein expression in the PVN also increased
significantly in MCAO rats; both of them could be blocked by prior application
of MK-801. Intracerebroventricular injection of L-glutamate induced changes in
Fos protein expression and arrhythmia similar to that in the stroke, which could
also be blocked by prior application of MK-801. Conclusions: It was concluded
that activation of the PVN in MCAO rats is likely mediated by glutamate via
activation of N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors, which causes
arrhythmias. Key Words: Arrhythmia—glutamate—ischemic stroke—NMDA
receptor—paraventricular nucleus.
Ó 2015 by National Stroke Association

Introduction
Ischemic stroke is a common life-threatening disease.
Its high mortality is related to the lethal arrhythmia during the initial period of ischemic stroke.1 Our previous
From the *Department of Physiology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin; †Institute of Acupuncture, Tianjin Chinese Medical University, Tianjin; and ‡Department of Neurology of 2nd Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
Received November 4, 2014; revision received November 20, 2014;
accepted November 24, 2014.
This study was supported by Science Research Foundation
of Heilongjiang Province Education Department of China (grant
no.:12541349); Science Research Foundation of Science and Technology Department of Harbin City, Heilongjiang Province, China (Grant
No. 2009RFXXS020).
Address correspondence to Ling Wang, MD, PhD, Department
of Physiology, School of Basic Medical Science, Harbin Medical
University, 157 Baojian Rd, Nangang, Harbin 150081, China. E-mail:
wangling6004@163.com.
1052-3057/$ - see front matter
Ó 2015 by National Stroke Association
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2014.11.025

844

studies proved that inward Na1 current, transient outward K1 current, and L-type calcium current channelopathy, and the Ca21 overload in ventricular myocytes
isolated from cerebral ischemic rats are likely the major
ionic mechanisms underlying cerebrogenic cardiac
arrhythmias.2 However, what caused these changes in
ventricular myocytes during ischemic stroke remains
unknown. Arrhythmias are frequently seen in stroke patients, even in those without history or signs of primary
heart diseases,3 which suggest a central nervous system
origin of these arrhythmias. Compelling evidence has
revealed a close correlation between brain activation of
unbalanced autonomic function and the onset of lifethreatening cardiac arrhythmias, particularly sympathetic hyperactivity.4 Recent studies further showed that
the imbalance between sympathetic and parasympathetic
activities does occur in those patients with cardiovascular
disturbances in cerebrovascular diseases.5 However, specific electrocardiographic (ECG) abnormality correlated
with a localized intracranial pathologic change has not
been established.

Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases, Vol. 24, No. 4 (April), 2015: pp 844-851

ISCHEMIC STROKE COMPLICATING WITH ARRHYTHMIA

Hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN) is a
crucial region in brain control of autonomic functions
and cardiovascular activity. In most instances, stimulation
of the PVN could activate sympathetic output and induce
arrhythmia.6,7 In the heart, long-term activation of the
sympathetic system can lead to uneven sympathetic
innervations and the ensuing arrhythmia, even sudden
cardiac death. The PVN receives glutamate innervations from forebrain and expresses large amount of
N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors as well.8
Microinjection of L-glutamate into the PVN could increase
sympathetic nerve activity and cause positive cardiovascular response.9 Earlier studies have also shown that
ischemic stroke could increase levels of extracellular
glutamate in the brain and sympathetic activity.10,11
However, whether glutamatergic activation of the PVN
is involved in the occurrence of arrhythmias after
ischemic stroke and whether this activation is mediated
by NMDA receptors remain to be determined.
For this purpose, we used Fos protein as an objective
indicator to illustrate the functional state of PVN neurons
in rats with middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). We
also compared the effects of single intracerebroventricular injection of L-glutamate on Fos expression and
arrhythmias. Then we examined prior application of
MK-801 on glutamate- and MCAO-evoked responses.
The results indicated that activation of the PVN in
MCAO rats is likely mediated by glutamate via activation
of NMDA receptors, which causes arrhythmias.

Materials and Methods
Experimental Animals
Male Wistar rats (Experimental Animal Centre of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China. Certificate
No.09-2-1), 220-250 g, were used in this study. All rats
were bred in an animal room with controlled temperature
(23 6 1 C), humidity (55 6 5%), and food and water available ad libitum. All experimental protocols were preapproved by the Experimental Animal Ethic Committee of
Harbin Medical University, China.

Experimental Groups
All rats were monitored the ECG for 20 minutes, and
those with normal ECG were used in the following experiments. The standard limb II ECG was continuously
recorded by a recorder (BL420; Chengdu TME Technology
Co, Ltd, China). To observe the changes of the activity
of PVN neurons after MCAO, 144 rats were randomly
divided into the following 3 groups: (1) control (n 5 16),
(2) sham-operated (n 5 16), and (3) right MCAO
(n 5 112). These rats in the third group were further randomly and equally divided into different time groups
(n 5 16 per group), 15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours,
4 hours, 8 hours, and 16 hours after MCAO. The rats in the

845

control and sham-operated groups were sacrificed at
2 hours after anesthesia or operation, and the rats in
MCAO groups were sacrificed at the corresponding time
points after MCAO. The right (ischemic side) brain of
each rat was used to detect Fos protein expression using
immunohistochemistry and Western blot. To observe the
effects of glutamate on arrhythmia induced by MCAO,
32 rats were randomly and equally divided into 4 groups
(n 5 8 per group): (1) saline (10 mL), (2) L-glutamate
(.5 mmoles, 10 mL), (3) MK-801 (4 nmoles, 10 mL) before
L-glutamate, and (4) MK-801 preceding MCAO. All rats
were sacrificed at 30 minutes after single intracerebroventricular injection or surgery, and the right brain of each rat
was used to detect Fos protein expression by Western blot.
In determining the application amount of glutamate, we
first calculated that in a total intracranial cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) of 200 mL in an adult rat,12 injection of .5 mmoles
of L-glutamate in 10 mL into the lateral ventricle would
create a glutamate concentration of 2500 mmol/L after
its even distribution in the CSF, which is much higher
than 8.2 mmol/L, a positive predictive value for progressing stroke13 and ensures sufficient glutamate diffused
into the brain parenchyma from the CSF.

Preparation of Cerebral Ischemia Model by MCAO
Following an overnight fast, each rat was anesthetized
with chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg, intraperitoneally). After
exposure of the right common carotid artery, internal
carotid artery, and external carotid artery surgically, a
paraffin wax–coated fishing thread (diameter .28 mm)
was aseptically introduced into the right common carotid
artery, in an anterograde fashion toward the carotid bifurcation. It was then directed distally up the right internal
carotid artery to a distance of 17.5 6 .5 mm from the
carotid bifurcation to occlude the origin of the MCA. In
sham-operated rats, the thread was immediately removed
as soon as the origin of the MCA was reached.

Identification of Cerebral Infarction and Evaluation of
Neurologic Deficit after MCAO
The neurologic deficits were evaluated by counting
cumulative scales from scale 0-4, no visible neurologic
deficits as the scale 0, forelimb flexion as the scale 1,
contralateral forelimb grips weakly as the scale 2, if the
animal was allowed to move around freely, it circled to
the paretic side only when pulled by the tail as the scale
3, and spontaneous circling as the scale 4, respectively.
For identification of the cerebral infarction, the brain
was removed out and dissected into coronal sections of
2-mm thick after the animal was tested for neurologic
deficits, then immersed into a saline solution containing
2% of 2, 3, 5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride at 37 C
for 30 minutes. If the scale was over 2 and 2, 3,
5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining was significant,
the model was successful (Fig 1).

S. JIA ET AL.

846

Figure 1. Representative diagrams of cerebral
infarction in the rats with right middle cerebral
artery occlusion. Coronal brain sections stained
with 2% of 2, 3, 5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride.
Note that the areas with red represents normal
tissue, with white represents infarct tissue (black
arrow) (For interpretation of references to color
in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article).

Intracerebroventricular Injection
The head of rat was fixed on the stereotaxic instruments
(SN-3; Narishige, Japan) and oriented according to the
B coordinate system of Pellegrino’s atlas after anesthesia.
A stainless steel tube with an external diameter of .8 mm
was inserted into the right lateral ventricle (Anterior to the
Bregma point, 0.1 mm; right to the midline, 1.5 mm; and
3.0 mm from the surface of the skull.) for injection. All injections were completed over 1 minute with a Hamilton
syringe, and the syringe was left in situ for 5 minutes.

Immunohistochemistry
Rats were overdosed with chloral hydrate (700 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally) and transcardially perfused with
300 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) followed by 500 mL of cold 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS
(pH 7.4). Then, the brains were removed and postfixed
in the same fixative at 4 C overnight. The hypothalamus
with surrounding brain tissues was dissected and
embedded in paraffin. Coronal brain sections (50 mm in
thickness) throughout the rostrocaudal extent of the
hypothalamus were obtained on a Manual Rotary Microtome (Leica RM2016, Shanghai, China). A total of 10 hypothalamic sections were taken from each animal,
according to Paxinos & Watson atlas, which contain the
PVN (plane of sections relative to bregma: P1.8P2.12 mm). These sections were rehydrated and microwaved in citric acid buffer to retrieve antigens. After
inhibition of endogenous peroxidases with 10% H2O2, serial sections were incubated with blocking buffer (5%
bovine serum albumin [BSA]). Next, all sections were
reacted with the primary polyclonal rabbit anti-Fos antibody (dilution, 1:2000 in .01 M PBS; pH, 7.4; sc-52; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) at 4 C overnight
and then were reacted with alkaline phosphatase goat
anti-rabbit IgG (dilution, 1:500 in .1% BSA; pH, 7.4;
ZB-2308; ZSGB, China.) at 37 C for 30 minutes. The antigen–antibody reaction sites were visualized with DAB-kit
(ZLI-9031; ZSGB, China) and the reaction was stopped in
PBS. These sections were then stained with hematoxylin,
dehydrated through graded alcohols, cleared in xylene,
and finally, cover-slipped with Distyrene Plasticizer
Xylene. The images were visually examined with conventional microscopy. The positive immune substance of

Fos protein in the PVN appeared yellow brown and
located in the nuclei. In high magnification visions
(3400), the number of positive neurons was counted in
5 areas and the reported numbers of each sample were
the average of these 5. The examiner was blinded to the
treatment. To eliminate the possibility of nonspecific
staining, controls of no-primary and no-secondary antibody reactions were also performed.

Western Blot
The PVN was quickly rinsed in ice-cold PBS buffer
(pH, 7.4) containing protease inhibitors and homogenized
with 200 mL ice-cold Radio Immunoprecipitation Assay
(RIPA) lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors (1 mM
phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride) in a homogenizer. The homogenate was then centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 C and the supernatant was collected. Protein
concentration of the collected supernatant was determined by BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime Biotechnology,
China). Equal amount of total lysate was denatured at
95 C for 5 minutes and then separated by 10% sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The
proteins were transferred to polyvinyl difluoride membrane (Millipore, Bedford, MA), and the blots were
blocked with 3% BSA dissolved in Tris-buffered saline
containing .1% Tween 20 for 30 minutes at room temperature. Membranes were then incubated overnight at
4 C with the primary antibodies against Fos (sc-52) and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
(Kangcheng, Shanghai, China), respectively. The GAPDH
was used as an internal control for equal input of protein
samples. Then the membranes were incubated with
alkaline phosphatase–conjugated secondary antibodies
(ZB-2308) at 37 C for 60 minutes and the blots were visualized using the alkaline phosphatase color development
kit (Beyotime Biotechnology). Alphaview 3.1.1.0 software
was used to quantify the band intensities. Relative levels
of Fos protein were attained by normalizing the band
densities to those of GAPDH, and then, compared with
that of controls.

Statistical Analysis
All experiments data were presented as mean 6 standard
error. Student paired t test with 2-tails was used for

ISCHEMIC STROKE COMPLICATING WITH ARRHYTHMIA

847

Figure 2. ECG changes in MCAO Rats. (A)
Normal ECG; (B) examples of bigeminy were
recorded by an ECG detector from most MCAO
rats; (C) examples of ventricular tachyarrhythmia from a few MCAO rats and most of
them died. Abbreviations: ECG, electrocardiography; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

comparisons between 2 groups (control and experimental groups). Statistical comparisons among multiple
groups were performed using analysis of variance. Differences were considered to be statistically significant when
P , .05.

Results
ECG Changes in MCAO Rats
To link arrhythmias with ischemic stroke, we first
observed ECGs of rats from different groups. The ECGs
of sham-operated rats (n 5 16) were all normal. The incidence of arrhythmia with right MCAO was observed as
high as 75.89% (85 of 112), which is significantly higher
than that of sham-operated rats (P , .001, chi-square
test). There were 2 episodes of arrhythmias, the peak
times of which occurred at 15.63 6 1.58 minutes and
238.36 6 14.32 minutes after MCAO and lasted
31.02 6 1.85 minutes and 26.28 6 1.36 minutes, respectively. The type of arrhythmia was mainly premature ventricular contraction (especially ventricular bigeminy) and
occasionally ventricular tachyarrhythmia (Fig 2). The incidence of arrhythmia with single intracerebroventricular
injection of L-glutamate was observed in 87.5% (7 of 8)
of the rats, similar to those with MCAO, which is significantly higher than that of saline group (P , .001,
chi-square test). The incidence of arrhythmia with
single intracerebroventricular injection of MK-801 with
or without L-glutamate was both zero (0 of 8). In the
MCAO rats with prior application of MK-801, the incidence of arrhythmia was also zero (0 of 8). These data
strongly indicate that cerebral ischemia could induce
arrhythmia and that the NMDA receptors mediated the
arrhythmogenic effect of glutamate.

Fos Immunohistochemical Staining after MCAO
To establish a correlation of the arrhythmias with PVN
neuron activity, we further observed expressions of Fos
proteins in immunostaining. Fos protein is an objective
indicator reflecting the functional state of neurons. In
the control group and vehicle/sham group, only a small
amount of lightly stained positive nuclei could be seen
in the PVN, whereas in the MCAO groups, the color of
positive nuclei in the PVN became dark and the number
of positive nuclei increased (Fig 3, A). Compared with
control group, the number of Fos positive nuclei in the
PVN at 15 minutes (P , .05), 30 minutes (P , .01), and 4
hours group (P , .01) was all significantly higher than
control (Fig 3, B), respectively.

The Expression of Fos Protein in the PVN after MCAO
To further quantitate Fos expressions, we performed
Western blots of the PVN lysates (Fig 3, C). After
MCAO, the expression of Fos protein in the PVN (Fig 3,
D) increased significantly at 15 minutes (P , .05), 30 minutes (P , .01), and 4 hours (P , .01). These findings indicate that the PVN neurons were activated twice after
MCAO, a result consistent with those of immunohistochemical observations.

Fos Protein Expressions in the PVN and Glutamatergic
Transmission
Ischemic stroke could increase levels of extracellular
glutamate in the brain10; microinjection of L-glutamate
into the PVN could increase sympathetic nerve activity
and cause positive cardiovascular response.9 In this
work, we further examined if this glutamatergic action

848

S. JIA ET AL.

Figure 3. Fos expressions in the PVN in
different experimental groups. (A) Typical
immunohistochemical images of the PVN.
(a), Control group, (b), sham group, (c-i)
MCAO group sampled at15 minutes, 30 minutes, 1 hour, 2 hours, 4 hours, 8 hours, and
16 hours after MCAO, respectively. (B) Summary graph showing the number of Fos positive nuclei in the PVN in different groups.
*P , .05, **P , .01 versus control group in
analysis of variance. (C and D) Exemplary
bands of Fos protein levels in Western blots
(C) and the bar graph (D) summarizing relative changes in Fos protein levels at different
times after MCAO. Abbreviations: MCAO,
middle cerebral artery occlusion; PVN, paraventricular nucleus.

ISCHEMIC STROKE COMPLICATING WITH ARRHYTHMIA

Figure 4. Fos protein levels at different glutamatergic activities in
Western blots. (A) Exemplary bands of Western blot in blank control and
intracerebroventricular microinjections of saline (10 mL), L-glutamate
(.5 mmoles, 10 mL), MK-801 (4 nmoles, 10 mL) before glutamate, and
MK-801 before MCAO. (B) Bar graphs summarizing relative changes in
Fos protein levels at different conditions specified above. *P ,.05 versus control group in analysis of variance. Abbreviation: MCAO, middle cerebral
artery occlusion.

was mediated by NMDA receptor. We first verified that
microinjection of L-glutamate into the lateral ventricle
caused a significant increase in Fos protein expression
in the PVN (P , .05) and typical arrhythmia, whereas
the same amount of saline injection had no effect
(P . .05). Microinjection of MK-801 into the lateral
ventricle alone did not influence Fos expression in the
PVN; however, prior application of MK-801 blocked the
increases in Fos levels after glutamate injection (P . .05)
or MCAO (P . .05; Fig 4). These findings support a hypothesis that during ischemic stroke the increased glutamate in the brain10 activates the PVN neurons via
NMDA receptors.

Discussion
In the present study, we found that MCAO induced
arrhythmias and increased PVN neuron activity significantly, which could be simulated by intracerebroventricular injection of L-glutamate and blocked by prior
application of MK-801. These results indicate that activating NMDA glutamate receptors is responsible for the
occurrence of arrhythmias in ischemic stroke, which is
likely mediated by the increase in PVN neuron activity.
It is known that cardiovascular disturbances with
imbalanced outflows of sympathetic and parasympathetic activities occurred in patients of cerebrovascular
diseases.5 Dogan et al3 further identified that arrhythmias
occur in 44% of the patients of ischemic stroke without

849

history of primary heart diseases. Consistently, we found
that the incidence of arrhythmia occurred in 75.89% of the
rats with MCAO. The higher incidence of arrhythmias
in experimental animals may reflect the uniformity of
ischemic stroke in MCAO rats relative to the various
degrees of injuries in stroke patients. Nevertheless, our
results confirm the previously observed correlation
between brain injury and arrhythmias.
In most cases, occurrence of arrhythmias is considered to be because of excessive activation of sympathetic
output.14 The PVN is a crucial brain region in the control of autonomic functions and cardiovascular activity,
and stimulation of the PVN could increase cardiac sympathetic activity and induce arrhythmia.6,7 The PVN
mainly contains 2 types of neurons: magnocellular
neurons and parvocellular neurons.6 The magnocellular
neurons are mainly in the dorsolateral regions and parvocellular neurons are mainly in the ventromedial regions. The main function of magnocellular neurons is
synthesis of arginine vasopressin (AVP) and oxytocin.
The parvocellular neurons are further divided into parvocellular neuroendocrine neurons and parvocellular
preautonomic neurons according to their function and
morphology.15 The parvocellular preautonomic neurons
send their projections to intermediolateral cell column
(IML) and form synapses with sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the IML to excite cardiac sympathetic
nerve directly.16 Our results demonstrated that activated
PVN neurons in MCAO rats complicating with
arrhythmia presented at both the dorsolateral and
ventromedial regions. These findings suggest that increases in sympathetic outflow through the PVN-IML
pathway are responsible for MCAO-associated arrhythmias although an involvement of magnocellular neurons
of the PVN could not be excluded. This proposal is
consistent with previous reports that stimulation of
the parvocellular preautonomic neurons with an excitatory amino acid increases the renal sympathetic nerve
activity and heart rate, and these responses could be
blocked by intrathecal applications of AVP receptor antagonists and oxytocin receptor antagonists in thoracic
spinal cord, respectively.17 In addition, after the
ischemic stroke, plasma AVP levels increase significantly
in rats with MCAO,18 which can depress myocardial
function.19Taken together, these findings indicate that
MCAO-associated arrhythmias are due to activation of
peptidergic neurons in the PVN.
The PVN receives glutamatergic and GABAergic projections from forebrain and other surrounding nuclei.
Neuron activity in the PVN depends on the balance
between the glutamatergic and GABAergic inputs on
the PVN neurons20; the former activates the PVN and
the latter inhibits it. Normally, the tonic inhibitory effect
of g-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) dominates activity of
the PVN.21 However, once intranuclear glutamate levels
increase and surpass GABAergic inhibition, the PVN

S. JIA ET AL.

850

neuron activity would increase. In the PVN, glutamate
mainly acts on the NMDA receptors to activate PVN
neurons.8 Several studies have also shown that glutamate levels increased significantly in the blood and
the CSF of patients with acute ischemic stroke.22,23
However, Brouns et al24 failed to replicate glutamate
elevation in the CSF of stroke patients recently. The controversy could be because of the following facts as the
authors pointed out: (1) most glutamate in CSF was
measured in the earlier stage after stroke onset, which
is too early to let high-level glutamate in the brain parenchyma diffuse into the CSF yet; (2) most samples in
controls were from patients with clinical suspicion of diseases, which increased the variance range of glutamate
concentration in controls, making potential increases of
glutamate in stroke group less clear statistically; (3) in
previous studies, high CSF glutamate levels were
detected mainly in a group of selected unstable progressing stroke patients13,25; however, in Brouns’ research, the
progressing stroke patients only accounted for 15.7% of
their study population. Thus, they could not replicate
glutamate elevation in CSF of stroke patients. The
MCAO model we used in this study likely simulates
the unstable progressing stroke and could induce
increases in brain glutamate content as reported.26 Therefore, our result supports most of the previous findings
that stroke can significantly increase brain CSF glutamate
levels.
It was also observed that there were 2 profiles of the
increases in glutamate levels: the first increase occurred
in a few hours after the ischemic stroke and the second
increase occurred at about 24 after ischemic stroke.27 In
our study, the activity of the PVN neurons also increased
twice after MCAO, which is consistent with the glutamate changes in patients with ischemic stroke. We also
found that microinjection of L-glutamate into the lateral
ventricle caused a significant increase in PVN neuron
activity and typical arrhythmia, and that could be
blocked by MK-801. Although Fos expression can be
induced by many stimuli other than glutamate and the
PVN may not be the only mediator of increased glutamate in the brain and CSF during MCAO, the PVN is
certainly an important target of MCAO-induced glutamate increase. Together, the present results strongly suggest that the PVN neurons are activated via NMDA
receptors by high levels of glutamate in the PVN of
patients with acute ischemic stroke.
Taken together, our results confirm that activation of
the PVN is involved in the arrhythmias during MCAO
and that activation of NMDA receptors along the cerebroventricular cavity, particularly the PVN, underlies the arrhythmias. The arrhythmias induced by PVN activation
are likely mediated by increasing the sympathetic nerve
excitability descending from the parvocellular PVN
neurons while involvement of magnocellular neurons
remains possible.

Acknowledgments: The authors thank Dr. Yu-Feng
Wang for editorial assistance.

References
1. Wira CR 3rd, Rivers E, Martinez-Capolino C, et al. Cardiac complications in acute ischemic stroke. West J Emerg
Med 2011;12:414-420.
2. Wang L, Sun L, Zhang Y, et al. Ionic mechanisms underlying action potential prolongation by focal cerebral
ischemia in rat ventricular myocytes. Cell Physiol Biochem 2009;23:305-316.
3. Dogan A, Tunc E, Ozturk M, et al. Electrocardiographic
changes in patients with ischaemic stroke and their prognostic importance. Int J Clin Pract 2004;58:436-440.
4. S€
or€
os P, Hachinski V. Cardiovascular and neurological
causes of sudden death after ischaemic stroke. Lancet
Neurol 2012;11:179-188.
5. Colivicchi F, Bassi A, Santini M, et al. Prognostic implications of right-sided insular damage, cardiac autonomic
derangement, and arrhythmias after acute ischemic
stroke. Stroke 2005;36:1710-1715.
6. Badoer E. Hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus and
cardiovascular regulation. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol
2001;28:95-99.
7. Shi H, Wei W, Zhang R. Myocardial ischemic arrhythmias elicited by electric stimulation to dorsomedial
nucleus and paraventricular nucleus of hypothalamus
in rabbits. Journal of Zhejiang Medical University 1993;
22:241-245.
8. Herman JP, Eyigor O, Ziegler DR, et al. Expression of
ionotropic glutamate receptor subunit mRNAs in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus of the rat. J Comp
Neurol 2000;422:352-362.
9. Kannan H, Hayashida Y, Yamashita H. Increase in sympathetic outflow by paraventricular nucleus stimulation
in awake rats. Am J Physiol 1989;256:R1325-R1330.
10. D
avalos A, Shuaib A, Wahlgren NG. Neurotransmitters
and pathophysiology of stroke: evidence for the release
of glutamate and other transmitters/mediators in animals and humans. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2000;9:2-8.
11. Chen CF, Lin HF, Lin RT, et al. Relationship between
ischemic stroke location and autonomic cardiac function.
J Clin Neurosci 2013;20:406-409.
12. Murtha LA, Yang Q, Parsons MW, et al. Cerebrospinal
fluid is drained primarily via the spinal canal and olfactory route in young and aged spontaneously hypertensive rats. Fluids Barriers CNS 2014;11:12.
13. Castillo J, D
avalos A, Noya M. Progression of ischaemic stroke and excitotoxic aminoacids. Lancet 1997;
349:79-83.
14. Schwartz PJ. Cardiac sympathetic denervation to prevent
life-threatening arrhythmias. Nat Rev Cardiol 2014;11:
346-353.
15. Hallbeck M, Larhammar D, Blomqvist A. Neuropeptide
expression in rat paraventricular hypothalamic neurons
that project to the spinal cord. J Comp Neurol 2001;433:
222-238.
16. Pyner S, Coote JH. Identification of branching paraventricular neurons of the hypothalamus that project to the
rostroventrolateral medulla and spinal cord. Neuroscience 2000;100:549-556.
17. Yang Z, Wheatley M, Coote JH. Neuropeptides, amines
and amino acids as mediators of the sympathetic effects
of paraventricular nucleus activation in the rat. Exp Physiol 2002;87:663-674.

ISCHEMIC STROKE COMPLICATING WITH ARRHYTHMIA
18. Chang Y, Chen TY, Chen CH, et al. Plasma argininevasopressin following experimental stroke: effect of
osmotherapy. J Appl Physiol 2006;100:1445-1451.
19. Indrambarya T, Boyd JH, Wang Y, et al. Low-dose vasopressin infusion results in increased mortality and cardiac dysfunction following ischemia-reperfusion injury
in mice. Crit Care 2009;13:R98.
20. Herman JP, Tasker JG, Ziegler DR, et al. Local circuit
regulation of paraventricular nucleus stress integration: glutamate-GABA connections. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 2002;71:457-468.
21. Li YF, Jackson KL, Stern JE, et al. Interaction between
glutamate and GABA systems in the integration of sympathetic outflow by the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 2006;
291:H2847-H2856.
22. Castillo J, Davalos A, Naveiro J, et al. Neuroexcitatory
amino acids and their relation to infarct size and neurological deficit in ischemic stroke. Stroke 1996;
27:1060-1065.

851
23. Skvortsova VI, Raevskii KS, Kovalenko AV, et al. Levels
of neurotransmitter amino acids in the cerebrospinal
fluid of patients with acute ischemic insult. Neurosci
Behav Physiol 2000;30:491-495.
24. Brouns R, Van Hemelrijck A, Drinkenburg WH, et al.
Excitatory amino acids and monoaminergic neurotransmitters in cerebrospinal fluid of acute ischemic stroke
patients. Neurochem Int 2010;56:865-870.
25. D
avalos A, Castillo J, Serena J, et al. Duration of glutamate release after acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 1997;
28:708-710.
26. Yang MX, Yu WT, Hu JK, et al. Effect of Zhongfengkang on cerebral glutamate and calcium of rats with
focal cerebral ischemia. Chinese Journal of integrative
medicine on cardio/cerebrovascular disease 2005;3:
877-878.
27. Yang Q, Zhang M, Zheng J, et al. Dynamic change of
serum glutamic acid and neurologic impairment in patient with ischemic stroke. Chinese Journal of Clinical
Rehabilitation 2005;9:96-97.

