Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014) 34, 1522–1530
& 2014 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/14 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

3-Nitropropionic acid-induced ischemia tolerance in the rat brain
is mediated by reduced metabolic activity and cerebral blood ﬂow
Oliver Bracko1, Valentina Di Pietro2, Giacomo Lazzarino3, Angela M Amorini3, Barbara Tavazzi3, Judith Artmann1, Eric C Wong4,5,
Richard B Buxton4, Michael Weller1, Andreas R Luft1 and Susanne Wegener1
Tissue tolerance to ischemia can be achieved by noxious stimuli that are below a threshold to cause irreversible damage
(‘preconditioning’). Understanding the mechanisms underlying preconditioning may lead to the identiﬁcation of novel therapeutic
targets for diseases such as stroke. We here used the oxidative chain inhibitor 3-nitropropionic acid (NPA) to induce ischemia
tolerance in a rat middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) stroke model. Cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) and structural integrity were
characterized by longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in combination with behavioral, histologic, and biochemical
assessment of NPA-preconditioned animals and controls. Using this approach we show that the ischemia-tolerant state is
characterized by a lower energy charge potential and lower CBF, indicating a reduced baseline metabolic demand, and therefore a
cellular mechanism of neural protection. Blood vessel density and structural integrity were not altered by NPA treatment. When
subjected to MCAO, preconditioned animals had a characteristic MRI signature consisting of enhanced CBF maintenance within the
ischemic territory and intraischemic reversal of the initial cytotoxic edema, resulting in reduced infarct volumes. Thus, our data
show that tissue protection through preconditioning occurs early during ischemia and indicate that a reduced cellular metabolism
is associated with tissue tolerance to ischemia.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014) 34, 1522–1530; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.112; published online 18 June 2014
Keywords: acute stroke; animal models; ASL; brain imaging; MRI

INTRODUCTION
The ability of an organism to develop tolerance against stressful
conditions can help to survive temporary restrictions in energy
supply, low oxygenation, or other environmental challenges.
Among other organs, the brain can acquire tolerance to
experimental injury such as trauma or ischemia.1 In human
stroke, the immediate onset and time-dependent course of
damage have driven the search for rapid neuroprotective
measures. The interest in ischemia tolerance was fueled by
clinical observations that a brief episode of ischemia such as a
transient ischemic attack of the brain or preinfarction angina of
the heart, might protect against subsequent stroke or heart attack,
similar to experimental preconditioning.2–4 To study mechanisms
involved in ischemia tolerance, several experimental preconditioning strategies have been described in vivo and in vitro, such as
hypoxia, brief episodes of ischemia, or oxygen-glucose deprivation.5–8 Some of the mechanisms identiﬁed include attenuation of
excitatory damage through reduced glutamate release and
downregulation of NMDA receptors, changes in gene expression
patterns favoring neuroprotection, as well as neurorestorative
responses such as the induction of neural progenitor cells.
Although vascular adaptations in response to preconditioning
could help to facilitate substrate delivery during subsequent
ischemia, the potential role of blood vessel remodeling in
ischemia tolerance remains open.5,9
1

Our goal was to characterize mechanisms of preconditioning
and to predict histologic and behavioral outcomes after stroke by
deﬁning a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) signature of the
ischemia-tolerant brain. We utilized a pharmacological preconditioning paradigm with the oxidative chain inhibitor 3-nitropropionic acid (NPA), which temporarily induces ischemia tolerance
through inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase and a burst of
reactive oxygen species.10–14 Using longitudinal, quantitative arterial
spin labeling (ASL)-cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) measurements, as
well as structural MRI, we here show that ischemic damage and
recovery evolve differently in ischemia-tolerant brains. CBF was
signiﬁcantly reduced in NPA-preconditioned rats at the time of
ischemia tolerance, which was associated with decreased metabolic activity, as determined from the quantiﬁcation of high
energy phosphates in tissue obtained from NPA-treated and control rats. Thus, we here identify a cellular mechanism mediating
preconditioning in the context of ischemic stroke.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preconditioning, Stroke Induction, and Experimental Groups
All experiments were performed in accordance with the National Institutes
of Health animal protection guidelines and approved by the UCSD
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Adult male Wistar rats 280 to
310 mg body weight were used for all experiments.

Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 2Division of Neurotrauma and Neurodegeneration, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK; 3Institute of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Catholic University of Rome, Rome, Italy; 4Departments of Radiology, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA and 5Departments of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. Correspondence: Dr S Wegener,
Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Frauenklinikstrasse 26, Zurich 8091, Switzerland.
E-mail: Susanne.Wegener@usz.ch
We are grateful for support by the Swiss National Science Foundation: NCCR Neural Plasticity and Repair as well as the Marie Heim-Vögtlin Foundation, the Koetser Foundation,
the European Union FP6 Marie Curie Outgoing International Fellowship, and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.
Received 18 March 2014; revised 28 May 2014; accepted 29 May 2014; published online 18 June 2014

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1523
For preconditioning, NPA (20 mg/kg body weight) or the same volume
of saline (controls) was injected once intraperitoneally. Three days after
sham or NPA treatment, animals were subjected to 60 minutes of middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). A modiﬁcation of the Koizumi intraluminal ﬁlament method was applied.15 During surgery and MRI, animals
were anesthetized using facemask inhalation of 1.5 to 2.5% isoﬂurane in a
2:1 N2O:O2 atmosphere. Temperature was maintained at 37 1C by a
feedback-controlled heating pad.
The ﬁrst MRI (D0) was acquired during MCAO without discontinuation of
anesthesia. For MRI, the animal was placed in a custom-built cradle. Body
temperature and respiratory rate were continuously monitored during MRI
sessions. After 60 minutes of MCAO, the occluding ﬁlament was removed
and the animals allowed to recover. Animals were re-anesthetized for
repetitive MRI at the following time points after MCAO: day 0 (D0), D1, D4,
and D14 after MCAO. Vasodilatory capacity was assessed on D4 and D14 by
comparing MRI-CBF measurements acquired under isoﬂurane anesthesia in
room air (‘air’) with those acquired in a 5% CO2 atmosphere (‘CO2’), after a
2-minute adjustment between switching gases as previously described.16
Animals were sacriﬁced on D14 after the last MRI acquisition and brains
subjected to further histologic analysis. The CBF maps obtained from the
control group have been published elsewhere.17 Functional assessments
were obtained before each MRI session and in addition on D7 after MCAO.
Of the initially included 21 animals, eight controls and ﬁve NPA animals
remained in both groups; exclusions were because of massive stroke and
intolerable weight loss/behavioral abnormalities/seizures: controls n ¼ 3,
NPA n ¼ 0; because of surgical complications (subarachnoid hemorrhage
upon advancement of the thread): controls n ¼ 2, NPA n ¼ 1; and because
of behavioral abnormalities such as reduced spontaneous activity or failure
to perform baseline functional assessment within predeﬁned range (see
below): controls n ¼ 0, NPA n ¼ 2. Another group of animals received
either intraperitoneal NPA (n ¼ 7) or saline (n ¼ 12) treatment and MRI
assessment was done 3 days later. After MRI, animals were sacriﬁced and
brains extracted for further histologic analysis. A separate group of animals
was treated with either NPA (n ¼ 10) or saline (n ¼ 10) and brains extracted
for high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis of brain
energy rich phosphates 3 days later.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging Acquisition and Data Processing
Magnetic resonance imaging experiments were carried out on a 3 T GE
Signa Excite whole-body system with a body transmit coil and a custombuilt passively decoupled single-loop receive-only head coil. CBF imaging
was achieved with multislice ﬂow-sensitive alternating inversion recovery
pulsed arterial spin labeling with the QUIPSS II modiﬁcation.18 In addition,
diffusion-weighted imaging with generation of apparent diffusion
coefﬁcient maps and fractional anisotropy maps, as well as T1- and
T2-weighted imaging were carried out. For details of the MRI sequences
and analysis strategies please see also Wegener et al (2007 and 2013).17,19
Images from all animals at all time points were ﬁrst co-registered and
then averaged using codes written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA)
software. Vasoreactivity (VR) maps were generated by subtracting the CBF
map acquired in air from the one acquired in 5% CO2.
Voxels with signiﬁcantly reduced apparent diffusion coefﬁcient values
were automatically selected as all voxels with a value of omean þ 2 s.d. of
a contralateral hemisphere region of interest. Similarly, regions of interest
for increased T2-values (4 mean þ 2 s.d. contralateral on a T2 map) or
hyperperfusion (4 mean þ 2 s.d. contralateral on a CBF map) were
selected. A voxel-wise independent sample t-test was used to compare
CBF maps of NPA or with those of control animals with a threshold of
Po0.05 using Matlab codes.

Cerebral Tissue Processing and High-Performance Liquid
Chromatography Analyses of Metabolites
An in vivo craniectomy was performed on all animals during anesthesia
with the aid of an operating microscope. After carefully removing the rat’s
skull, the brain was freeze-clamped by aluminum tongues, pre-cooled in
liquid nitrogen, and immediately immersed in liquid nitrogen, to accelerate
freezing of the tissue and increase the recovery of metabolites.23 After the
wet weight determination, the brain was deproteinized according to the
organic solvent deproteinizing procedure, described in detail elsewhere,
which ensures no loss of labile compounds and guarantees an efﬁcient
deproteinization of the tissue for metabolite analysis.24 Deproteinized
samples were then ﬁltered through a 0.45-mm HV Millipore ﬁlter (Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA) and loaded (20 mL) onto a Hypersil C-18, 250  4.6 mm,
5-mm particle size column, provided with its own guard column (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc, Milan, Italy). The column was connected to an HPLC
apparatus consisting of a SpectraSystem P4000 pump system (Thermo
Fisher Scientiﬁc) and a highly-sensitive UV6000LP diode array detector
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) equipped with a 5-cm light path ﬂow cell and set
up between 200- and 300-nm wavelengths. Data acquisition and analysis
were performed using a personal computer and the ChromQuest software
package provided by the HPLC manufacturer. N-Acetylaspartate and
metabolites related to tissue energy state and mitochondrial function
(adenosine triphosphate (ATP), adenosine diphosphate (ADP), adenosine
monophosphate (AMP), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) were separated,
in a single chromatographic run, according to a gradient modiﬁcation of
existing ion-pairing HPLC method.24,25 Assignment and calculation of the
compounds of interest in chromatographic runs of tissue extracts were
carried out at either 206 (N-Acetylaspartate) or 260-nm wavelength by
comparing retention times, absorption spectra, and areas of peaks with
those of peaks of chromatographic runs of freshly prepared ultrapure
standard mixtures with known concentrations. The energy charge potential
(ECP) in brain extracts was calculated according to the equation: ECP ¼
ATP þ 1/2ADP/ATP þ ADP þ AMP.

Immunoﬂuorescence and Histochemistry
After perfusion ﬁxation, brains were removed, immersed in ice-cold 4%
formalin and transferred to 30% sucrose solution for at least 3 days.
Coronal 40-mm-thick sections were cut on a freezing microtome (Leica,
Nussloch, Germany). Every twelfth slice from each brain was stained for
KCC2 and RECA-1 ﬂuorescence intensity measurement. All sections were
stained and imaged in parallel. Primary antibodies used were mouse
a-RECA-1 1:400 (AbD Serotec, Oxford, UK), rabbit a-KCC2 1:500 (Millipore),
a-rabbit CC3 1:400 (Bioconcept, Allschwil, Switzerland), a-rabbit GFAP
1:1000 (Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland), a-mouse MAP2 1:500 (Abcam,
Cambridge, UK), a-mouse COX-IV 1:250 (Abcam). Secondary antibodies
were goat a-mouse-Cy3 1:300 and goat a-rabbit-Alexa488 1:300 (Jackson
ImmunoResearch, Suffolk, UK). Nuclei were counterstained with 4,6diamidino-2-phenylindole (Sigma-Aldrich). Images were processed in
Adobe Photoshop (CS5 for Mac) or ImageJ (NIH).
For DAB immunohistochemistry, endogenous peroxidase was quenched
using 0.6% hydrogen peroxidase for 30 minutes at RT, after the regular
staining protocol using mouse a-NeuN 1:200 (Millipore), a-ED1 1:1000 (AbD
Serotec) as a primary antibody and mouse a-Biotin (1:250; Jackson
ImmunoResearch) as a secondary antibody. DAB staining was done using
VECTASTAIN Elite ABC Kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) and
DAB Peroxidase Substrate Kit, 3,3-diaminobenzidine (Vector Laboratories).
Sections were mounted using DPX Mountant (Sigma-Aldrich).

Image Analyses
Behavioral Testing
Adhesive tape removal test: to assess sensorimotor function and neglect
after MCAO, two strips of tape (18  12 mm) were applied in random order
to the saphenous part of the forepaws. The time that the animals took to
contact (sensory function/neglect) and remove (sensorimotor function) the
tape on both sides (left and right) was recorded. Results from three trials at
least 5 minutes apart were averaged at each session.20,21
The 18-point observational score for assessment of sensorimotor deﬁcits
after MCAO was also applied; results from this score for the control group
have been previously published.17,22 In this test, a maximum of three
points is scored for each of the following observations: (1) spontaneous
activity, (2) symmetry in limb movement, (3) forepaw outstretching, (4)
climbing, (5) body proprioception, and (6) response to vibrissae touch, so
that 18 points indicate no neurologic deﬁcit.
& 2014 ISCBFM

For ﬂuorescence intensity quantiﬁcation, images were taken using a  20
objective with an inverted Leica Wide ﬁeld microscope (Leica DMI 6000,
Leica). ROIs (710  530 mm) were chosen from cortical and subcortical
regions bilaterally, using the same settings for all conditions. The
measurements from contralateral and ipsilateral ROIs were combined
per section and animal. RECA-1 and KCC2 ﬂuorescence intensity was
measured and calculated using the ImageJ (NIH) software package as
mean signal intensity/mm2±s.d.
For the quantiﬁcation of NeuN  DAB staining after stroke, areas
showing loss of NeuN expression were derived by subtracting the
manually outlined areas of intact NeuN þ staining on the ipsilateral side
from the area of the contralateral hemisphere, thereby correcting for
edema. The sum of all areas with loss of NeuN staining was multiplied by
the distance between slices, deriving lesion volume in mm3.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1524
COX and KCC2 signal intensity were measured with a frame size of
1024  1024 pixels on a scanning confocal microscope (FluoView FV1000,
Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) at a constant Z-step of 0.5 mm using a  20
objective for COX and  40 oil objective for KCC2. Quantiﬁcation was done
using ImageJ (NIH). All images were taken with the same laser power and
gain settings. Pictures were taken contralateral and ipsilateral from a
cortical, striatal, and dentate gyrus (DG) region, per section and animal.
All pictures were analyzed in Imaris 7.6.3 (Bitplane, Belfast, UK) using the
Imaris MeasurementPro package (Bitplane). The MAP2 signal was threedimensionally reconstructed while using the same threshold settings for
all images per region. The volume was calculated and the KCC2 intensity
was extracted from the MAP2 three-dimensional reconstruction.

Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were carried out in SPSS v12.0 for Windows, except
for the voxel-wise t-test of CBF data (Figure 4A), which was performed in
Matlab.
All values are given as mean±s.d. For group comparisons, the two-sided
independent sample t-test was used. In not normally distributed data, the
nonparametric Mann–Whitney U test was used for group comparisons.
Repeated measures general linear model analyses were conducted to
assess signiﬁcant differences between functional performances over time
in control or NPA animals. A P-valueo0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.

RESULTS
3-Nitropropionic Acid Preconditioning Results in Tissue Protection
and Improved Functional Outcome after Middle Cerebral Artery
Occlusion through Maintained Intraischemic Cerebral Blood Flow
and Apparent Diffusion Coefﬁcient Recovery
Experimental ischemia was induced by MCAO in adult male Wistar
rats preconditioned with NPA or pretreated with saline. Fifteen
minutes after occlusion of the MCA, ischemic lesions were readily
detected on diffusion-weighted imaging, affecting cortical and
subcortical areas within the occluded left MCA-territory in both
groups (Figure 1A). Notably, in a second diffusion-weighted
imaging acquisition 30 minutes later with the occluding device
still in place, lesions had remained stable in controls, but had
diminished in NPA-treated rats, where only one animal showed a
signiﬁcant reduction in the apparent diffusion coefﬁcient after
45 minutes of ischemia (Figures 1A and 1B). Quantitative CBF
imaging using arterial spin labeling showed a drop in CBF on the
ischemic side during MCAO in both groups and a recovery of CBF
after retraction of the occluding ﬁlament from D0 until D14
(Figure 2A). The perfusion restriction was, however, less severe in
NPA animals (Figure 2B). Between D1 and D14, all animals of the
control group showed a postischemic hyperperfusion, which was
signiﬁcantly attenuated and only detected on D1 in the NPA
group (Figures 2A and 2C). This pattern of less extensive
postischemic hyperperfusion with an earlier peak after reperfusion

is an indicator of less severe ischemic damage.17 Indeed, infarct
size as determined from T2-weighted MRI on D14 was dramatically smaller in preconditioned animals (Figure 2D). Diffusion
tensor imaging revealed that callosal and descending corticospinal ﬁber tracts were initially damaged, reﬂected by a hyperacute
increase and subacute decrease in fractional anisotropy, but, in
contrast to controls, regained structural integrity in the NPA group
(Figure 2E).
The VR remained intact in NPA-preconditioned animals on D4
and D14 after MCAO. In contrast, the normal vasodilatory
response to a 5% CO2 stimulus was lost on the ischemic side in
controls on D4 (Figures 2F and 2G). In most control animals, VR
subsequently recovered or even showed an overshooting CBF
increase on D14.
Magnetic resonance imaging ﬁndings correlated with improved
functional performance. In a composite neurologic score, combining measures of sensory and motor function typically affected
after MCAO, deﬁcits were still detectable on D14 in controls,
showing a signiﬁcantly better performance of the NPA group at all
observation time points (Figure 3A).
Deﬁcits in sensorimotor function and neglect after MCAO
were also assessed in the sticky tape test. The time to ﬁrst contact
and removal of the tape was measured. Before MCAO, animals
were trained to remove the tape within 10 seconds. On D1
after left-sided MCAO, deﬁcits to perceive and remove the
tape on the right side were noted in all animals, causing an
increase in the time to contact and remove the tape on the right
forepaw (Figure 3B). Both groups showed a fast recovery towards
D7. On average, NPA animals performed faster, which did,
however, not reach signiﬁcance in the repeated measures analysis
of variance.
Tissue Protection by 3-Nitropropionic Acid Preconditioning
Next, we analyzed infarct size after MCAO in NPA-treated versus
control rats. Loss of NeuN expression was signiﬁcantly smaller in
NPA than in control animals (13.3±2.5 mm3 versus 48.6±11 mm3;
Po0.01 Figures 4A–C). Strikingly, loss of NeuN expression occurred
in most NPA animals without signs of tissue necrosis, whereas
controls had undergone extensive cystic degeneration of brain
tissue on the ischemic side (Figures 4A and 4C). In controls, infarct
border zones were characterized by loss of NeuN staining, detection
of cleaved caspase-3 (CC3) positive cells indicating apoptosis, an
increase in GFAP signal because of gliosis, and an increase in RECA1 signal corresponding to peri-infarct angiogenesis. Furthermore,
macrophage inﬁltration around the infarct border zone was visible
on ED1 immunohistochemistry (Figures 4A and 4D).
Neuronal death was observed in all NPA animals after MCAO in
scattered cortical and subcortical regions, along with GFAP and

Figure 1. Intraischemic ADC recovery in NPA-preconditioned animals. (A) Masks of the ischemic lesion from individual animals of the control
(Con) or NPA-treated group derived from ADC maps acquired 15 (upper panel) or 45 (lower panel) minutes after the onset of MCAO. Masks are
overlaid onto anatomic (T2w) images. Regions of overlap between individual animals are color-coded. Although the area of ADC reduction is
similar at 15 and 45 minutes ischemia duration in controls, there is a dramatic intraischemic recovery in the NPA group. (B) Number of voxels
with a significantly reduced ADC (mean±s.d.) at 15 and 45 minutes after the onset of ischemia (**Po0.01). ADC, apparent diffusion
coefficient; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; NPA, 3-nitropropionic acid.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

& 2014 ISCBFM

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1525

Figure 2. NPA preconditioning results in less severe ischemic perfusion restriction and attenuated tissue damage after stroke. (A) Averaged
CBF maps from controls (Con) or NPA-treated animals during ischemia (D0) and on days 1, 4, and 14 (D1, D4, D14) demonstrate an attenuated
drop in CBF on D0 in the NPA group (red arrow) compared with controls (white arrow). Postischemic hyperperfusion in the NPA group is only
observed in few voxels on D1 (red arrow) compared with controls (white arrow). (B) CBFo30: voxels with a CBF value below 30 ml/100 g per
minute on D0, resembling severely reduced perfusion. There are significantly less voxels with intraischemic CBFo30 in the NPA compared
with the control group (*Po0.05). (C) Number of voxels with postischemic hyperperfusion (CBF4mean þ 2 s.d. contralateral) in controls (dark
gray columns) and NPA group (white column) at D1, D4, and D14 after reperfusion. There are significantly more hyperperfused voxels in
controls than in the NPA- group; the latter with hyperperfusion only on D1 (**Po0.011; D4 and D14 not shown for NPA). (D) The number of
voxels with an increased T2 value (4 mean þ 2 s.d. of contralateral), indicating infarct, is significantly higher in controls (**Po0.001) than in
NPA animals. To the right, averaged T2 maps from D14 show high signal on the ischemic side in controls, whereas there is barely any signal
abnormality detectable in the NPA group. (E) Averaged fractional anisotropy (FA) maps from DTI overlaid onto averaged ADC maps on D0, D1,
D4, and D14 in the control and NPA group. After a brief episode of increased FA during ischemia (red asterisks), FA is decreased within the area
of ischemia (white arrows), indicating derangement of fiber tracts. However, although FA remains low in controls, remaining fiber tracts show
a recovery of FA values in NPA animals (red arrow). Also note the development of vasogenic edema, causing an increase in ADC values on the
ischemic side in controls, but not in the NPA group. (F) Averaged vasoreactivity maps, derived from subtraction of the CBF map acquired
during inhalation of air from the CBF map acquired with 5% CO2 as a vasodilatory stimulus on D4 and D14 in controls and NPA animals. White
arrows point to a lack of CBF increase because of 5% CO2 within the ischemic area in controls on D4, indicating impaired vasoreactivity, which
has recovered on D14. Note the overshooting vasoreactivity in peri-lesional, cortical areas in controls on D14, which is present in some but not
all animals of the control group. In NPA animals, vasoreactivity within the ischemic area is maintained. (G) Vasoreactivity expressed as %
increase in CBF with the 5% CO2 stimulus on D4 and D14 within the voxels with a CBFo30 mg/100 ml per minute at D0 (severely ischemic
voxels). In contrast to NPA-preconditioned animals, vasoreactivity was significantly impaired on D4 in controls (**Po0.01). ADC, apparent
diffusion coefficient; CBF, cerebral blood flow; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; NPA, 3-nitropropionic acid.

ED1 positivity, indicating gliosis and macrophage activation
(Figures 4A, 4C, and 4D). Of note, these areas were not detected
on T2w MRI, which is the MRI parameter most commonly applied
to quantify chronic ischemic damage.26 This indicates that NPAinduced neuroprotection after stroke is not complete and that
regional loss of neurons may occur.
In search for mechanisms of NPA-induced ischemia tolerance,
we further analyzed the expression of the K þ /Cl  co-transporter
KCC2 in brains of animals subjected to MCAO with and without
NPA preconditioning. KCC2 is upregulated in response to
excitotoxic injury, maintaining ion gradients, and supporting
neuroprotection27,28 and downregulated in response to more
severe ischemia.29,30 By preventing excessive intracellular Cl 
accumulation and hyperexcitability after ischemia, KCC2
upregulation might contribute to a protective response elicited
by preconditioning. We did not ﬁnd a speciﬁc alteration of the
KCC2 expression in preconditioned brains after ischemia; but a
decrease in KCC2 signal in the infarct area of both, controls and
NPA-preconditioned animals after MCAO (Figure 4A), indicating
that postischemic downregulation of KCC2 occurs despite
preconditioning in the areas of neuronal damage, most likely
reducing GABAergic inhibitory functions.
& 2014 ISCBFM

Structural and Metabolic Adjustments after 3-Nitropropionic Acid
Preconditioning
After the robust neuroprotective effect of NPA preconditioning
was conﬁrmed in the rat MCAO model, we next sought to
characterize changes in the vascular and metabolic properties of
animals in the ischemia-tolerant state. In analogy to the MCAO
experiments, two groups of animals were either preconditioned
with intraperitoneal NPA or saline. Three days later, animals were
not subjected to MCAO but analyzed using MRI and histologic
analyses of brain tissue. Although NPA preconditioning had no
impact on the gross structural integrity, we found a global,
approximately 30% reduction in baseline CBF in the NPA
group (138.75±19.2 versus 108.6±16.3 mg/100 ml per minute;
Figure 5A). Despite this decrease in CBF, VR was preserved
(Figure 5B). Another cohort of animals with NPA preconditioning
and controls were subjected to HPLC analysis for quantiﬁcation of
metabolites related to mitochondrial function and cell energy
state, including adenosine nucleotides (ATP, ADP, and AMP),
N-Acetylaspartate, and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. In
comparison with the saline group, 3 days after NPA preconditioning, tolerant animals had a nonsigniﬁcant decrease in ATP
(2139.64±220.24 versus 2326.70±180.00 nmol/g wet weight),
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1526
animals and controls underwent immunoﬂuorescence analysis of
the endothelial marker RECA-1 3 days after treatment. We did not
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant difference in RECA-1 expression between groups
in any of the regions analyzed (cortex, striatum, dentate gyrus;
Figures 6A and 6B). We again analyzed brain KCC2 expression
3 days after NPA preconditioning without MCAO. We found no
signiﬁcant difference in KCC2 expression between NPA animals or
controls in any of the three regions analyzed (Figures 6A and 6B).
This argues against a role of KCC2 as part of the NPA-preconditioning signal. No signs of neuronal damage were detected in
both groups with NeuN, MAP2- or caspase-3 stain for apoptotic
cells (data not shown).

Figure 3. Sensorimotor deficits after MCAO are attenuated by
preconditioning. (A) In a composite neurologic score where 18
points indicate no deficits and lower scores an impairment of
sensorimotor function, NPA (light gray line) animals are significantly
less affected than controls (black line) (**Po0.01). (B) Latency to
contact (dashed lines) and remove (solid line) a sticky tape applied
to the left or right (indicated in upper right corner of the diagram)
forepaw of rats in the control (black) or NPA (light gray) group at
different time points before (D0) and after (D1, D4, D7, D14) MCAO.
Because of occlusion of the left MCA, the time to contact or remove
the tape on the right side is longer in all animals after ischemia.
However, on average, deficits are less severe in the NPA group (this
effect did not reach significance in repeated measures analysis of
variance). MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; NPA, 3-nitropropionic acid.

equal ADP values (259±90.1 versus 207.4±34.5 nmol/g wet
weight), a signiﬁcant increase in AMP (70.51±8.47 versus
47.19±8.28 nmol/g wet weight; Po0.001) and an unaltered sum
of nucleotides (ATP þ ADP þ AMP). The change in the concentrations of adenylates caused a signiﬁcant decrease in the ECP:
0.919±0.016 versus 0.942±0.004; Po0.01, indicating a mitochondrial-dependent imbalance in energy production and consumption (Figure 5C). N-Acetylaspartate, a marker of neuronal integrity,
was not signiﬁcantly different between groups (NPA: 8075.2±
971.7 versus con 8783.4±513.6), nor was the concentration
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NPA: 527.5±68 versus con
550.2±39.7 nmol/g wet weight).
These results suggest that metabolic adjustments might
underlie the observed lower CBF in ischemia-tolerant NPA-treated
animals. This was supported by a reduced expression of the
respiratory chain enzyme cytochrome c-oxidase (COX) in NPApreconditioned brains (Figures 6A and 6B). To assess possible
adaptations at the vascular level, brains of NPA-preconditioned
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

DISCUSSION
The mechanisms by which a preconditioned brain maintains
tolerance to ischemia remain obscure, especially the contribution
of vascular versus metabolic adaptations. We approached this
problem by analyzing CBF and metabolic phosphates in NPApreconditioned rats at the time of ischemia tolerance. Furthermore, infarct growth and functional outcomes were assessed after
MCAO in preconditioned and sham-preconditioned rats.
MRI during and after MCAO in the NPA-mediated model of
pharmacological preconditioning revealed that NPA-mediated
protection of the brain started immediately during the ischemic
challenge through maintenance of intraischemic blood ﬂow and
recovery of the initial MCAO-induced cytotoxic edema. As a
consequence, structural tissue integrity was preserved, which was
reﬂected by only slight and temporary disruption of ﬁber tracts in
diffusion tensor imaging, normal VR, and less vasogenic edema
with signiﬁcantly smaller ﬁnal T2-lesions. When CBF was measured
in the ischemia-tolerant animals (72 hours after NPA preconditioning), we found a signiﬁcant global reduction in CBF with preserved
VR. Strikingly similar to our results, in a rat model of ischemia
tolerance induced by cortical spreading depression, autoradiography demonstrated a CBF reduction restricted to those regions
affected by cortical spreading depression to a similar extent and at
a similar time (72 hours after cortical spreading depression) before
ischemia.31 Laser Doppler ﬂowmetry was suggestive of preserved
intraischemic CBF in tolerant animals; however, the limitations of
this technique including a lower spatial resolution and relative CBF
measurements led the authors to hypothesize that based on the
lower preischemic CBF, absolute values might not have been
higher in CSD-preconditioned animals. These ﬁndings support a
common mechanism of ischemia tolerance where metabolic
adaptations are ﬁrst installed which later facilitate preserved
vascular responses to ischemia. Only few studies have investigated changes in CBF because of preconditioning before and at
the time of subsequent ischemia. After preconditioning, some
groups have found an increase in relative CBF, as determined from
laser Doppler ﬂowmetry, during or in the hours after subsequent
ischemia,32–34 whereas others observed neuroprotection without
CBF effects during MCAO.35–37 Dawson et al used autoradiography
to show that 15 minutes after the onset of MCAO, CBF was
unchanged in animals subjected to lipopolysaccharide preconditioning; however, 4 and 24 hours later, microvascular perfusion as
assessed by an intravascular ﬂuorescent tracer technique was
preserved at higher levels in preconditioned animals compared
with controls.38 Gustavsson et al observed an attenuation of the
CBF decrease during a hypoxic/ischemic injury 24 hours after
hypoxic preconditioning, along with an increase in microvascular
density,9 albeit in a neonatal model where angiogenesis is likely to
remain more plastic compared with the adult brain. In our model,
no increase in vascularization was observed in ischemia-tolerant
brains, however, the lower ECP and reduced COX expression
pattern suggested a signiﬁcant decrease in mitochondrial
phosphorylation capacity at the rate necessary to meet the
cellular energy demand subsequent to NPA administration.
& 2014 ISCBFM

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1527

Figure 4. Ischemic lesions after MCAO in controls (Con) and NPA-preconditioned animals. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images
demonstrating expression of NeuN (green), CC3 (red), GFAP (red), RECA-1 (green), and KCC2 overlaid onto DAPI (red and blue) on the
ipsilateral (stroke) and contralateral (contra) side in controls (upper and middle panel) as well as on the ipsilateral (stroke) side in NPApreconditioned animals (lower panel). Two weeks after MCAO, tissue necrosis has occurred in controls, whereas only selective neuronal
damage can be detected in NPA animals (white arrow on the lower panel NeuN staining). (B) Infarct size derived from NeuN
immunohistochemistry in Con and NPA animals. Note that this analysis includes areas of cystic tissue degeneration as well as selective
neuronal loss. (C) Left: overview (  2) of NeuN immunohistochemistry in a Con (upper panel) versus NPA (lower panel) animal. Right: higher
(  10) magnification of the NeuN immunohistochemistry in a control animal showing normal striatal NeuN expression on the contralateral
(upper panel) and loss of NeuN expression on the ipsilateral (lower panel) side. (D) ED1 immunohistochemistry demonstrating macrophage
infiltration at the infarct border in controls (upper panel) and at the zones of selective neuronal death in NPA animals (lower panel). Arrows in
C and D indicate areas of selective neuronal damage in NPA animals. DAPI, 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole;
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; NPA, 3-nitropropionic acid.

Figure 5. The ischemia-tolerant state is characterized by lower baseline CBF and energy imbalance in NPA-preconditioned animals.
(A) Average CBF maps from controls (Con) and NPA-preconditioned (NPA) animals 3 days after saline or NPA treatment without the induction
of experimental stroke. Lower panel: voxel-wise statistics of CBF values between groups indicating voxels with significantly lower CBF in NPA
animals in pink, overlaid onto anatomic (T2w) images. There is a global CBF reduction 3 days after NPA treatment compared with controls.
(B) Comparison of whole-brain CBF values between groups with and without CO2 challenge. Although baseline CBF is lower in NPA animals,
CBF increases to a similar extent after application of CO2, which indicates that vasoreactivity is preserved after NPA treatment. (C) Levels of the
brain metabolites ATP, AMP, and ECP 3 days after NPA preconditioning or sham treatment. There is significantly more AMP and a lower ECP in
brains of the NPA group. AMP, adenosine monophosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CBF, cerebral blood flow; ECP, energy charge
potential; NPA, 3-nitropropionic acid.
& 2014 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1528

Figure 6. NPA preconditioning decreases the expression of COX, but does not influence the density of blood vessels or the expression of the
chloride co-transporter KCC2. (A) Panels are showing MAP2 (green), KCC2 (red), RECA-1 (red), and COX (red) expression in the cortex (upper
panels), striatum (middle panels), and dentate gyrus (DG, lower panels) of an exemplary control and NPA animal. Nuclei were counterstained
with DAPI (blue). MAP2: MAP2 expression (green), KCC2 in MAP2: KCC2 signal (red) extracted from the MAP2-masked area, Merge: overlays of
MAP2, KCC2, and DAPI. RECA-1: overlay of RECA-1 expression (red) and DAPI (blue). COX: overlay of COX expression (red) and DAPI (blue).
(B) Quantitative analyses of the KCC2 (left), RECA-1 (center), and COX (right) immunofluorescence signal in cortex, striatum, and DG in controls
and NPA (mean±s.d.). DAPI, 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole 4,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; NPA, 3-nitropropionic acid.

In addition, the decrease in the rate of ATP synthesis provoked a
change in the proportion of adenosine nucleotides suggesting a
state of energy imbalance that has been shown to be associated
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

with induction of cellular programs for neuroprotection.39 Our
ﬁnding of decreased ECP together with the reduction of CBF
throughout the brain of NPA-preconditioned animals is a strong
& 2014 ISCBFM

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1529
argument supporting a role of energy metabolism imbalance for
preconditioning, as suggested by the tendency to decrease the
rate of ATP synthesis with a concomitant increase in its dephosphorylated products (AMP). As metabolites in our experiments
were measured in whole-brain homogenates, it is possible that
apparently the modest differences found in these parameters
might have been of larger amplitude in a small metabolically
active compartment such as neuron terminals.
Albeit to a much lesser extent, such response might be similar
to the prolonged energy conserving phase of topor in hibernating
animals.40 The analogy between ischemia tolerance in hibernators
and tolerance induced by preconditioning has long been
suggested by similar neuroprotective mechanisms, such as the
induction of HIF-dependent pathways, adenosine receptor
activation, and the reduction of glutamate release.1,41 However,
the role of metabolic downregulation in preconditioning-induced
tolerance has remained open.5,42–44 On the basis of our results, it is
not possible to discriminate if the observed metabolic adjustments occurred directly because of the inhibition of succinate
dehydrogenase by NPA, or later. Interestingly, although the
inhibition of succinate dehydrogenase after NPA application
is immediate (30 minutes) and longer lasting (3 days), the
direct effect of NPA on ATP synthesis is much shorter lasting
(approximately 2 hours).11
Histologic analysis proved the NPA-induced tissue protection
suggested from MRI, however, selective neuronal death occurred
in parts of the ischemic territory that were not detected on T2w
MRI. This ﬁnding points out the importance of multimodal
(imaging/functional testing/histology) readouts in the assessment
of ischemic damage. Although our ﬁndings may be speciﬁc for
preconditioning with NPA, evidence from other preconditioning
paradigms speak for common principal mechanisms, such as
induction of Bcl-2, ATP-dependent potassium channels and
TNFa.7,45,46 Future experiments will be needed to test additional
models of preconditioning using longitudinal, quantitative CBF
measurements.
Current outcome prediction algorithms for stroke are based on
preexisting, non-modiﬁable patient characteristics.47 On the basis
of the ﬁndings presented here, MRI-based approaches will be able
to reﬁne these parameters and have the potential to guide future
therapeutic decisions by analyzing preischemic or intraischemic
CBF, postischemic hyperperfusion, and early diffusion-weighted
imaging lesion dynamics.
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

REFERENCES
1 Kitagawa K. Ischemic tolerance in the brain: endogenous adaptive machinery
against ischemic stress. J Neurosci Res 2012; 90: 1043–1054.
2 Schaller B. Ischemic preconditioning as induction of ischemic tolerance after
transient ischemic attacks in human brain: its clinical relevance. Neurosci Lett
2005; 377: 206–211.
3 Wegener S, Gottschalk B, Jovanovic V, Knab R, Fiebach JB, Schellinger PD et al.
Transient ischemic attacks before ischemic stroke: preconditioning the human
brain? A multicenter magnetic resonance imaging study. Stroke 2004; 35:
616–621.
4 Rezkalla SH, Kloner RA. Preconditioning in humans. Heart Fail Rev 2007; 12:
201–206.
5 Dirnagl U, Becker K, Meisel A. Preconditioning and tolerance against cerebral
ischaemia: from experimental strategies to clinical use. Lancet Neurol 2009; 8:
398–412.
6 Stevens SL, Leung PY, Vartanian KB, Gopalan B, Yang T, Simon RP et al. Multiple
preconditioning paradigms converge on interferon regulatory factor-dependent
signaling to promote tolerance to ischemic brain injury. J Neurosci 2011; 31:
8456–8463.
7 Gidday JM. Cerebral preconditioning and ischaemic tolerance. Nat Rev Neurosci
2006; 7: 437–448.

& 2014 ISCBFM

8 Kirino T. Ischemic tolerance. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2002; 22: 1283–1296.
9 Gustavsson M, Mallard C, Vannucci SJ, Wilson MA, Johnston MV, Hagberg H.
Vascular response to hypoxic preconditioning in the immature brain. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2007; 27: 928–938.
10 Gidday JM. Pharmacologic Preconditioning: translating the Promise. Transl Stroke
Res 2010; 1: 19–30.
11 Wiegand F, Liao W, Busch C, Castell S, Knapp F, Lindauer U et al. Respiratory chain
inhibition induces tolerance to focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
1999; 19: 1229–1237.
12 Weih M, Bergk A, Isaev NK, Ruscher K, Megow D, Riepe M et al. Induction of
ischemic tolerance in rat cortical neurons by 3-nitropropionic acid: chemical
preconditioning. Neurosci Lett 1999; 272: 207–210.
13 Horiguchi T, Kis B, Rajapakse N, Shimizu K, Busija DW. Opening of mitochondrial
ATP-sensitive potassium channels is a trigger of 3-nitropropionic acid-induced
tolerance to transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 2003; 34: 1015–1020.
14 Zhu HC, Gao XQ, Xing Y, Sun SG, Li HG, Wang YF. Inhibition of caspase-3 activation
and apoptosis is involved in 3-nitropropionic acid-induced ischemic tolerance to
transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. J Mol Neurosci 2004; 24: 299–305.
15 Koizumi J, Yoshida Y, Nakazawa T, Ohneda G. Experimental studies of ischemic
brain edema, I: a new experimental model of cerebral embolism in rats in which
recirculation can be introduced in the ischemic area. Jpn J Stroke 1986; 8: 1–8.
16 Wegener S, Wong EC. Longitudinal MRI studies in the isoﬂurane-anesthetized rat:
long-term effects of a short hypoxic episode on regulation of cerebral blood ﬂow
as assessed by pulsed arterial spin labelling. NMR Biomed 2008; 21: 696–703.
17 Wegener S, Artmann J, Luft AR, Buxton RB, Weller M, Wong EC. The time of
maximum post-ischemic hyperperfusion indicates infarct growth following transient experimental ischemia. PLoS One 2013; 8: e65322.
18 Wong EC, Buxton RB, Frank LR. Quantitative imaging of perfusion using a single
subtraction (QUIPSS and QUIPSS II). Magn Reson Med 1998; 39: 702–708.
19 Wegener S, Wu WC, Perthen JE, Wong EC. Quantiﬁcation of rodent cerebral blood
ﬂow (CBF) in normal and high ﬂow states using pulsed arterial spin labeling
magnetic resonance imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 2007; 26: 855–862.
20 Modo M, Rezaie P, Heuschling P, Patel S, Male DK, Hodges H. Transplantation of
neural stem cells in a rat model of stroke: assessment of short-term graft survival
and acute host immunological response. Brain Res 2002; 958: 70–82.
21 Wegener S, Weber R, Ramos-Cabrer P, Uhlenkueken U, Wiedermann D, Kandal K
et al. Subcortical lesions after transient thread occlusion in the rat: T2-weighted
magnetic resonance imaging ﬁndings without corresponding sensorimotor deficits. J Magn Reson Imaging 2005; 21: 340–346.
22 Garcia JH, Wagner S, Liu KF, Hu XJ. Neurological deﬁcit and extent of neuronal
necrosis attributable to middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Statistical validation. Stroke 1995; 26: 627–634, discussion 635.
23 Lazzarino G, Nuutinen M, Tavazzi B, Di Pierro D, Giardina B. A method for preparing freeze-clamped tissue samples for metabolite analyses. Anal Biochem 1989;
181: 239–241.
24 Lazzarino G, Amorini AM, Fazzina G, Vagnozzi R, Signoretti S, Donzelli S et al.
Single-sample preparation for simultaneous cellular redox and energy state
determination. Anal Biochem 2003; 322: 51–59.
25 Tavazzi B, Lazzarino G, Leone P, Amorini AM, Bellia F, Janson CG et al. Simultaneous high performance liquid chromatographic separation of purines, pyrimidines, N-acetylated amino acids, and dicarboxylic acids for the chemical
diagnosis of inborn errors of metabolism. Clin Biochem 2005; 38: 997–1008.
26 van Dorsten FA, Olah L, Schwindt W, Grune M, Uhlenkuken U, Pillekamp F et al.
Dynamic changes of ADC, perfusion, and NMR relaxation parameters in transient
focal ischemia of rat brain. Magn Reson Med 2002; 47: 97–104.
27 Pellegrino C, Gubkina O, Schaefer M, Becq H, Ludwig A, Mukhtarov M et al.
Knocking down of the KCC2 in rat hippocampal neurons increases intracellular
chloride concentration and compromises neuronal survival. J Physiol 2011; 589(Pt
10): 2475–2496.
28 Blaesse P, Airaksinen MS, Rivera C, Kaila K. Cation-chloride cotransporters and
neuronal function. Neuron 2009; 61: 820–838.
29 Jaenisch N, Witte OW, Frahm C. Downregulation of potassium chloride cotransporter KCC2 after transient focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2010; 41: e151–e159.
30 Galefﬁ F, Sah R, Pond BB, George A, Schwartz-Bloom RD. Changes in intracellular
chloride after oxygen-glucose deprivation of the adult hippocampal slice: effect
of diazepam. J Neurosci 2004; 24: 4478–4488.
31 Otori T, Greenberg JH, Welsh FA. Cortical spreading depression causes a longlasting decrease in cerebral blood ﬂow and induces tolerance to permanent focal
ischemia in rat brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003; 23: 43–50.
32 Kunz A, Park L, Abe T, Gallo EF, Anrather J, Zhou P et al. Neurovascular protection
by ischemic tolerance: role of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. J Neurosci
2007; 27: 7083–7093.
33 Fan YY, Hu WW, Dai HB, Zhang JX, Zhang LY, He P et al. Activation of the central
histaminergic system is involved in hypoxia-induced stroke tolerance in adult
mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2011; 31: 305–314.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

NPA-induced ischemia tolerance: CBF and metabolism
O Bracko et al

1530
34 Furuya K, Zhu L, Kawahara N, Abe O, Kirino T. Differences in infarct evolution
between lipopolysaccharide-induced tolerant and nontolerant conditions to focal
cerebral ischemia. J Neurosurg 2005; 103: 715–723.
35 Barone FC, White RF, Spera PA, Ellison J, Currie RW, Wang X et al.
Ischemic preconditioning and brain tolerance: temporal histological and functional outcomes, protein synthesis requirement, and interleukin-1 receptor
antagonist and early gene expression. Stroke 1998; 29: 1937–1950, discussion
1950–1951.
36 Alkayed NJ, Goyagi T, Joh HD, Klaus J, Harder DR, Traystman RJ et al. Neuroprotection and P450 2C11 upregulation after experimental transient ischemic
attack. Stroke 2002; 33: 1677–1684.
37 Matsushima K, Hakim AM. Transient forebrain ischemia protects against subsequent focal cerebral ischemia without changing cerebral perfusion. Stroke 1995;
26: 1047–1052.
38 Dawson DA, Furuya K, Gotoh J, Nakao Y, Hallenbeck JM. Cerebrovascular hemodynamics and ischemic tolerance: lipopolysaccharide-induced resistance to focal
cerebral ischemia is not due to changes in severity of the initial ischemic insult,
but is associated with preservation of microvascular perfusion. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 1999; 19: 616–623.
39 Di Pietro V, Amorini AM, Tavazzi B, Hovda DA, Signoretti S, Giza CC et al.
Potentially neuroprotective gene modulation in an in vitro model of mild traumatic brain injury. Mol Cell Biochem 2013; 375: 185–198.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1522 – 1530

40 Dave KR, Christian SL, Perez-Pinzon MA, Drew KL. Neuroprotection: lessons from
hibernators. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol 2012; 162: 1–9.
41 Narayanan SV, Dave KR, Perez-Pinzon MA. Ischemic preconditioning and clinical
scenarios. Curr Opin Neurol 2013; 26: 1–7.
42 Yenari M, Kitagawa K, Lyden P, Perez-Pinzon M. Metabolic downregulation: a key
to successful neuroprotection? Stroke 2008; 39: 2910–2917.
43 Kapinya KJ, Lowl D, Futterer C, Maurer M, Waschke KF, Isaev NK et al. Tolerance
against ischemic neuronal injury can be induced by volatile anesthetics and is
inducible NO synthase dependent. Stroke 2002; 33: 1889–1898.
44 Dornbos 3rd D, Zwagerman N, Guo M, Ding JY, Peng C, Esmail F et al. Preischemic
exercise reduces brain damage by ameliorating metabolic disorder in ischemia/
reperfusion injury. J Neurosci Res 2013; 91: 818–827.
45 Kato K, Shimazaki K, Kamiya T, Amemiya S, Inaba T, Oguro K et al. Differential
effects of sublethal ischemia and chemical preconditioning with 3-nitropropionic
acid on protein expression in gerbil hippocampus. Life Sci 2005; 77: 2867–2878.
46 Nakagawa I, Ogawa Y, Noriyama Y, Nakase H, Yamashita M, Sakaki T. Chemical
preconditioning prevents paradoxical increase in glutamate release during
ischemia by activating ATP-dependent potassium channels in gerbil hippocampus. Exp Neurol 2003; 183: 180–187.
47 Flint AC, Faigeles BS, Cullen SP, Kamel H, Rao VA, Gupta R et al. THRIVE score
predicts ischemic stroke outcomes and thrombolytic hemorrhage risk in VISTA.
Stroke 2013; 44: 3365–3369.

& 2014 ISCBFM

