[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2012.09.004
[Link]
mailto:zliu@radiology.arizona.edu
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2012.09.004
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09698051
Imaging of rat cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury using99mTc-labeled duramycin
Yuqing Zhang a,1, Gail D. Stevenson a, Christy Barber a, Lars R. Furenlid a, Harrison H. Barrett a,
James M. Woolfenden a, Ming Zhao b, Zhonglin Liu a,⁎
a Department of Medical Imaging, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724–5067, USA
b Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA
a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e  i n f o 
Article history:
Received 28 February 2012
Received in revised form 31 July 2012
Accepted 13 September 2012
Keywords:
99mTc
Duramycin
SPECT
Cerebral ischemia
Stroke
Objectives: Prompt identification of necrosis and apoptosis in the infarct core and penumbra region is critical
in acute stroke for delineating the underlying ischemic/reperfusion molecular pathologic events and defining
therapeutic alternatives. The objective of this study was to investigate the capability of 99mTc-labeled
duramycin in detecting ischemia-reperfusion injury in rat brain after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion.
Methods: Ischemic cerebral injury was induced in ten rats by vascular insertion of a nylon suture in the left
MCA for 3hr followed by 21–24hr reperfusion. After i.v. injection of 99mTc-duramycin (1.0-3.5mCi), dynamic
cerebral images were acquired for 1hr in six rats using a small-animal SPECT imager. Four other rats were
imaged at 2hr post-injection. Ex vivo images were obtained by autoradiography after sacrifice. Histologic
analyses were performed to assess cerebral infarction and apoptosis.
Results:SPECT images showed that 99mTc-duramycin uptake in the left cerebral hemisphere was significantly
higher than that in the right at 1 and 2hr post-injection. The level of radioactive uptake in the ischemic brain
varied based on ischemic severity. The average ratio of left cerebral hot-spot uptake to right hemisphere
radioactivity, as determined by computerized ROI analysis, was 4.92±0.79. Fractional washout at 1hr was
38.2±4.5% of peak activity for left cerebral hot-spot areas and 80.9±2.0% for remote control areas (Pb0.001).
Based on triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining and autoradiograph image data, the hotspot uptake may be
associated primarily with the ischemic penumbra, in which high apoptotic activity was observed by cleaved
caspase-3 immunocytochemical staining.
Conclusions: 99mTc-duramycin SPECT imaging may be useful for detecting and quantifying ongoing apoptotic
neuronal cell loss induced by ischemia-reperfusion injury.
© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Ischemic stroke is a consequence of total or partial interruption of
cerebral arterial blood supply [1]. Stroke is a leading cause of death
and disability in the United States and throughout the world.
Pathophysiological findings after stroke indicatea complex cascade
of events including loss of plasma-membrane integrity, apoptosis and
neuronal cell death. Regions suffering the most severe degrees of
blood-flow reduction rapidly progress to irreversible damage,
representing an ischemic core [2]. Typically, the ischemic core is
surrounded by a region of brain tissue known as the ischemic
penumbra, in which cerebral cells are potentially salvageable, but the
extent of the penumbra decreases over time by gradual recruitment of
cells into the core. Prompt identification of cell death in the ischemic
core and apoptosis in the penumbra region is critical for delineating
the molecular pathologic events underlying ischemia/reperfusion and
defining therapeutic alternatives.
Neuronal apoptosis after cerebral ischemic insult is characterized
by specific changes such as cell shrinking, chromatin condensation,
nucleus fragmentation, and morphological changes of the cell
membrane [3–5]. Cell membranes, including those of neurons and
neuroglia, are composed of proteins and a lipid bilayer. Phospholipids
including phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE),
phosphatidylserine (PS) and sphingomyelin (SM) are the dominant
lipid components of cell membranes. PE is the second most abundant
mammalian membrane phospholipid and constitutes 20–50% of total
phospholipids. In the brain, PE accounts for at least 45% of total
phospholipids. Accumulating evidence indicates that cell-surface
exposure of PE on apoptotic cells is well correlated with PS exposure
in the early phase of apoptosis [6].
The presence of PE on apoptotic cell surface may play a regulatory
role. Blebbing and the formation of apoptotic bodies are essential
processes in which intracellular components are discretely packaged
and designated to be engulfed. Like PS, PE is a constituent of the inner
leaflet of the plasma membrane, with little presence on the surface of
typical viable cells[7]. In apoptosis, PE is exposed onto the cell surface
Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 520 626 4248.
E-mail address: zliu@radiology.arizona.edu (Z. Liu).
1 Present address: Department of Nuclear Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, USA.
0969-8051/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2012.09.004
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Nuclear Medicine and Biology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/nucmedbio
( 8.0.0.2542.750865020 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
as the redistribution of phospholipids across the bilayer is facilitated
[8]. In necrosis, PE becomes accessible to the extracellular milieu
due to compromised plasma membrane integrity. In contrast to PS,
which when externalized serves as a signaling mechanism for
scavenging of dying cells, the externalization of PE is likely to
contribute to reorganization of membrane structure and cytoskeletal
components. The molecular diversity of phospholipids is essential for
their structural and signaling functions in cell membranes. Many
individual phospholipid constituents are known to be involved in
specific signaling functions necessary for cells to respond to external
stimuli [8–10].
Duramycin, a 19-amino-acid peptide produced by Streptoverticillium
cinnamoneus, has been found to be reactive with PE and is a
potential molecular probe candidate. It binds the head group of PE
with high affinity at a molar ratio of 1:1. Duramycin is the smallest
known polypeptide that has a defined 3-dimensional binding site. The
biologic activities of 99mTc-labeled duramycin have been preliminarily
characterized, and its PE-binding capability has been shown to be
useful for imaging of cardiac cell death [11]. Given its low molecular
weight, high stability, high binding affinity, and specificity, 99mTcduramycin
may have favorable properties as a potential molecular
probe for cellular apoptosis after cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Recent research has revealed that many neurons in the ischemic
penumbra or peri-infarct zone may undergo apoptosis after several
hours or days, and thus they are potentially recoverable for some time
after the onset of stroke [4,12]. Direct visualization of the apoptotic
ischemic penumbra with 99mTc-duramycin may represent an opportunity
for early therapeutic intervention.
The objective of this study was to investigate the capability of
99mTc-duramycin in detecting ischemia-reperfusion injury and visualizing
the ischemic penumbra in rat brain after middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) using a high-resolution small animal SPECT imager.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Radiolabeling duramycin with 99mTc
For 99mTc-labeling, duramycin was conjugated with succinimidyl
6-hydrazinonicotinate acetone hydrazone (HYNIC). The detailed
procedure has been described previously [11]. The reagent in the
vial was a lyophilized composition of HYNIC-conjugated duramycin,
30mg of tricine, 9.5mg of trisodium triphenylphosphine-3,39,3-
trisulfonate (TPPTS), and 6.25μg of SnCl
2
. The vial of duramycin
was reconstituted by addition of 500 μLof 99mTc as sodium
pertechnetate (~30mCi) in saline. The solution in the vial was
incubated at 80o C for 20minutes. The radiochemical purity was
determined with HPLC analysis.
2.2. Establishment of rat middle cerebral artery occlusion model
The rat model of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) was
developed using the technique described previously [13]. Ten male
Sprague–Dawley rats (250 to 300g) were used for these studies.
Briefly, the rats were intubated using a 14G catheter and anesthetized
with 1.5% isoflurane throughout surgery. An incision was made in the
neck exposing the left common carotid artery. The external carotid
artery was isolated and ligated using 5–0 silk (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ,
USA). Middle cerebral artery occlusion was achieved by inserting a 4–
0 nylon suture (Doccol Corporation, Redlands, CA) via the stump of
the external carotid artery into the internal carotid artery a distance of
1.5cm from the bifurcation of the common and internal carotid
arteries. Once the suture was successfully placed, the occlusion of left
cerebral artery was maintained for 3hours. Subsequently, the wound
was closed using sutures and the rat was recovered from anesthesia.
After the scheduled duration of temporary ischemia was reached, the
rat was re-anesthetized using 1.5% isoflurane and the suture was
removed to initiate cerebral reperfusion. All animals were allowed to
recover and underwent cerebral reperfusion overnight (21–24hours),
followed by SPECT imaging. For all experiments, the contralateral
side of the brain (right hemisphere) was used as an intrinsic
negative control.
2.3. High-resolution SPECT imaging
Scintigraphic brain images were obtained using a small-animal
stationary SPECT imager, FastSPECT II, which was designed and
built in the Radiology Research Laboratory of The University of
Arizona. FastSPECT II consists of 16 modular cameras and a
cylindrical aperture with one interchangeable pinhole per camera.
It is capable of acquiring projection data without any motion of the
object or detection system. The spatial resolution is about 1mm
with the 1-mm-diameter pinholes used in this study.
After overnight cerebral reperfusion, four rats were anesthetized
with 1.0-1.5% isoflurane and intravenously injected with 99mTcduramycin
(1.0-3.5mCi, 0.3mL). The rats were allowed to recover for
2hours and then imaged using FastSPECT II. Anesthetized rats were
placed inside the aperture using a translation stage for 15-minute
imaging data acquisition. Sixteen projections were obtained, one from
each camera, to generate the data set for tomographic reconstruction.
The animals were positioned so that the imagingfield of view covered
the entire brain. In order to determine the cerebral radiopharmaceutical
kinetic profile,99mTc-duramycin (1.0-3.5mCi, 0.3mL) was intravenously
injected in six other rats via a pre-installed jugular vein
catheter using a Harvard PHD2000 syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus,
Holliston, MA) followed by a 0.1-mL saline flush. Immediately after
injection, dynamic cerebral images were recorded over a 60-minute
period using FastSPECT II. Specifically, one-minute images were
acquired every minute for 10minutes, followed by 5-minute
acquisitions at 15, 20, 30, and 45minutes post-injection. To enhance
signal intensity for better visualization and region-of-interest (ROI)
establishment, images at 60minutes post-injection were acquired for
10minutes. At the end of the imaging session, the rats were sacrificed
and brains were excised and sectioned for histological, immunohistochemical
and autoradiographic analysis.
2.4. Image processing
Tomographic reconstructions of FastSPECT II data were processed
using 50 iterations of the OS-EM algorithm. Using AMIDE 0.9.2
software, 3D images were generated in an 81×121×121 voxel format,
and tomographic transverse, coronal, and sagittal slices with onevoxel
thickness (0.5mm) were produced.
For each rat imaged dynamically, a 3D ROI analysis was applied for
semi-quantitative analysis of the cerebral uptake of 99mTc-duramycin.
ROIs around the left hemispheres with increased radioactive uptake
were created on all transverse slices of the 60-minute post-injection
images; the ROIs could be viewed simultaneously on the coronal and
sagittal slices.The 60-minute ROIs were applied to all of the dynamic
images from 1 to 60minutes for determining averaged cerebral timeactivity
curves (TACs), which were corrected for ROI size (pixels),
radioactive decay, and acquisition time. The radioactivity (counts/
pixel) and TACs of control right hemispheres were generated using
similar ROI analysis. Care was taken to draw ROIs on both hemispheres
to avoid potential calvarial bone-marrow uptake [13,14].To
avoid effects from variations of injected dose, individual TACs were
normalized at each time point for initial peak counts, which typically
appeared at 2minutes post-injection in remote control areas and
10minutes in ischemic cerebral zones.The counts per pixel represent
the average of counts within the left and right cerebral hemispheres,
midbrain, and posterior fossa.
81 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(8.0.0.2542.931045841 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
2.5. Infarct volume determination and autoradiograph analysis
Lesion volume was assessed on postmortem analysis by 2,3,5-
triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride (TTC) (Sigma, St Louis, MO) staining.
The isolated rat brains were sliced into 1.0-1.5mm coronal sections.
Representative sections were immersed in 3% TTC buffer for 20
minutes at 37o C. The sections were then transferred to 10% formalin
and photographed immediately using a digital camera. Infarct volume
was measured with SigmaScan Pro 5.0 software (SPSS Science,
Chicago, IL) in trace-measurement mode. The percentage infarct
volume was calculated by dividing infarct volume by contralateral
hemisphere volume.
After TTC staining, the ex vivo spatial distribution of radioactivity
in the cerebral sections was examined using autoradiography.
The tissue slices were covered with 1 layer of plastic wrap and
exposed to FujiFilm phosphor imaging plates for 5–15minutes. A
FujiFilm BAS5000 Bio-Imaging Analysis System (Stamford, CT) was
used to scan the plates for digital autoradiograph acquisition. The
average intensity of autoradiograph images at gray-scale display in
normal and ischemic hemispheres was determined using SigmaScan
Pro 5.0 software.
2.6. Histology and immunohistochemistryassay
For histology and immunohistochemistry assay, coronally sliced
brain blocks were collected andfixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1M
PBS for 48hours. Thefixative was replaced once at 24hours. The tissue
blocks were processed with sequential dehydration in 20% and 30%
sucrose solution. After dehydration, the samples were sectioned with
a microtome at 20-μm thickness and mounted onto poly-L-lysinecoated
slides. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was performed
to obtain morphological evidence of cell death.
Detection of apoptotic cells in cerebral sections was based on
immunohistochemical staining of cleaved caspase-3 with rabbit anticleaved
caspase-3 monoclonal antibody (mAb) (Cell Signaling
Technology, Beverly, MA). All procedures, including staining of the
tissue sections, deparaffinization, and cell conditioning (antigen
retrieval with a borate-EDTA buffer) were performed on a Discovery
XT Automated Immunostainer (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc, Tucson,
AZ), using Ventana-validated reagents. Rabbit anti-cleaved caspase-3
mAb was detected using an anti-rabbit biotinylated secondary mAb
followed by biotinylated-streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase and
3,3′-diaminobenzidine system (DAPMap). Primary antibody staining
was detected by hematoxylin counterstaining. Immunohistochemistry
was also performed without incubation with the primary antibody
as an experimental negative control. This allowed us to determine the
experimental signal to noise ratio. Following staining, slides were
dehydrated through graded alcohols, cleared in xylene and coverslipped
with mounting medium. Images were captured using a Nikon
microscope with digital image software.
2.7. Statistical analysis
Significant differences between infarct and noninfarct regions for
single measurement parameters were assessed using unpaired
Student's t-test. Significant differences for infarct volume measurements
were determined via repeated one-way analysis of variance
with Bonferroni's post hoc analysis. For all statistical tests,Pb0.05 was
considered significant.
2.8. Ethics
The animal experiments were performed in accordance with the
Principles of Laboratory Animal Care from the National Institutes of
Health (NIH Publication 85–23, revised 1985) and were approved by
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at The
University of Arizona.
3. Results
3.1. Cerebral radioactive distribution and infarct determination
The FastSPECT II cerebral images showed sufficient resolution and
radioactive intensity to define the individual hemispheres for
comparison, even though only about 1.0mCi 99mTc-duramycin was
injected in some animals.The radioactive distribution in the control
right cerebral hemisphere was barely detectable and at the level of
soft-tissue background. The in vivo focal distributions of 99mTcduramycin
in the left cerebral hemisphere with MCAO could be
visualized on tomographic images at 60 and 120minutes postinjection.
FastSPECT II images showed that 99mTc-duramycin uptake
in the left cerebral hemisphere was significantly higher than that in
the right hemisphere. Left cerebral hemispheres in the rats with
MCAO typically showed distinctly increased focal radioactive accumulations
(hotspots), which were identifiable on multiple transverse,
coronal, and sagittal slices, as shown inFig. 1. However, the increased
radioactivity levels and localizations varied within the left cerebral
hemispheres. In several rats, the99mTc-duramycin uptake appeared to
be quite inhomogeneous in a large area of the left hemisphere. As
shown inFig. 2, the SPECT images sometimes also revealed doughnutshaped
areas of radioactiveuptake in the ischemic hemisphere, in
which an area of lower radioactivity was surrounded by higher
radioactive accumulation.The radioactivity levels in the inhomogeneous
or doughnut distribution patterns were lower overall compared
to the radioactivity of small focal hotspots.
Postmortem analysis demonstrated that the volume of cerebral
infarction (TTC-unstained) in the ischemic hemisphere ranged from
about 1.5cm3to almost the whole left hemisphere (seeFig. 3). When
TTC staining revealed a large cerebral infarction, the results of
autoradiograph imaging indicated that the dominant TTC-unstained
areas were mismatched with 99mTc-duramycin hotspots on most
cerebral slices. The cerebral hotspots were predominantly associated
with the less-TTC-stained areas, potentially representing ischemic
penumbral tissues. Representative TTC staining and autoradiograph
images from a rat with a large brain infarction are shown inFig. 3B-C.
The in vivo 99mTc-duramycin SPECT images from the same animal are
shown in Fig. 2). On those cerebral slices, the infarcted areas were
partially surrounded or mixed with tissues that were less-TTC-
stained, and most of the hotspot activity was in this less-TTC-stained
region. In other animals, when the cerebral infarct was small, the
hotspots of 99mTc-duramycin on autoradiograph images were well
matched with the infarcted areas in size and location, as demonstrated
in Fig. 4. Accordingly, in vivo SPECT imaging of small infarcts
showed clear lesions with focal radioactive uptake (Fig. 5).
Results of quantitative analysis of autoradiograph images are
shown in Fig. 6. The focal intensity of 99mTc-duramycin uptake in the
ischemic areas was significantly higher than that in the control right
hemisphere. However, the focal areas of 99mTc-duramycin uptake on
autoradiograph images were significantly smaller than the unstained
cerebral areas on TTC images (see Fig. 7).
3.2. Kinetic analysis of dynamic images
Cerebral time-activity curves of 99mTc-duramycin are shown in
Fig. 8. After reaching an initial peak at about 2minutes, 99mTcduramycin
in the right hemisphere exhibited rapid clearance over the
observation period of 60minutes post-injection. In contrast, 99mTcduramycin
in the left cerebral ischemic area showed increasing uptake
until 10minutes, after which there was slow washout. A significant
difference was observed at each time point from 3minutes to
60minutes between the left cerebral ischemic area and non-ischemic
82 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-736683154)
Fig. 1.FastSPECT II tomographic transverse (A), sagittal (B), and coronal (C) slices (0.5mm thick) of 99mTc-duramycin (3.0mCi) 2hr post-injection in a rat with 3-hr cerebral ischemia
followed by 21-hr reperfusion. Projection data were acquired for 15minutes. The images show areas of abnormally increased radiotracer uptake, indicated by the yellow dashed line,
within the left hemisphere.
83 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 2
[Link]
image of Fig. 3
righthemisphere. At60minutespost-injection,theaverageratioofleft
cerebral hot spot activity to right hemisphere radioactivity was 4.92±
0.79. Fractional washout was 80.9±2.0% of peak activity for remote
control areas and 38.2±4.5% for left cerebral hotspot areas (Pb0.001).
3.3. Histopathology and immunohistochemical assay
H&E staining showed morphological evidence of cerebral damage
in the left hemisphere of all rats. Representative images are shown in
Fig. 9 A-B. H&E staining clearly demonstrated the infarct border and
pathological features of cerebral infarction, characterized by cell body
shrinkage, darkly stained pyknotic nuclei, and intensely stained red
eosinophilic cytoplasm. High apoptotic activity was observed by
cleaved caspase-3 immunocytochemical staining (Fig. 9 C). High
numbers of neuronal cells with positive caspase-3 staining were
found in the ischemic penumbra. Nuclear morphology of most of the
caspase-3-stained cells was consistent with apoptosis, with signs of
cell shrinkage, nuclear fragmentation, and chromatin condensation.
No staining could be detected in negative controls (Fig. 9 D).
4. Discussion
If cerebral arterial bloodflow is not restored within a short period
in acute stroke, the ultimate result of the ischemic cascade is
Fig. 2.FastSPECTIItomographictransverseslices(0.5mmthick)of99mTc-duramycin(1.8mi)60minutespost-injectioninaratwith3-hrcerebralischemiafollowedby24-hrreperfusion.
Projection data were acquired for 10minutes. The white dashed line indicates the margin of the brain. The yellow dashed line indicates a doughnut-shaped area of increased radiotracer
uptake localized in the left middle cerebral artery region.
Fig. 3. A: Harvested whole rat brain from the animal in Fig. 2. A large white or pale pink portion (yellow dashed line) is present in the left hemisphere and corresponds to strokerelated
ischemia.B: Cerebral slices with TTC staining from the rat brain in A, but oriented differently, in which viable cerebral tissue is stained red. Large TTC-unstained segments
consistent with infarction are present. The white dashed line indicates the area of radiotracer uptake from autoradiograph images. C: Autoradiograph images from the cerebral slices
in B. The blue dashed line indicates the brain margin. The prominent radioactive uptake (dark black) was associated with less-TTC-stained areas or mixed areas of stained and
unstained, as shown in B.
84 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 4
[Link]
image of Fig. 5
irreversible loss of neuronal function[2,6,15]. Prompt identification of
apoptosis in the infarct core and penumbra region is critical for
delineating the underlying ischemic area and defining therapeutic
alternatives. Current thrombolytic therapeutic protocols have a short
therapeutic window following vessel occlusion and remain suboptimal
due to the lack of available diagnostic modalities to reflect
dynamicin vivomolecular pathology processes[16]. Clinically, there is
a need to develop new imaging approaches to define the role of
apoptosis in the ischemic penumbra region and assess therapeutic
interventions aimed at decreasing neuronal damage [5,17,18]. Unlike
necrosis, which is an essentially irreversible process, apoptosis may be
amenable to therapeutic intervention.
Although neurons are large cells that can reach in all parts of the
body through axons, the vast majority of nerve cell bodies are found
only in the central nervous system. These nerve cell bodies are
extremely sensitive to ischemia. Visualization of cell death after stroke
has until recently been restricted to the histological investigation of
postmortem brains[19]. Using modern molecular imaging methods, it
has become possible to monitor neuronal dying in the human brain in
real time. For example, apoptosis can be imaged indirectly with
radiolabeled annexin V in animal models and humans using SPECT
and PET. Annexin V is a human protein that has high affinity for PS,
which is selectively exposed after activation of caspase-3[5,13,17,20].
It has been shown that 99mTc-labeled annexin V can identify hypoxic/
ischemic cerebral reperfusion injury in rat MCAO models. As early as
2hours following reperfusion, radiolabelled annexin V images
revealed a two to three fold increase in annexin V uptake in the
involved hemisphere compared with the normal contralateral
Fig. 4. A: Representative cerebral slices with TTC staining from a rat with a small infarct. The white dashed line indicates the area of radioactivity from autoradiograph images. B:
Autoradiograph images from the slices in A. The blue dashed line indicates the margin of the brain. Hotspot radioactive uptake (dark black) on autoradiograph images approximately
matchesthe small TTC-unstained areas in A. On far left slice, the hotspot size is larger than TTC-unstained area.
Fig. 5. FastSPECT II images (representative transverse slices) with focal 99mTc radioactive accumulation (yellow dashed line) acquired 60minutes after injection of 2.1mCi 99mTcduramycin
from a rat subjected to 3-hr MCAO and 23-hr reperfusion. Postmortem slices from this rat are shown inFig. 4. The white dashed line indicates the brain outline. Projection
data were acquired for 10minutes.
85 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 6
hemisphere [14]. In addition, cell death induced by cerebral ischemia
in a mouse model of stroke can be well visualized using near-infrared
fluorescence imaging of annexin V [21]. Furthermore, 99mTc-HYNIC-
annexin V imaging can identify neuronal apoptosis within 2hours
after reversal of hypoxia in an animal model of global cerebral
ischemia [17]. It is also possible to investigate the apoptosis 
mechanism in the brains of patients with Alzheimer's disease using
99mTc-HYNIC-annexin V SPECT imaging [22].
The results of this study demonstrate for the first time that
intravenous administration of 99mTc-duramycin resulted in a rapid
targeting of brain infarct areas induced by MCAO. In this study with a
limited number of animals, multiple focal hot spots were observed in
the ischemic hemispheres. We also found in some animals that small
hotspots were often visualized along with irregular areas that had low
radioactivity. This phenomenon is likely attributable to a mixture of
small foci of necrotic, apoptotic, and viable cells. Overall, the ischemic
core was not clearly separable from the ischemic penumbra on most
in vivo images. In one animal with left cerebral infarction, however, a
large doughnut pattern of radioactive uptake was found in the
ischemic hemisphere, suggesting uptake of 99mTc-duramycin in an
ischemic penumbra surrounding a central nonviable core. SPECT
imaging may permit separation of such ischemic peripheral areas
from nonviable central regions.
Postmortem analyses in this study showed that the protocol of
transient focal ischemia produced variable sized ischemic infarcts in
the ipsilateral hemisphere, as visualized by both TTC staining and
H&E staining. Based on comparison of TTC staining and autoradiographs
, the pattern of radioactive uptake varied considerably in
areas of infarction. 99mTc-duramycin showed good localization in
small infarcts areas of ischemia. In large infarctions, however,99mTcduramycin
uptake tended to underestimate the extent of infarction
and be associated primarily with the ischemic penumbral areas,
where TTC staining was reduced but not completely absent.
Presumably, the avid accumulation of 99mTc-duramycin in the
region of infarction is because of high levels of accessible PE.
99mTc-duramycin uptake may occur not only in the penumbra
involving high apoptotic activity, but also in ischemic core with
significant necrosis because PE becomes accessible to the extracellular
milieu in necrotic cells. On the other hand, the low or absent
uptake of 99mTc-duramycin in large ischemic cores most likely is
due to poor tissue perfusion and impaired microvascular function.
Currently, the exact roles and percentages of each mode of cell
death after ischemia-reperfusion in the rat stroke model are not
completely clear. More in vivo studies on this agent at different
ischemia-reperfusion times are warranted.
We examined the appearance of caspase-3 activation to determine
evidence for apoptosis in the ischemic brain tissues. We found high
apoptotic activity in the ischemic penumbra on immunohistochemical
staining. In a prior study, caspase-3 activity was reported as early as
8hours following 50minutes of transient MCAO in rats, with a peak at
24hours after reperfusion, and was still present 14 days later [19].
Thus, the high level of apoptotic activity in the ischemic penumbra
region was apparently related to the cerebral hotspot uptake of 99mTcduramycin
observed in our MCAO rat models.
99mTc-duramycin exhibits higher affinity with PE than annexin V,
and accordingly may be more useful as a biomarker of early apoptotic
processes.99mTc-duramycin has excellent radiopharmaceutical kinetics
, with fast blood clearance and extremely low distribution in soft
tissues and major organs except kidneys. A potential practical
application of 99mTc-duramycin, as shown in this study, is the
capability to delineate injured cells in an area of cerebral ischemia.
Depending on the time course and severity of ischemia-reperfusion
injury, the highest uptake of 99mTc-duramycin may not necessarily be
in the infarct core, but rather in the penumbra, where tissues are less
severely damaged but are undergoing apoptosis. To this end, 99mTc-
Fig. 6.Results of quantitative analysis of autoradiograph images. Focal uptake of 99mTcduramycin
in the ischemic area was significantly higher than that in the remote right
hemisphere. * Pb0.01.
Fig. 7.Comparison of infarct measurement on TTC staining and hotspot accumulation of
99mTc-duramcyin on autoradiograph imaging. Infarct size measured by TTC staining
was significantly larger than the area of 99mTc-duramycin accumulation on autoradiographs.
* Pb0.01 compared to autoradiograph imaging.
Fig. 8.Cerebral time-activity curves of 99mTc-duramycin from FastSPECT II quantitative
imaging in rats with cerebral ischemia-reperfusion. Starting at 3minutes, the
radioactivity in the ischemic area was significantly higher than in the remote viable
zone (Pb0.05).
86 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1141657325)
duramycin may be useful for detecting tissues with ischemic damage
that are potentially salvageable with treatment.
There are limitations that need to be considered in this study. First,
because cerebral ischemia leads to disturbances in the blood–brain
barrier, non-specific radiotracer influx might contribute to the
increased uptake in the ischemic hemisphere. The pathophysiological
changes in the ischemic-reperfused brain increase vascular permeability
and also increase interstitial space. As a result, the radioactivity
detected in the ischemic hemisphere might be a combination of
specific 99mTc-duramycin uptake and nonspecific leakage of the tracer.
The contribution of nonspecific binding and leakage needs to be
quantitatively clarified in further studies using a nonspecific radiotracer
similar in molecular weight to 99mTc-duramycin. During the
period of our data acquisition, a micro-CT system was not available to
obtain co-registration of rat brain CT to 99mTc-duramycin SPECT
images. It is difficult to visualize the brain based on hotspot images and
identify the difference between core and penumbra radioactivity due
to lack of co-registered CT images. Moreover, the autoradiographic
images in this study were collected on thick (1.0-1.5mm) cerebral
sections, not on micro sections, so that direct correlation of 99mTcduramcyin
uptake on autoradiographic images with histologic
demonstration of ischemic core and penumbra was not possible.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated that 99mTc-duramycin SPECT imaging can
detect sites of injury in a rat model with cerebral ischemiareperfusion
injury. The uptake of 99mTc-duramycin may be associated
primarily with the ischemic penumbra, in which high apoptotic
activity exists, rather than in the infarct core. However, the level of
radioactive uptake in the ischemic area may vary widely, depending
on the time course of cerebral artery occlusion-reperfusion and
severity of injury, so that the ischemic core may not always be
distinguishable from the ischemic penumbra. The cerebral infarct size
may also be underestimated by 99mTc-duramycin SPECT imaging. The
pharmacokinetics of 99mTc-duramycin is suitable for early imaging
following injection. Thus, it is possible to assess ongoing apoptotic
neuronal cell loss in patients with ischemic stroke in real time using
dynamic 99mTc-duramycin SPECT imaging.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Edward Abril from Tissue Acquisition
and Cellular/Molecular Analysis Shared Service (TACMASS), which is
supported by the Arizona Cancer Center Support Grant (NIH
CA023074), for generating the immunohistochemical and histological
data. We would like to thank Dr. Raymond Nagle at TACMASS for
review and discussion of our histological data. We are thankful to
Li Wan for assistance in animal studies. This work was supported by
NIH grants 5P41-EB002035 and 5R01-HL102085.
References
[1] Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA. Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities in
stroke. Nat Rev Neurosci 2003;4:399-415.
[2] Moustafa RR, Baron JC. Pathophysiology of ischaemic stroke: insights from
imaging, and implications for therapy and drug discovery. Br J Pharmacol
2008;153(Suppl 1):S44-54.
[3] Broughton BR, Reutens DC, Sobey CG. Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral
ischemia. Stroke 2009;40:e331-9.
[4] Taylor RC, Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Apoptosis: controlled demolition at the cellular
level. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008;9:231-41.
[5] Balasubramanian K, Schroit AJ. Aminophospholipid asymmetry: A matter of life
and death. Annu Rev Physiol 2003;65:701-34.
[6] Endres M, Engelhardt B, Koistinaho J, Lindvall O, Meairs S, Mohr JP, et al. Improving
outcome after stroke: overcoming the translational roadblock. Cerebrovasc Dis
2008;25:268-78.
[7] Bevers EM, Comfurius P, Dekkers DW, Zwaal RF. Lipid translocation across the
plasma membrane of mammalian cells. Biochim Biophys Acta 1999;1439:317-30.
[8] Emoto K, Toyama-Sorimachi N, Karasuyama H, Inoue K, Umeda M. Exposure of
phosphatidylethanolamine on the surface of apoptotic cells. Exp Cell Res
1997;232:430-4.
[9] Wymann MP, Schneiter R. Lipid signalling in disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2008;9:
162-76.
[10] Vance JE. Phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine in mammalian cells:
two metabolically related aminophospholipids. J Lipid Res 2008;49:1377-87.
[11] Zhao M, Li Z, Bugenhagen S. 99mTc-labeled duramycin as a novel phosphatidylethanolamine-binding
molecular probe. J Nucl Med 2008;49:1345-52.
[12] Mergenthaler P, Dirnagl U, Meisel A. Pathophysiology of stroke: lessons from
animal models. Metab Brain Dis 2004;19:151-67.
Fig. 9.Photomicrographs of a rat cerebral slice following 3-hr MCAO and 24-hr reperfusion. A: H&E staining (1X) demonstrates an infarction (arrows) in the left MCA region. B: H&E
staining (20X) shows a mixed area with healthy and injured neuronal cells. C: Representative photomicrograph of immunostaining demonstrates caspase-3 staining predominantly
in the ischemic penumbra. D: Negative control immunostaining without primary antibody shows no neuronal staining in ischemic penumbra.
87 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1560813362)
[13] Mari C, Karabiyikoglu M, Goris ML, Tait JF, Yenari MA, Blankenberg FG. Detection
of focal hypoxic-ischemic injury and neuronal stress in a rodent model of
unilateral MCA occlusion/reperfusion using radiolabeled annexin V. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 2004;31:733-9.
[14] Blankenberg FG, Kalinyak J, Liu L, Koike M, Cheng D, Goris ML, et al. 99mTc-HYNIC-
annexin V SPECT imaging of acute stroke and its response to neuroprotective
therapy with anti-Fas ligand antibody. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2006;33:
566-74.
[15] Dirnagl U, Iadecola C, Moskowitz MA. Pathobiology of ischaemic stroke: an
integrated view. Trends Neurosci 1999;22:391-7.
[16] Candelario-Jalil E. Injury and repair mechanisms in ischemic stroke: considerations
for the development of novel neurotherapeutics. Curr Opin Investig Drugs
2009;10:644-54.
[17] D'Arceuil H, Rhine W, de Crespigny A, Yenari M, Tait JF, Strauss WH, et al. 99mTc
annexin V imaging of neonatal hypoxic brain injury. Stroke 2000;31:2692-700.
[18] Balasubramanian K, Mirnikjoo B, Schroit AJ. Regulated externalization of
phosphatidylserine at the cell surface: implications for apoptosis. J Biol Chem
2007;282:18357-64.
[19] Zille M, Farr TD, Przesdzing I, Muller J, Sommer C, Dirnagl U, et al. Visualizing cell
death in experimental focal cerebral ischemia: promises, problems, and
perspectives. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012;32:213-31.
[20] Heckl S. Future contrast agents for molecular imaging in stroke. Curr Med Chem
2007;14:1713-28.
[21] Bahmani P, Schellenberger E, Klohs J, Steinbrink J, Cordell R, Zille M, et al.
Visualization of cell death in mice with focal cerebral ischemia using fluorescent
annexin A5, propidium iodide, and TUNEL staining. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2011;31:1311-20.
[22] Lampl Y, Lorberboym M, Blankenberg FG, Sadeh M, Gilad R. Annexin V SPECT
imaging of phosphatidylserine expression in patients with dementia. Neurology
2006;66:1253-4.
88 Y. Zhang et al. / Nuclear Medicine and Biology 40 (2013) 80–88
( 8.0.0.2542.1979969399 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
