[Link]
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016&domain=pdf
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016
[Link]
mailto:hossain@kennedykrieger.org
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09699961
Genetic deletion of neuronal pentraxin 1 expression prevents brain
injury in a neonatal mouse model of cerebral hypoxia–ischemia
Shabarish Thatipamula a, Md Al Rahima,b, Jiangyang Zhangc, Mir Ahamed Hossaina,b,⁎
a Hugo W. Moser Research Institute at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
b Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
c Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e  i n f o 
Article history:
Received 2 September 2014
Revised 1 December 2014
Accepted 18 December 2014
Available online 29 December 2014
Keywords:
Neuronal pentraxin 1
Neuronal pentraxin 2
Hypoxia–ischemia
Neonatal brain injury
Oxygen glucose deprivation
Mitochondria
Bax
Caspase-3
T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
Neonatal hypoxic–ischemic (HI) brain injury is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity in infants and children
for which there is no promising therapy at present. Previously, we reported induction of neuronal pentraxin 1
(NP1), a novel neuronal protein of the long-pentraxin family, following HI injury in neonatal brain. Here, we
report that genetic deletion of NP1 expression prevents HI injury in neonatal brain. Elevated expression of NP1
was observed in neurons, not in astrocytes, of the ipsilateral cortical layers (I–IV) and in the hippocampal CA1
and CA3 areas of WT brains following hypoxia–ischemia; brain areas that developed infarcts (at 24–48 h),
showed significantly increased numbers of TUNEL−(+) cells and tissue loss (at 7 days). In contrast, NP1-KO
mice showed no evidence of brain infarction and tissue loss after HI. The immunofluorescence staining of brain
sections with mitochondrial protein COX IV and subcellular fractionation analysis showed increased accumulation
of NP1 in mitochondria, pro-death protein Bax activation and NP1 co-localization with activated caspase-3
in WT, but not in the NP1-KO brains; corroborating NP1 interactions with the mitochondria-derived pro-death
pathways. Disruption of NP1 translocation to mitochondriaby NP1-siRNA inprimary cortical culturessignificantly
reduced ischemic neuronal death. NP1 was immunoprecipitated with activated Bax [6A7] proteins; HI caused
increased interactions of NP1 with Bax, thereby, facilitating Bax translocation to mitochondrial and neuronal
death. To further delineate the specificity of NPs, we found that NP1 but not the NP2 induction is specifically
involved in brain injury mechanisms and that knockdown of NP1 only results in neuroprotection. Furthermore,
live in vivo T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) including fractional anisotropy (FA) mapping
showed no sign of delayed brain injury or tissue loss in the NP1-KO mice as compared to the WT at different
post-HI periods (4–24 weeks) examined; indicating a long-term neuroprotective efficacy of NP1 gene deletion.
Collectively, our results demonstrate a novel mechanism of neuronal death and predict that inhibition of NP1
expression is a promising strategy to prevent hypoxic–ischemic injury in immature brain.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
Perinatal/neonatal hypoxic–ischemic brain injury is the leading
cause of long-term disabilities and neurological disorders (Johnston,
1997; Lorenz et al., 1998; Northington et al., 2011). Neonatal brain
injury following hypoxia–ischemia (HI) occurs at a rate of about three
per thousand live-born infants (Johnston, 2005; Johnston et al., 2011);
affecting the life of all ages and population including patient,
care-takers and the family. However, current treatment regimens are
not optimal. A number of clinical trials have focused on new therapies,
however, very few trials have documented limited clinical benefits
due to lack of understanding of the discrete cellular and molecular factors
and signaling pathways involved in brain injury mechanisms
(Blomgren and Hagberg, 2006; Kalenderian et al., 2009; Pezzini and
Padovani, 2009).
Discoveries of the role of the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-D-aspartic acid
(NMDA) glutamate receptor-mediated excitotoxicity, oxidative stress,
and cell-death signaling pathways have provided a platform for understanding
neonatal brain injury (Barks and Silverstein, 1992; Choi and
Rothman, 1990; Hossain et al., 1998; Portera-Cailliau et al., 1997).
Among the candidate target molecules considered to act as early mediators
of AMPAR-recruitment and clustering at synaptic sites include
members of the neuronal pentraxin family; neuronal pentraxin 1
(NP1), neuronal activity-regulated pentraxin (Narp; also called NP2),
and neuronal pentraxin receptor (NPR), and NPs are exclusively
expressed in neurons (Goodman et al., 1996; Schlimgen et al., 1995;
Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Neurology, Kennedy Krieger Institute, 707
North Broadway, Room 400-N, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. Fax: +1 443 923 2695.
E-mail address:hossain@kennedykrieger.org (M.A. Hossain).
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016
0969-9961/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Neurobiology of Disease
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynbdi
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.2019346868)
Tsui et al., 1996).O'Brien et al. (1998, 1999)have shown that Narp regulates
AMPA glutamate receptor clustering at synaptic sites (O'Brien
et al., 1998, 1999). We found that NP1 co-localizes with GluR1 and enhanced
GluR1 membrane insertion at the synaptic site in OGD exposed
hippocampal neurons, whereas, knockdown of NP1 resulted in decrease
in the surface GluR1 cluster density, synaptic localization, and neuronal
death after OGD (Al Rahim and Hossain, 2013). Thus, it is possible that
NP1 may disrupt inter-neuronal synaptic activity, and the suppression
of which possibly contributes to the recovery function after HI brain
injury.
Proposed functions of NPs include modulation of synaptic uptake,
synapse formation, and synaptic remodeling (Kirkpatrick et al., 2000;
Schlimgen et al., 1995). Previously, we have shown induction of NP1
in neonatal brain injury following HI (Hossain, 2008; Hossain et al.,
2004) is regulated via a pro-death glycogen synthase kinase 3α/βdependent
pathway (Russell et al., 2011); indicating a novel regulatory
link between NP1 induction and neonatal death. Neuronal cell death
signaling pathways in mitochondria have been demonstrated in the
ischemic brain (Chan, 2004; Perez-Pinzon et al., 1999) that are often
triggered by the translocation of Bad and Bax, two proapoptotic Bcl-2
family members, to mitochondria (Armstrong and Jones, 2002; Zong
et al., 2001). In addition, various cell death mechanisms require de
novo synthesis of both RNA and lethal proteins to trigger apoptotic
cell death (D'Mello et al., 1993). However, how the induction of NP1 expression
leads to the propagation of neuronal death or its inhibition
contributes to neuroprotection against hypoxic–ischemic cerebral injury
in neonatal brain is not completely understood. Here, we report that
that genetic deletion of NP1 expression attenuated mitochondriamediated
HI-induced brain injury and showed persistent long-term
neuroprotection in neonatal brain.
Materials and methods
Neonatal mice model of HI
Neonatal (P8) wild type (WT) and NP1 knockout (NP1-KO) mice
(C57BL/6 background) originated from separate WT and NP1-KO
breedingcolonies were used for theHIstudy. Thesemiceare of congenic
C57BL/6 background, constitutive knockouts; viable and fertile as mutant
and can be bred as such, maintain normal body weight and appear
grossly normal (Bjartmar et al., 2006; Kirkpatrick et al., 2000). NP1-KO
mice were kindly provided by Dr. Paul Worley, Dept. of Neuroscience,
School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
Animals were anesthetized and subjected to unilateral common carotid
artery occlusion (CCAO) combined with controlled hypoxia exposure in
humidified 10% oxygen balanced nitrogen similar to that described
previously (Hossain et al., 2004). Briefly, pups were separated from
their dams and placed in a temperature-controlled incubator set to an
ambient temperature at 35 °C. Under deep inhalant anesthesia
(isoflurane in an oxygen/nitrous oxide mixture delivered via a Drager
vaporizer) a 5–6 mm incision was made on the neck and the right
common carotid artery was isolated, double ligated, and cut between
theligatures.Hypoxia wasinduced bycontinuousflow of warm, humidified gas (10%, balanced nitrogen) for 30 min. After hypoxic exposure,
the animals were placed in the temperature controlled incubator 2 h
prior to returning them to their dams in order to eliminate post-insult
temperature variability that can influence the extent of injury. A subset
of control animals were mock-treated with a small incision on their
necks without CCA occlusion and placed in a Plexiglass chamber at normal
air (sham control). We used 1 pup/litter as each litter is considered
as n = 1 for comparison between control and HI (WT vs. KO). Animals
were sacrificed at 24, 48, 72 h and 7 days after HI. All procedures involving
animals were carried out in accordance with the NIH guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by The Johns Hopkins
University Animal Care and Use Committee.
Histochemistry
Injury to different brain areas was determined by triphenyltetrazolium
chloride (TTC, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) staining of brain sections
(2 mm) collected at 24 and 48 h post-HI and from Nissl-stained brain
sections obtained at 7 days post HI. Quantitative morphometric analysis
of injury volumes was determined using the computer-assisted image
analysis software package Microcomputer Imaging Device (MCID) of
Imaging Research (Brock University, St. Catharines, Ontario, Canada)
according to our established methods (Hossain et al., 1998). For Nisslstained
sections, brain injury was assessed by histologic analysis of
striatum and dorsal hippocampus. Serial 25μm coronal sections were
cut with a cryostat (MICROM, Heidelberg, Germany) and stained with
0.5% Cresyl violet. For each animal, the cross-sectional areas of striatum
and hippocampus at both ipsilateral and contralateral sides were
measured using MCID image analysis. For striatum, six coronal sections
selected at 250μm intervals, rostral to the anterior commissure were
analyzed. For hippocampus, six coronal sections caudal to the rostral
most edge of hippocampus were analyzed. For each section the percent
damage was calculated by comparing the cross-sectional area of the injury
(I) and the contralateral (C) side using the formula: 100 × (C−I/C)as
described previously (Hossain et al., 1998). For TTC staining, a subset of
animals from the sham control and HI groups were sacrificed by decapitation
at indicated times post-HI to determine cerebral infarctions as described
previously (Hossain et al., 2004). The areas of infarction were
visualized with a digital scanner (HP Scanjet G4010) and quantified by
MCID analysis to determine infarct volumes. The average values of percent
damage were determined for each structure and animal.
TUNEL staining
The DeadEnd Fluorometric TUNEL System (Promega, Madison, WI,
USA) was used to detect degenerated cells in brain sections following
HI as described previously (Hossain et al., 2004). Briefly, brain sections
were processed according to the manufacturers' instructions. Negative
controls were performed under identical conditions except for the
omission of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) from the reaction
buffer and sections were counter stained with DAPI. Fluorescein
fluorescence was visualized under a fluorescence microscope (Carl
Zeiss Axioplan 1) with excitation at 485 nm and emission at 535 nm.
DAPIfluorescence (blue) was visualized with excitation and emission
filters at 365 nm and 450 nm, respectively. The number of TUNEL (+)
cells was quantified by using MCID image analysis as described
previously (Russell et al., 2006).
Immunofluorescence analysis
To assess the distribution of NP1 protein in different brain regions
and sub-regions (e.g., hippocampal CA1, CA3 and dentate gyrus)
representative coronal brain sections (20 μm) were subjected to
immune-staining and analyzed by fluorescence microscopy as described
previously (Hossain et al., 2004). Mouse pups were sacrificed
at the indicated time-points after HI by perfusion fixation with icecold
4% paraformaldehyde in 1× PBS and cryoprotected sequentially
in 15% and 30% sucrose solutions overnight followed by freezing on
dry ice. Representative coronal brain sections (20 μm) from control
and HI animals were immunostained as described previously
(Al Rahim et al., 2013; Hossain et al., 2004). Mouse monoclonal anti-
NP1 (1:200) (BD Transduction Laboratories, Temecula, CA, USA), GFAP
(1:1000), COX IV (1:250) and cleaved caspase-3 (1:200; Cell Signaling,
Beverly,MA, USA) wasused astheprimary antibody, whiledonkey antimouse
, anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (green) and 568 (red) are the secondary
antibodies used (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Immunofluorescence
was visualized using an inverted fluorescence microscope
(Olympus IX51 fitted with DP2-DSW-V3.2 application software) at
16 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-464109146)
10× and ZEISS Axioimager M2 (AxioVision SE64 Rel.4.8.1 application
software) at 100× magnification.
Preparation of cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions
Subcellular fractionation was performed using cortical tissues from
sham control and HI animals (WT and NP1-KO) as described previously
(Al Rahim et al., 2013; Russell et al., 2011). Briefly, the cerebral cortices
were collected and placed in 10 volumes of an ice-cold homogenization
buffer (250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mg/ml BSA, 0.5 mM EDTA,
0.5 mM EGTA) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor
cocktails (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA, USA). Tissues were homogenized
using a hand-held homogenizer by eight strokes and centrifuged at
2000 g for 3 min. The pellet (P1) is the nuclear fraction. The postnuclear
supernatant (S1) was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 10 min at
4 °C for the cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions. The supernatant
was used as the crude cytosolic fraction. The pellet was washed with a
sucrose buffer (in mM: 320 sucrose, 3 CaCl2
, 2 Mg-acetate, 0.1 EDTA,
10 Tris–HCl), and further centrifuged at 12,000 gfor 10 min. The pellet
containing the mitochondrial fraction was resuspended in the sucrose
buffer supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails.
To confirm the separation of cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions, blots
were stripped and incubated with β-actin (Sigma) and prohibitin
(Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), respectively, which also served as
loading controls.
Embryonic cortical neuronal culture
Primary cortical neuronal cultures were prepared from embryonic
day 16 (E16) wild-type (WT) and NP1-knockout (NP1-KO) mice as
described previously (Hossain et al., 2004). Briefly, primary cortical
neurons were grown in a culture medium consisting of Neurobasal™medium
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 2% B27 supplement (Invitrogen),
2-mM L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin–streptomycin as described previously
(Hossain et al., 2004). At 3 days in vitro (DIV), one-third of the
media was replaced with fresh medium (without L-glutamine) containing
cytosine arabinofuranoside (AraC, 5μM; Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA)
to arrest the growth of non-neuronal cells. Experiments were conducted
at DIV 12, when cultures consisted primarily of neurons (N95% MAP-2
immunoreactive cells) (MAP-2; Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA).
Short interference RNA (siRNA) directed against NP1 mRNA (NP1-siRNA)
For NP1 gene silencing experiments, we transfected primary cortical
neurons withNtpx1specific siRNA constructs (5′-AATTCTTCCAGCCAAA
CCAAC-3′) (construct #7) (5-AAGAACGACACAGAGGAAAGG-3′) (construct
#9) generated using a Silencer™ siRNA Construction Kit (Cat #
1620) (Ambion, Inc. Austin, TX, USA) and the commercially available
control scramble siRNA (SsiRNA) following the methods described previously
(Russell et al., 2011). The oligodeoxyribonucleotide sequences
exhibited no similarity to any other known mammalian genes as determined
by BLAST. Experimental treatments were initiated ~48 h after
transfection. Using siRNA specific for NP1, we have achievedN90% reduction
in NP1 protein levels compared to control SsiRNA. To mechanistically
demonstrate the mitochondrial localization of NP1, primary
cortical neurons were co-transfected with either DsRed2 control or
pDSRed2-Mito vector (Clontech) DNA that targets the host cell's
mitochondria (Rizzuto et al., 1995) in the presence of NP1-siRNA, and
exposes to OGD as described above (Al Rahim et al., 2013).
Induction of oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD), modeled in vitro, using
cultured primary cortical neurons
To induce oxygen glucose deprived conditions, cultured cortical
neurons at DIV 12 were exposed to OGD as described previously (Al
Rahim and Hossain, 2013; Al Rahim et al., 2013; Sharma et al., 2014).
Briefly, neurons were placed in glucose-free Earl's balanced salt solution
(EBSS) and then exposed to humidified 95% N
2
/5% CO
2
using anaerobic
modular incubator chambers (Billups-Rothenberg, Del Mar, CA, USA)
for different time periods (2–8 h). Control cultures were incubated
with EBSS with glucose and incubated in humidified 95% air/5% CO
2
for the same duration.
Assessment of cell cytotoxicity
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity released in the media after
OGD exposure was measured using the CytoTox96 Non-radioactive Cytotoxicity
Assay Kit (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) as described previously
(Hossain et al., 2004; Russell et al., 2007). Percent cell death was
determined using the formula: % cytotoxicity = hypoxic LDH release
(OD
490
) / maximum LDH release (OD
490
) after correcting for baseline
absorbance of LDH release at 490 nm.
Co-immunoprecipitation of NP1 with Bax
Cortical tissue homogenate from sham control and HI animals was
prepared as described above. The crude cytosolic fraction was further
centrifuged at 12,000 gfor 10 min and the pellet was suspended in an
immunoprecipitation buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate, 100 mM
NaCl, 1% Triton X-100) containing 1× protease inhibitor cocktail set I,
and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail II (Calbiochem) following the
method as described previously (Hossain et al., 2004). One hundred
micrograms of total proteins were subjected to immunoprecipitation
by incubating overnight with activated Bax [6A7] antibody (1:100, Cell
Signaling) at 4 °C with constant shaking. Then, 20 μl of protein A/G-
agarose conjugated beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz,
CA, USA) was added to each sample and incubated for 2–4 h at 4 °C.
The beads were collected, washed, and boiled for 3 min in 50μlof1× 
electrophoresis sample buffer followed by Western blot analysis.
SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis
SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting were performed according to the
method of Laemmli (1970) as described previously (Hossain et al.,
2002).Crudehomogenates(250–300μg)from theipsi-and contralateral
cerebral cortices were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting
using antibodies specific for NP1, COX IV (1:1000; Cell Signaling),
Bax (1:1000, Cell Signaling), activated Bax [6A7] (1:500, Abcam),
procaspase-3 and cleaved caspase-3 (1:1000; Cell Signaling), prohibitin
andβ-actin (1:5000, Sigma) antibodies according to the method described
previously (Hossain et al., 2002, 2004). Horseradish peroxidase
(HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ,
USA) were used at 1:5000 dilutions for 1 h at RT. HRP reaction product
was then visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence using an ECL
Western blotting detection kit (SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent
Substrate, Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Digitized images were
quantified using NIH ImageJ software.
Quantification of NP1 expression by real-time PCR
Total RNA was extracted from hippocampal and cortical brain areas
at different times after HI using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) according to
the manufacturer's protocol. cDNA was synthesized from 1μg of purified total RNA using iScript™cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Richmond, CA, USA), following the manufacturer's instructions. Quantitative
real-time PCR was performed in triplicate by using iQ SYBR Green
Supermix on the CFX96™Real-time System (Bio-Rad) as described previously
(Al Rahim et al., 2013). The mRNA level was normalized by
housekeeping gene HPRT (Semenza, 2001). The primer sets used for
NP1 (Acc. No. NM_008730.2) were 5′-GCT GCG AGA GCC AGA GCA
CC-3′ (sense) and 5′-TTG CCC GAG TTG GCT GAG CG-3′ (anti-sense),
17 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1527214570)
[Link]
http://www.Mristudio.org
and for HPRT were 5′-CCT GGC GTC GTG ATT AGT GAT G-3′(sense) and
5′-CAG AGG GCT ACA ATG TGA TGG C-3′(anti-sense).
In vivo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
In vivo MRI experiments were performed on a horizontal bore
11.7 Tesla MR scanner (Bruker Biospin, Ballerica, MA, USA) equipped
with a triple-axis gradient unit (maximum strength of 70 G/cm), using
a volume excitation coil and a 4-channel phased array receiver coil designed
for mouse brain imaging as described previously (Aggarwal
et al., 2010). Briefly, animals were anesthetized with 1% to 1.5%
isoflurane in a mix of oxygen and air at 1:3 ratios and placed in an animal
holder. During imaging, the animal's respiration rate was monitored
using a pressure sensor (SAII, Stony Brook, NY, USA) and
maintained at 50–60 breaths per min by adjusting the concentration
of isoflurane. Body temperature was monitored at 35–37 °C via a thermocouple
placed under the body. Multi-slice T2-weighted images
were performed utilizing a rapid acquisition with refocused echo
(RARE) sequence with the following parameters: echo time (TE)/
repetition time (TR) = 60/3800 ms, RARE-factor = 8, four signal averages
,field of view (FOV) = 15 mm × 15 mm, 28 slices with 0.5 mm
slice thickness, in-plane resolution of 0.08 mm × 0.08 mm, and animaging
time of 12 min. Multi-slice in-vivo DTI was performed using a foursegment
diffusion-weighted EPI sequence with the following parameters
: TE/TR = 24/14,000 ms, one signal average, 30 diffusion directions,
b = 1500 s/mm2, an in-plane resolution of 0.12 mm × 0.12 mm with a
partial Fourier factor of 1.4 in the phase encoding direction, and the
same FOV, slice thickness and number of slices as the T2-weighted images.
With respiratory gating, the total imaging time was approximately
30 min. All animals recovered in 5 min after imaging. Diffusion tensor
was reconstructed at each pixel along with apparent diffusion coefficient
(ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA) using the log-linearfitting
method implemented in DTIStudio (http://www.Mristudio.org). The
percentage of ipsilateral volume relative to contralateral volume was
determined by ipsi / contra × 100 in each animals (n = 6)
Statistical analysis
Statistics were performed using GraphPad Prism software, Version
5.01. For one experimental and one control group, two-tailed Student's
t-test was used to determine if differences exist between means.
Comparisons involving multiple groups were done by ANOVA, followed
by Bonferroni/Dunn post-hoc test where appropriate. Significance level
was assigned at p b 0.05.
Results
Morphometric quantification of HI brain injury and neuroprotection in
neonatal brain
We have examined whether knockdown of the NP1 gene (Ntpx1)
expression protects against HI-induced injury in neonatal brain
(Fig. 1). Brain injury was assessed by visual observation of postmortem
brains (Fig. 1A), from TTC-stained brain sections (2.0 mm) (Fig. 1B), and
by measuring ipsi- and contralateral cortical and hippocampal volumes
at 7 days post-HI Nissl-stained coronal brain sections (WT vs. NP1-KO)
by using MCID Elite and NIH Image J software’s(Fig. 2). Although the severity
of brain injury varied, the WT HI brain at 24 h appeared edematous
and developed infarction (white areas) visible in the ipsi-lateral
side of the whole brain (shown by arrows) as compared to sham controls.
Whereas, NP1-KO HI brain appeared normal and no sign of infarction
(no injury) similarto that observed in sham control brains(Fig. 1A).
Morphometric quantification of TTC-stained brain sections for assessment
of injury in WT animals showed significantly increased brain infarction
area (p b 0.01), which was completely absent in the NP1-KO
brains (Fig. 1B). Quantitative morphometry of brain injury from Nisslstained
brain sections for assessment of tissue damage showed significant
decrease in the ipsilateral-cortical (50%) and -hippocampal
(~60%) volumes at 7 d post-HI compared to the sham controls
(Figs. 2A–B). In contrast, volumetric quantification of Nissl-stained
brainsectionsfrom NP1-KO animals revealed nocortical and hippocampal
tissue loss compared to that observed in WT brains under similar
conditions. Our results suggest the involvement of NP1 in the brain
injury mechanisms.
To further assess the effects of NP1 induction in brain injury and
neuroprotection, we performed TUNEL-histochemistry for degenerated
neurons in adjacentbrain sections collected from WT (Fig. 3A) and NP1-
KO animals (Fig. 3B) at 48 h post-HI. Intensely stained TUNEL (+) cells
were detected in the WT ipsilateral cortex (Fig. 3A, upper panels) and
hippocampus (lower panels), whereas, TUNEL− staining was almost
absent in the NP1-KO ipsilateral-cortex and -hippocampus (Fig. 3B).
These TUNEL (+) cells showed characteristics of both apoptotic (darkly
stained round chromatin) and necrotic (diffusely stained chromatin)
morphologies, which are consistent with our previous findings
(Hossain et al., 2004; Russell et al., 2006). Quantification of the number
of TUNEL (+) cells showed significantly increased number of TUNEL
(+) cells (pb0.001) were observed in the WT ipsilateral frontal and parietal
cortex and in the pyramidal layer of the CA1 and CA3, but not in
the dentate gyrus, hippocampal areas at 48 h post-HI as compared to
the sham controls (Fig. 3C). Whereas, TUNEL (+) cells were almost absent
in the respective brain areas of NP1-KO brains (Fig. 3D); suggesting
neuroprotection in NP1-KO animals against HI.
NP1 is induced in neurons following HI and NP1 gene deletion exerts
neuroprotection against HI
First, we examined NP1 induction following HI by multiple
approaches. Immunofluorescence analysis of brain sections collected
at 48 h post-HI from WT animals showed differential levels of NP1 induction
in different cortical layers and hippocampal regions (Fig. 4).
Ipsilateral-cortical layers I–III (Fig. 4A) and hippocampal CA1 and CA3
areas (Fig. 4B) showed higher levels of NP1 expression compared to
the respective contralateral sides and sham controls. Further analysis
of NP1-specific immunoreactivity (viewed at 60× oil objective) and orthogonal
projection offluorescence images showed increased levels of
NP1 localized mainly in the perinuclear region of the cytoplasm
(Fig. 4D) but not in the nucleus that was stained with DAPI (Fig. 4E).
No difference in NP1-immunoreactivity was observed in the contralateral
side of the cortical and hippocampal regions as compared to sham
controls.
To further validate theinduction of NP1 in HIbrain,we examined expression
of NP1 mRNA and protein levels in the ipsilateral cerebral cortex.
Quantification of NP1 mRNA levels by RT-qPCR showed a N2-fold
induction of NP1 mRNA at 72 h (p b 0.01) which remained increased
up to 7 days post-HI (pb 0.001), examined, in the ipsilateral cortex as
compared to the contralateral side (Fig. 4F). Western blot analysis of
the cortical tissue homogenate also confirmed a HI time-dependent increase
in NP1 protein levels (N2-fold) after HI compared to the sham
controls (Fig. 4G); corroborating the induction of NP1 in the cerebral
cortex and hippocampus with HI injury. Our results clearly demonstrate
a temporal relationship of NP1 induction with HI brain injury in WT animals.
In contrast, NP1 protein was completely absent in the NP1-KO
brain, validating the NP1 knockout status in NP1-KO animals (Supplemental
Fig. 1). Our results further confirm neuroprotection against HI
in the absence of NP1 expression in the neonatal brain.
NP1 induction is neuronal specific
Glial cells especially astrocytes (activated astrocytes) play an active
role in ischemic neuropathology (Norris et al., 2005; Rogers et al.,
1996) by secreting inflammatory cytokines (Mojsilovic-Petrovic et al.,
2007). We asked if NP1 is induced in non-neuronal cells in the brain
18 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-248473660)
following HI. Brain sections from control and HI animals (WT and NP1-
KO) were double immunostained with NP1 and astrocyte marker GFAP
(Fig. 5). Fluorescence microscopy revealed activated phenotype of
astrocytes (hypertrophy of soma and processes, Fig. 5B, middle row)
in brain areas where we also observed intense NP1 induction as compared
to sham controls (Fig. 5A, upper row). However, merged images
revealed that NP1 is not expressed/induced in astrocyte cells following
HI as evident in the absence of co-localization between NP1 and GFAP;
confirming neuron-specific expression of NP1 (Hossain, 2008; Hossain
et al., 2004). It is possible that in NP1, though exclusively expressed in
neurons (Dodds et al., 1997; Goodman et al., 1996; Hossain, 2008;
O'Brien et al., 2002; Tsui et al., 1996), the secreted NP1 protein is readily
taken up by surrounding glial cells (Schlimgen et al., 1995) leading to
glial activation. In contrast, brain sections from NP1-KO brain showed
no astrocyte reactivity and retained normal astrocyte morphology
(Fig. 5C, bottom row) similar to those observed in brain sections from
sham controls (Fig. 5A). Our results suggest that NP1 induction in neurons
may play a causative role in orchestrating astrocyte activation and
neuronal death.
Pro-death effects of NP1 induction depend on the mitochondrial
localization of NP1 following HI
To ascertain the cellular localization of NP1 protein following induction
and to gain an in-depth insight into the effects of NP1 accumulation
in mitochondria, we performed dual immunofluorescence analysis
using the mitochondrial specific marker COX IV and NP1, and subcellular
fractionation of control and HI cortical tissues from WT brain (Fig. 6).
NP1 was co-localized with COX IV, a mitochondrial membrane bound
protein which serves as a mitochondrial marker, in the WT HI brain,
but this co-localization was completely absent in the NP1-KO brain suggesting
specific localization of NP1 in the mitochondria following HI
(Figs. 6A–B). An orthogonal view of merger images revealed that most
of mitochondria exhibited NP1 immunofluorescence that overlapped
(yellow) with mitochondrial COX IV (Fig. 6B).
Subcellular fractionation of control and HI cortical tissues (12–48 h
post HI) separating mitochondrial and cytoplasm fractions followed by
Western blotting using NP1-specific antibody showed a HI timedependent
increase of NP1 protein, with a molecular mass of 47 kDa,
Fig. 1.Cerebral HI-induced brain injury in neonatal brain. The right CCA of neonatal rats was ligated and then subjected to 30 min of hypoxia as described in theMaterials and methods
section. A) Representative whole brain morphology of WT and NP1-KO animals shown at 24 h after HI. The hemisphere ipsilateral to the ligation appeared edematous and showed apparent
sign of liquefaction area (black arrows) in WT brains but not in the NP1-KO brain. B) TTC-staining of brain sections (2 mm) showed marked infarction (white areas) and quantification
of infarction volume showed significantly increased (N20%) infarcted area in the right cerebral hemisphere as compared to the sham controls. In contrast, the infarction was almost absent
in the NP1-KO brains following HI and appeared similar to sham controls. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 10; **pb 0.01). Representative images are shown.
19 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
localization in the mitochondrial fraction as compared to the respective
control (Fig. 6C). To confirm the separation of cytosolic and mitochondrial
fractions, membranes were stripped and incubated with cytoplasmic
(β-actin) and mitochondrial (prohibitin) markers, respectively,
which also serve as loading control.
Tomechanistically demonstrate the localization of NP1 in mitochondria
, we transfected primary cortical neurons with DsRed2 control vector
and pDSRed2-Mito vector DNA, and cortical cultures were exposed
to oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) at 12 days in vitro (DIV) (Fig. 7).
This vector is designed for red fluorescence labeling of mitochondria
with the mitochondrial targeting sequence from subunit VIII of cytochrome
c oxidase (Mito) (Rizzuto et al., 1995) that targets to the host
cell's mitochondria. Overlapped immunofluorescence images of
MtDsRed (red) and NP1 (green) further confirmed a marked increase
in NP1 localization into the mitochondria (yellow) following OGD as
compared to normoxia control neurons (Fig. 7BI, BII). Next, we asked
if NP1 localization to mitochondria caused neuronal death and if disruption
of NP1 translocation to mitochondria might reduce OGD-induced
neuronal death. To directly demonstrate the involvement of mitochondrial
localization of NP1 in neuronal death, a subset of cortical cultures
was co-transfected with either control scramble siRNA or NP1-siRNA
to knockdown NP1 protein (Fig. 7A) and pDSRed2-Mito vector, and
exposed to OGD as above. Fluorescence images show absence of
NP1 protein in mitochondria as evident in the absence of NP1
co-localization with MtDsRed (Fig. 7BIII). LDH release cytotoxicity
assay under similar conditions revealed a significant reduction in
OGD-induced neuronal injury (
+
p b 0.01) in NP1-siRNA transfected
cells compared to cells transfected with control scramble siRNA
(*pb0.01 vs.normoxia control cells)(Fig. 7C).Our resultsprovidedirect
evidence that pro-death effects of NP1 depend on its mitochondrial
localization following HI.
NP1 mitochondrial localization facilitates Bax activation
Previously we found that NP1 interacts with pro-death Bax (Al
Rahim et al., 2013). We asked whether NP1 induction is associated
with Bax activation and Bax localization to mitochondria leading to initiation
of mitochondrialdeathprograms. Here, we examined Baxactivation
in the cytoplasm and mitochondrial fractions from WT and NP1-KO
cerebral cortices collected at 6–24 h post-HI (Fig. 8). Western immunoblots
using antibody specific for the Bax [6A7] activated form (Hsu and
Youle, 1997) showed increased Bax [6A7] immunoreactive protein
Fig. 2.Cerebral HI caused brain injury in WT neonatal mice but not in the NP1-KO micebrain. A) Nissl-stained brain sections of sham control (upper panels) andHI (lower panels) mice showed
injury in the ipsilateral-cortical and -hippocampal areas of WT brains, but no injury/tissue loss (neuroprotection) in the NP1-KO brains as comparedtothatinWTbrainat7dayspost-HI.Representative
images are shown. B) Brain injury was quantified 7 days after HI by measuring cortical, striatal and hippocampal volumes from Nissl-stained coronal sections (20μm) using the
Microcomputer Imaging Device (MCID Elite) software as previously described (Hossain et al., 1998). Morphometric quantification of representative coronal sections revealed significant
loss of ipsilateral striatum, cortex and hippocampus volumes of WT brains,but not in NP1-KO animals, compared to the contralateral side and that of sham controls. Representative coronal
brain sections are shown. Data represent mean ± SEM (n = 10). **p b0.01, ***pb 0.001, compared to sham controls. ++pb 0.01, +++pb0.001 compared to WT HI animals.
20 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
( 8.0.0.2542.1491759905 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
bands in the mitochondrial fraction at 6 h (N4-fold, pb 0.01) and 12 h
(N2-fold, pb0.05) post-HI from the WT cortex (Fig. 8A).Whereas,activated
Bax [6A7] protein bands were negligible or absent in mitochondrial
fraction from NP1-KO cortical tissues (Fig. 8B). Results, expressed
as fold changes (Bax6A7/Bax ratio) from four separate experiments
(n = 4), clearly show that NP1 induction following HI and NP1's
mitochondrial localization facilitates the accumulation of active Bax to mitochondria
leading to the activation of mitochondrial death pathways.
To directly demonstrate the interaction of NP1 with active Bax protein
, we performed co-immunoprecipitation experiments using Bax
[6A7]-specific primary antibodies (Fig. 8C). Our results showed that
NP1wasco-precipitatedwith activeBax protein,and Western immunoblotting
showed increased precipitation of NP1 protein (N1.5-fold,
pb 0.01) with active Bax after HI. Our results clearly demonstrate that
NP1 forms protein complexes with Bax, and that HI enhances NP1 interactions
with active Bax to facilitate their mitochondrial localization.
NP1 causes neuronal injury by activating mechanisms downstream of Bax
activation and NP1 gene deletion blocked activation of caspase proteases
initiated following HI
It is known that activation of Bax induces cytochrome c release from
mitochondria that triggers caspase-3 cleavage and apoptosis (Galluzzi
et al., 2009). To further ascertain the contribution of NP1 to cell death
cascades and neuroprotection in the absence of its expression, we examined
the caspase-signaling pathways. Immunofluorescence analysis
of activated caspase-3 in brain sections from WT animals revealed the
appearance of intense cleaved caspase-3 (i.e., activated) specificimmunoreactive
proteins in different layers of the WT ipsilateral cortex
following HI (Figs. 9A–B). Further analysis revealed that caspase-3 activation
occurred in cells showing NP1 induction as evident in the intense
co-localization of NP1 with cleaved caspase-3 (Fig. 9B), suggesting
neuron-specific NP1-dependent activation of the caspase-3 death
pathway. Brain sections from sham controls or hemispheres contralateral
to the CCAO showed no evidence of cleaved caspase-3-specific
immunoreaction in the cerebral cortex. In contrast, brain sections
from NP1-KO animals showed no evidence of cleaved caspase-3-
specific immunoreactivity in the ipsilateral cerebral cortex following
HI. Western blot analyses of cortical tissue homogenate further confirmed the activation of caspase-3 as evident in the 17 kDa cleaved
caspase-3-specific immunoreactive protein bands, whereas, no cleaved
caspase-3-specific band was visible in the NP1-KO cortex homogenate
(Fig. 9C). These results suggest that the caspase-3 activation did not
occur in the absence of NP1 induction, implying a direct causative link
between NP1 induction and caspase-3 activation in the death signaling
pathways.
Fig. 3.Fluorometric TUNEL histochemistry of brain section obtained from sham controls and 7 days post-HI WT and NP1-KO animals were counterstained with DAPI (dark blue) after TUNEL
staining (green). Fluorescencemicroscopic analysis of TUNEL−(+) cells showed increasedfluorescence of TUNEL(+) staining (green) with darkly stained round chromatin (apoptotic cells) in
the ipsilateral-cortex (upper panels) and -hippocampus (lower panels) of WT animals (A), but less TUNEL(+ve) staining was observed in NP1-KO brains(B). Quantification of TUNEL(+ve)
cells by MCID image analysis revealed significantly increased numbers of TUNEL(+ve) cells in the ipsilateral cortex (~70%) and hippocampus (~60%) as compared to sham controls (C). In
contrast, the numbers of TUNEL(+) cells were almost absent or significantly less (b5%, non-significant) in the ipsilateral-cortex and -hippocampus of NP1-KO brain compared to the
corresponding sham controls. Values are mean ± SEM (n = 10; ***pb0.001 with respect to sham controls). Representative images are shown.
21 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1836040863)
NP1 knockout, but not the NP2 knockout, animals are protected against
HI-induced brain injury
Next, we asked if the induction of NP1 and its family members NP2
and NPR are specifically involved in neonatal brain injury, then there
will be no injury (i.e., neuroprotection) in absence of their expression.
To address this question, neonatal (P8) WT, NP1-KO, NP2-KO and NP-
triple knockout (NP-TKO; in which NP1, NP2 and NP receptor genes
are all knocked out) mice were subjected to HI and sacrificed at the indicated
time post-HI. Quantification of infract volume by MCID image
analysis of TTC-stained brain sections from WT animals showed infarction
and tissue loss following 48 h post-HI (Fig. 10), as observed in
Fig. 1B. In contrast, NP1-KO and NP-TKO HI animals showed a complete
absence of infarction (i.e., no injury) at 48 h post-HI, and there was no
damage (tissue loss) in the ipsilateral hemisphere of KO brains examined
at 7 days post-HI compared to that in WT HI brains (Fig. 10A,
third panel). Most strikingly, in contrast to NP1-KO and NP-TKO brains,
the TTC-stained brain sections from NP2-KO brains showed significant
infarction and tissue loss following HI (Fig. 10A, fourth panel). Western
blot analysis of tissue homogenate from NP2-KO cortex and OGD-
exposed NP2−/− cortical neurons revealed increased induction of
NP1 in NP2-KO brain (Figs. 10B, C). Our results clearly delineate the
involvement of NP1, but not the NP2, in hypoxic–ischemic brain injury
triggered following HI, suggesting the specificity of NP1 in the brain
injury mechanisms.
Long-term neuroprotection observed in NP1-KO and NP-TKO animals
following HI
The extent of neuroprotection observed in NP1- and NP-TKO brain
following HI was further confirmed by in vivo T2-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), diffusion tensor MRI (DTI) at 4 weeks post-
HI(Fig. 11).The T2-weighted images give anoverview ofthe brain anatomy
, and the fractional anisotropy (FA) images show the white matter
tracts inside. We found that WT brain of each animal was severely injured
withfluidfilled cavity (hydrocephalus ex vacuo) occupies almost
half of the brain at 4 weeks post-HI (Fig. 11, middle panel). Thefimbria
(yellow arrow) and external capsule (blue arrow) almost disappeared
and thecerebralpeduncle (redarrow) waspartially damaged. Quantitative
determination of damaged brain regions based on T2-weighted
analyses showed that ipsilateral-cortical and -hippocampal volumes
Fig. 4.NP1 induction in the cerebral cortex and hippocampal areas of WT animals following HI. Immunostaining of WT brain sections (20μm) with NP1-specific antibody showed intense
NP1 immunofluorescence indifferent layersof the ipsilateral cortex as compared to the contralateral side and sham controls. The negative control for NP1 immunostaining was performed
byreplacing NP1 primaryantibodywith nonimmune IgG.A)NP1-specific immunoreactivity showed differential distribution ofNP1 inthe different corticallayers(I–VI) with moreintense
immunoreactivity observed in layers I–III as compared to the deeper layers (IV–VI). NP1-specificimmunofluorescence in individual neurons is shown at 100× magnification (inset). Similarly
, a high level of NP1 immunoreactivity was observed in the hippocampal pyramidal layer of the ipsilateral-CA3 and -CA1, but not in DG, areas relative to the contralateral hemisphere
andshamcontrols(B).C)NP1 inductionwas morepronounced at 24h whichpersisted upto 7 dayspost-HI,examined. D,E)Orthogonal view,NP1cellularlocalizationismore pronounced
inthe perinuclear region of the cytoplasm, butnot inthe nucleus.Representativeimagesareshown.F) Induction of NP1expression incerebral cortexatdifferenttime periodsfollowing HI.
Total RNA was extracted from cortical tissue and NP1 mRNA expression levels were analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR. Fold induction is the ratio of NP1 to internal control HPRT.
Valuesaremean ± SEM(n= 5;*pb0.05, **pb0.01, ***pb0.001). G) Total proteins from cortical tissuewereanalyzed bySDS-PAGEandimmunoblottedfor NP1protein.TheNP1 antibody
detected a distinct single band of NP1-immunoreactive protein with a molecular mass of 47 kDa. Theβ-actin serves as a loading control. Values are NP1/β-actin ratio and expressed as fold
change over controls. Representative bands are shown (n = 5).
22 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(8.0.0.2542.1409793893 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
were reduced to 48%and 6% (ipsi/contra × 100), respectively, compared
to the contralateral side (100%) (Fig. 11). Most strikingly, the NP1-KO
(shown) and NP-TKO mice brains showed no apparent sign of injury/
damage to these structures in all the brains examined, and appeared
quite similar to that of sham controls at 4 weeks post-HI (Fig. 11,third
column). Next, we asked if the observed neuroprotection in NP1- and
NP-TKO brains persisted for longer periods of time. To address this, we
examined the same group of controls and HI animals from WT and
NP1-KO mice at 24 weeks post HI. The T2-weighted and DTI images
showed a similar magnitude of neuroprotection in the NP1-KO and
NP-TKO brains as compared to WT animals at 24 weeks post-HI (not
shown) as observed at 4 weeks post-HI (Fig. 11). These data are important
as our results demonstrate a long-term neuroprotective efficacy
and neuroanatomical integrity against HI brain injury in the absence
of NP1 expression in NP1- and NP-TKO animals.
Discussion
In this study, we have investigated how the induction of NP-family
members following HI contributes to the cerebral injury and strategies
to achieve neuroprotection in neonatal brain. First, we found that the
neuronal protein NP1 following induction undergoes translocation to
mitochondria and initiates the activation of mitochondria-derived
death cascades leading to neuronal death; providing a new evidence
for intracellular function of NP1 in hypoxic–ischemic brain injury. Second
, we found that NP1 induction occurs in neurons only, and is more
intense in the ischemic penumbra where neuronal death is slowly
developing and is more amenable to therapeutic intervention. Third,
ourfindings further delineate that among the NP family members it is
NP1, not the NP2, induction that is specifically involved in brain injury
mechanisms. Most strikingly, we found that genetic deletion of NP1 ablated
cerebral injury and showed complete neuroprotection in neonatal
mice brain following exposure to HI. Another striking aspect of ourfindings
is the long-term neuroprotection efficacy in the absence of NP1 expression
as evident in the live MRI T2-weighted and FA brain images
acquired at 4 and at 24 weeks post-HI from the same group of WT and
KO animals. Together, our results show that induction of NP1 triggers
mitochondria-mediated death cascades and that genetic knockdown
of NP1 resulted in neuroprotection against HI, demonstrating a novel
molecular insight into the mechanisms of regulating neuronal death
Fig. 5.WT and NP1-KO brain sections from sham controls and HI animals were double immuno-stained with GFAP- (astrocyte marker) and NP1-specific antibodies. Fluorescence microscopyrevealed
activatedphenotype of astrocytesascharacterized bylargercellbodiesandsubstantially thickerprocesses(white arrows) and NP1induction (B, middle row) in WT HI brain
sections as compared to sham control (A, upper row). Merged images showed no co-localization between NP1 and GFAP. Whereas, brain sections from NP1-KO brain showed no astrocyte
reactivity and retained normal astrocyte morphology (C, bottom row) similar to those observed in brain sections from sham controls (A). Representative images are shown. Scale bar,
20μm.
23 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
or survival. This is the first demonstration on how inhibition of NP1
expression leads to neuroprotection against HI injury in neonatal brain.
Ample evidence suggests that mitochondria-mediated apoptotic
death pathways are activated after cerebral ischemia (Johnston, 2001;
Johnston and Ishiwa, 1995; Johnston et al., 2001; Martin et al., 1997).
In addition, control of neuronal injury involves a balance between expression
of apoptotic and anti-apoptotic proteins at post-injury periods,
thus providing many potential approaches to modifying the outcome of
hypoxic–ischemic insult. Here, our identification of NP1 induction and
its localization to mitochondria following HI suggests that NP1 might
be a new target molecule, which is possibly acting upstream in regulating
the onset of the cascade of mitochondria-derived delayed events of
the cell death pathways. We found post HI-time dependent increased
induction of NP1 in the frontal and parietal cortices and in different hippocampal
(pyramidal layers of CA3 and CA1) regions; the same brain
areas that developed infarction (i.e., injury) following HI, consistent
with our previous report (Hossain et al., 2004). In fact, we found that
NP1 induction occurred prior to the development of the infarction
(data not shown), consistent with a role of NP1 in the injury mechanisms.
In contrast, NP1-KO animals showed intact brain morphology
(no infarction) and neuroprotection (no tissue loss) following HI. Our
findings provide clear evidence that NP1 is a pro-death protein that is
induced in a greater magnitude following HI leading to neonatal brain
injury.
Fig. 6.HI-induced NP1 protein is preferentially localized in mitochondria. Brain sections from WT and NP1-KO animals were immunostained with COX IV, a mitochondrial marker and
NP1-specific antibodies. A) Fluorescence microscopy and merged digitized images showed intense NP1- and COX IV immunostaining in the WT HI brain and their colocalization (yellow),
but this co-localization was completely absent in the NP1-KO brain sections. Scale bar, 5μm. B) Orthogonal sectioning shows co-localization of NP1 (red) and COX IV (green) in mitochondria
seen as yellow. Representative images are shown. C) Subcellular fractionation of cortical tissues from WT brains followed by Western blot analysis showing translocation of NP1
protein from cytoplasm to mitochondrial fraction. Prohibitin and actin were used as controls for purity of the mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions, respectively, which also served as
loading controls. Representative bands are shown (n = 5).
24 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(8.0.0.2542.1170818677 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
In the present study we found that HI-induced NP1 is translocated to
mitochondria as evident in our biochemical and subcellular fractionation
studies. Likewise, immunofluorescence staining of brain sections
confirms that NP1 initially localizes in the perinuclear region of the cytoplasm
, whereas, NP1 increases markedly in mitochondria following
HI. Intense co-localization of NP1 with mitochondrial marker COX IV
in HI brains indicated that, after induction, the majority of NP1 is
targeted to mitochondria. This localization of NP1 was further
confirmed in hypoxic–ischemic primary cortical neurons transfected
with MtDsRed expression vector labeling mitochondria with redfluorescence.
These results are consistent with the intracellular function of
NP1 which is also supported by a recent report showing that the majority
of NP1 is intracellular under low neuronal activity (Clayton et al.,
2012). Most importantly, we found that disruption of NP1 translocation
by knockdown of NP1 protein in cortical neurons by NP1-specificsiRNA
attenuated NP1 localization to mitochondria and significantly reduced
ischemic neuronal death following OGD. We performed a number of
studies aimed at identifying the functional aspects of the increased accumulation
of NP1 protein in mitochondria. The Bcl-2 family of proteins
Bad and Bax play a crucialrole in intracellular apoptotic signal transduction
by regulating the permeability of mitochondrial membrane (Yuan
and Yankner, 2000; Zong et al., 2001). Here, we found that the presence
of NP1 in mitochondria is accompanied by increase in Bax activation
(Bax [6A7]) in mitochondria. Whereas, in the absence of NP1 induction,
no activated Bax [6A7] was observed in the mitochondrial fraction from
NP1-KO brains, suggesting a role for NP1 that acts upstream of Bax activation
and mitochondrial accumulation. The majority of Bax resides in
the cytoplasm and under stress conditions, undergoes a conformation
change that causes Bax translocation to the mitochondrion membrane
leadingto therelease of cytochromec andtriggeringneuronal apoptosis
(Youle and Strasser, 2008; Zonget al., 2001). Bax is also a direct target of
GSK-3β that modulates Bax expression and functions to promote
mitochondria-mediated apoptosis (Linseman et al., 2004; Watcharasit
et al., 2003). Previously, we reported GSK-3α/β-dependent NP1
Fig. 7.Disruption of NP1 localization to mitochondria following HI. A) Primary cortical neurons were transfected with NP-1 specific siRNA constructs that achievedN95% knockdown of
NP1 protein as compared to cells transfected with control scramble siRNA. B) Primary cortical neurons were transfected with control and pDSRed2-MitovectorDNA(2μg) and exposed to
4 h of OGD at DIV 12. Mitochondria labeled with MtDsRed (red) and NP1 (green) and merged images (yellow) showed mitochondrial localization of NP1 (shown by white arrows) (BI, II).
A subsetofcorticalcultureswasco-transfectedwith either control scramble siRNA or NP1-siRNAand pDSRed2-Mito vectorandexposedto OGD.Fluorescence imagesshowabsenceofNP1
immunostaining in mitochondria (BIII). Representative images are shown. LDH release cytotoxicity assay revealed significant reduction in OGD-induced neuronal injury in NP1-siRNA
transfected cells compared to cells transfected with control scramble siRNA (C). Results are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 8; **pb0.01 compared to normoxia control;+pb0.01, compared
to OGD exposed cells transfected with scramble siRNA).
25 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(8.0.0.2542,864059315 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
induction, increased NP1–Bax interaction in OGD exposed hippocampal
neurons and that this interaction was reversed by GSK-3 inhibitor
SB216763, confirming GSK-3 regulation of NP1 (Al Rahim et al., 2013;
Russell et al., 2011), further ensuing NP1 interaction with activated
Bax [6A7]. Thus it appears that NP1 forms a protein complex with Bax
that facilitates Bax activation and its accumulation in mitochondria
(Clayton et al., 2012), thereby contributing to mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabilization following HI (Al Rahim et al., 2013).
Next, we investigated whether NP1 localization to mitochondria activates
mechanisms of the apoptotic program that are downstream of
Bax activation. The entry of cytochrome c from mitochondria into the
cytosol plays a central role in the regulation and activation of caspase
cascades of the executioner phase of apoptosis (F. Li et al., 1997; P. Li
et al., 1997; Zou et al., 1999). We observed a robust increase in the
cleaved (active) form of caspase-3 in the ipsilateral cerebral cortex of
WT but not in the NP1-KO brains. Most importantly, activation of
Fig. 8.Effects of HI-induced NP1 on pro-death Bax activation and its translocation to mitochondria. Subcellular fractionation of cortical lysates from WTand NP1-KO brains followed by
Western blot analysis showed differential distribution of active Bax [6A7]-specific immunoreactive bands in the cytoplasm and mitochondrial fractions at different times post-HI.
A)Increase inactive Bax [6A7] protein levelswas apparentinthemitochondrial fraction at 6 and 12h post-HI.Incontrast, theBax [6A7] specific bands were absentorremained unchanged
intheabsenceof NP1expressioninNP1-KO brains similartothatobservedintherespective controls(B). COXIVandactinwere usedascontrol forpurityofthemitochondrial andcytosolic
fractions, respectively, which also served as loading controls. Values are shown as the ratio of Bax [6A7] /Bax and expressed as fold changes over sham controls from four separate
experiments (n = 4). Representative bands are shown. C) Interactions of NP1 with the active Bax. SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting of Bax [6A7] immunoprecipitates with NP1-
and Bax [6A7]-specific antibodies revealed HI-induced increase of NP1 co-precipitation (1.5-fold) relative to sham control. IgG immunoprecipitates showed no evidence of NP1- and
Bax-specific bands. Representative blots are shown.
26 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1163727744)
caspase-3 occurred in cells showing NP1 induction following HI as
evident in the intense co-localization of NP1 with cleaved caspase-3.
Whereas, activation of caspase-3 was completely absent in NP1-KO
brain, indicating neuroprotection against HI. Most strikingly, we found
that NP1 induction, not other NP1 members, is specifically involved in
HI brain injury as evidenced by the presence of infarction (injury) in
NP2-KO brain, which also showed NP1 induction. It appears that the
observed HI injury in NP1-KO brain is due to the NP1-inductiondependent
activation of caspase-3. Collectively, our results clearly
demonstrate the role of NP1 in mitochondria-mediated caspase-3-
dependent neuronal death in HI brain injury. It is possible that the absence
of NP1 expression desensitizes neurons to HI injury by preventing
mitochondrial activation of cell death cascades. Our results provide new
evidence for an intracellular function of NP1.
To further demonstrate that knockdown of NP1 induction indeed
specifically contributes to neuroprotection against HI, we employed
high resolution T2-weighted and FA MRI for morphometric detection
of brain injury and neuroprotection over time in live animal brains
(WT vs. NP-KO) at different time periods post-HI (4–24 weeks). Live
T2-weighted and FA images showed brain injury and substantial tissue
loss in WT ipsilateral cerebral hemisphere but no apparent sign of
brain injury observed in the NP1-KO brains, further establishing the
role of NP1 in brain injury mechanisms. Furthermore, the advantage
of live MRI scanning at multiple time points post-HI on the same
Fig. 9.NP1 induction in brain following HI showed co-localization with pro-apoptotic activated caspase-3. A) Immunofluorescence analysis of activated caspase-3 in brain sections from
WT andNP1-KObrainsrevealed theappearanceof intenselycleavedcaspase-3 (i.e.,activated)specific immunoreactive proteins inthe WT ipsilateral cortexfollowingHIwhereas,caspase-
3 specificimmunofluorescencewasalmostabsent inNP1-KObrains. B)Orthogonal sectioningshows co-localization of NP1 (red) andcleaved caspase-3(green)inWT brain sections(seen
asyellow). Scale bar, 5μm. C)Western blotanalysisof cortical tissues from WT and NP1-KO brains collected at differenttimes(6–48h)post-HI showed cleaved caspase-3 immunoreactive
protein bands (17 kDa) in the WT cortical tissue lysates but not in the NP1-KO cortical lysates. Representative bands are shown.
27 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
animal both in the case of the WT and NP-KO allowed us to determine
the progression of morphological changes, structural alteration/atrophy
of brain. The T2-weighted and FA imaging of the same group of
animals at the 4 week and then at 24 week post-HI time periods
showed no sign of brain injury in NP-KO mice compared to that of
WT mice, further demonstrating the long-term neuroprotective
Fig. 10.Cerebral HI caused brain infarction in WT and NP2-KO neonatal mice but not in NP1-KO and NP-TKO brains. A) The TTC-staining of brain sections (2 mm) at 48hpost-HIfromWT
and NP2-KO animals revealedmarkedinfarctions(white areas)intheright cerebralcortexand hippocampal CA1 andCA3 areas,whichwerecompletely absent inbrain sectionsfrom NP1-
KO and NP-TKO animals under identical HI conditions. Representative images of TTC-stained sections are shown, experiments were repeated twice with n = 5 each time. B, C) Western
blot analyses of the ipsilateral cortical tissues from NP2-KO brains at different times post-HI showed NP1-specific immunoreactive bands with a molecular mass of 47 kDa. Similar induction
of NP1 was observed in NP2−/−primary cortical neurons following exposure to OGD for different time periods. Representative bands are shown.
Fig. 11.In vivomagnetic resonance imagesof controls(WT and NP1-KO) and HI (WT and NP1-KO) brains were obtained using an 11.7 T horizontal scanner at 4 weeks post-HI.Thefimbria
(yellow arrow) and external capsule (blue arrow) almost disappeared and the cerebral peduncle (red arrow) was partially damaged. The ipsilateral-cortical and -hippocampal volumes
were reduced to 48% and 6% (ipsi/contra × 100) (middle panels), respectively, compared to the percentage of the contralateral side (100%). Most importantly, the NP1-KO mice brain
showed no apparent sign of injury and appeared quite similar to the WT controls. Representative images are shown.
28 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
( 8.0.0.2542.625084099 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0070
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0070
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0090
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0090
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0095
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0095
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0105
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0105
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0110
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0120
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0120
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0125
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0125
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0115
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0115
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0140
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0140
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0145
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0145
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0145
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0150
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0150
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0155
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0155
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0155
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0160
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0160
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0160
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0170
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0170
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0170
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0175
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0175
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0175
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0190
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0190
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0200
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0200
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0205
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0205
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0220
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0220
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0235
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0235
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0235
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0225
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0225
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0225
efficacy and neuroanatomical integrity following knockdown of NP1
expression.
In conclusion, our study clearly demonstrates a mechanism by
which the induction of a pro-death neuronal protein NP1 influences mitochondria
mediated neuronal death in response to hypoxic–ischemic
insult, and that genetic deletion of NP1 expression ablated HI-induced
brain injury. Our results suggest a novel function of NP1 in the regulation
of mitochondria-mediated neuronal death program. Furthermore,
live MRI revealed the long-term effects of NP1 gene deletion on neuroprotection
efficacy and normal neuroanatomical integrity, pointing to a
potential role of NP1 in post-injury cerebral functional recovery. Our
results demonstrate that inhibition of NP1 induction is required to
achieve significant neuroprotection in neonatal brain following hypoxic–ischemic insult. Together ourfindings identify NP1 as a novel molecular
target of HI within the central neurons, and suggest that inhibition
of NP1 expression is a promising strategy for therapeutic approaches for
the management of neonates suffering from hypoxic–ischemic brain
injury.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2014.12.016.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant
RO1 NS046030-09. We also gratefully acknowledge Dr. Paul Worley
for providing the knockout mice. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke or the
National Institutes of Health.The authors declare nocompetingfinancial
interests.
References
Aggarwal, M., Mori, S., Shimogori, T., Blackshaw, S., Zhang, J., 2010.Three-dimensional diffusion
tensor microimaging for anatomical characterization of the mouse brain.
Magn. Reson. Med. 64, 249–261.
Al Rahim, M., Hossain, M.A., 2013. Genetic deletion of NP1 prevents hypoxic–ischemic
neuronal death via reducing AMPA receptor synaptic localization in hippocampal
neurons. J. Am. Heart Assoc. 2, e006098.
Al Rahim, M., Thatipamula, S., Hossain, M.A., 2013.Critical role of neuronal pentraxin 1 in
mitochondria-mediated hypoxic–ischemic neuronal injury. Neurobiol. Dis. 50, 59–68.
Armstrong, J.S., Jones, D.P., 2002. Glutathione depletion enforces the mitochondrial permeability
transition and causes cell death in Bcl-2 overexpressing HL60 cells. FASEB
J. 16, 1263–1265.
Barks, J.D., Silverstein, F.S., 1992.Excitatory amino acids contribute to the pathogenesis of
perinatal hypoxic–ischemic brain injury. Brain Pathol. 2, 235–243.
Bjartmar, L., Huberman, A.D., Ullian, E.M., Renteria, R.C., Liu, X., Xu, W., Prezioso, J.,
Susman, M.W., Stellwagen, D., Stokes, C.C., Cho, R., Worley, P., Malenka, R.C., Ball, S.,
Peachey, N.S., Copenhagen, D., Chapman, B., Nakamoto, M., Barres, B.A., Perin, M.S.,
2006. Neuronal pentraxins mediate synaptic refinement in the developing visual
system. J. Neurosci. 26, 6269–6281.
Blomgren, K., Hagberg, H., 2006.Free radicals, mitochondria, and hypoxia–ischemia in the
developing brain. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 40, 388–397.
Chan, P.H., 2004. Mitochondria and neuronal death/survival signaling pathways in
cerebral ischemia. Neurochem. Res. 29, 1943–1949.
Choi, D.W., Rothman, S.W., 1990.The role of glutamate neurotoxicity in hypoxic–ischemic
neuronal death. Ann. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 171–182.
Clayton, K.B., Podlesniy, P., Figueiro-Silva, J., Lopez-Domenech, G., Benitez, L., Enguita, M.,
Abad, M.A., Soriano, E., Trullas, R., 2012. NP1 regulates neuronal activity-dependent
accumulation of BAX in mitochondria and mitochondrial dynamics. J. Neurosci. 32,
1453–1466.
D'Mello, S.R., Galli, C., Ciotti, T., Calissano, P., 1993. Induction of apoptosis in cerebellar
granule neurons by low potassium: inhibition of death by insulin-like growth factor
I and cAMP. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 90, 10989–10993.
Dodds, D.C., Omeis, I.A., Cushman, S.J., Helms, J.A., Perin, M.S., 1997. Neuronal pentraxin
receptor, a novel putative integral membrane pentraxin that interacts with neuronal
pentraxin 1 and 2 and taipoxin-associated calcium-binding protein 49. J. Biol. Chem.
272, 21488–21494.
Galluzzi, L., Blomgren, K., Kroemer, G., 2009. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization
in neuronal injury. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 481–494.
Goodman, A.R., Cardozo, T., Abagyan, R., Altmeyer, A., Wisniewski, H.G., Vilcek, J., 1996.
Long pentraxins: an emerging group of proteins with diverse functions. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev. 7, 191–202.
Hossain, M.A., 2008. Hypoxic–ischemic injury in neonatal brain: involvement of a novel
neuronal molecule in neuronal cell death and potential target for neuroprotection.
Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 26, 93–101.
Hossain, M.A., Fielding, K.E., Trescher, W.H., Ho, T., Wilson, M.A., Laterra, J., 1998. Human
FGF-1 gene delivery protects against quinolinate-induced striatal and hippocampal
injury in neonatal rats. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10, 2490–2499.
Hossain, M.A., Bailone, J.C., Gomez, R., Laterra, J., 2002. Neuroprotection by scatter factor/
hepatocyte growth factor and FGF-1 in cerebellar granule neurons is phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt-dependent and MAPK/CREB-independent. J. Neurochem.
81, 365–378.
Hossain, M.A., Russell, J.C., O'Brien, R., Laterra, J., 2004.Neuronal pentraxin 1: a novel mediator
of hypoxic–ischemic injury in neonatal brain. J. Neurosci. 24, 4187–4196.
Hsu, Y.T., Youle, R.J., 1997. Nonionic detergents induce dimerization among members of
the Bcl-2 family. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 13829–13834.
Johnston, M.V., 1997.Hypoxic and ischemic disorders of infants and children. Lecture for
the 38th meeting of Japanese Society of Child Neurology, Tokyo, Japan, July 1996.
Brain Dev. 19, 235–239.
Johnston, M.V., 2001. Excitotoxicity in neonatal hypoxia. Ment. Retard. Dev. Disabil. Res.
Rev. 7, 229–234.
Johnston, M.V., 2005. Excitotoxicity in perinatal brain injury. Brain Pathol. 15, 234–240.
Johnston, M.V., Ishiwa, S., 1995.Ischemia and excitotoxins in development. Ment. Retard.
Dev. Disabil. Res. Rev. 1, 193–200.
Johnston, M.V., Trescher, W.H., Ishida, A., Nakajima, W., 2001. Neurobiology of hypoxic–
ischemic injury in the developing brain. Pediatr. Res. 49, 735–741.
Johnston, M.V., Fatemi, A., Wilson, M.A., Northington, F., 2011. Treatment advances in
neonatal neuroprotection and neurointensive care. Lancet Neurol. 10, 372–382.
Kalenderian, E., Pegus, C., Francis, C., Goodwin, N., Jacques, H.S., Lasa, D., 2009.Cardiovascular
disease urban intervention: baseline activities and findings.J.Community
Health 34, 282–287.
Kirkpatrick, L.L., Matzuk, M.M., Dodds, D.C., Perin, M.S., 2000.Biochemical interactions of
the neuronal pentraxins. Neuronal pentraxin (NP) receptor binds to taipoxin and
taipoxin-associated calcium-binding protein 49 via NP1 and NP2. J. Biol. Chem. 275,
17786–17792.
Laemmli, U.K., 1970. Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the head of
bacteriophage T4. Nature 227, 680–685.
Li, F., Srinivasan, A., Wang, Y., Armstrong, R.C., Tomaselli, K.J., Fritz, L.C., 1997a. Cellspecific induction of apoptosis by microinjection of cytochrome c. Bcl-xL has activity
independent of cytochrome c release. J. Biol. Chem. 272, 30299–30305.
Li, P., Nijhawan, D., Budihardjo, I., Srinivasula, S.M., Ahmad, M., Alnemri, E.S., Wang, X.,
1997b. Cytochrome c and dATP-dependent formation of Apaf-1/caspase-9 complex
initiates an apoptotic protease cascade. Cell 91, 479–489.
Linseman, D.A., Butts, B.D., Precht, T.A., Phelps, R.A., Le, S.S., Laessig, T.A., Bouchard, R.J.,
Florez-McClure, M.L., Heidenreich, K.A., 2004. Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta
phosphorylates Bax and promotes its mitochondrial localization during neuronal
apoptosis. J. Neurosci. 24, 9993–10002.
Lorenz, J.M., Wooliever, D.E., Jetton, J.R., Paneth, N., 1998.A quantitative review of mortality
and developmental disability in extremely premature newborns. Arch. Pediatr.
Adolesc. Med. 152, 425–435.
Martin, L.J., Brambrink, A., Koehler, R.C., Traystman, R.J., 1997. Primary sensory and
forebrain motor systems in the newborn brain are preferentially damaged by hypoxia–ischemia. J. Comp. Neurol. 377, 262–285.
Mojsilovic-Petrovic, J., Callaghan, D., Cui, H., Dean, C., Stanimirovic, D.B., Zhang, W., 2007.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is involved in the regulation of hypoxiastimulated
expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) and
MCP-5 (Ccl12) in astrocytes. J. Neuroinflammation 4, 12.
Norris, C.M., Kadish, I., Blalock, E.M., Chen, K.C., Thibault, V., Porter, N.M., Landfield,
P.W., Kraner, S.D., 2005. Calcineurin triggers reactive/inflammatory processes in
astrocytes and is upregulated in aging and Alzheimer's models. J. Neurosci. 25,
4649–4658.
Northington, F.J., Chavez-Valdez, R., Martin, L.J., 2011. Neuronal cell death in neonatal
hypoxia–ischemia. Ann. Neurol. 69, 743–758.
O'Brien, R.J., Lau, L.F., Huganir, R.L., 1998. Molecular mechanisms of glutamate receptor
clustering at excitatory synapses. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8, 364–369.
O'Brien, R.J., Xu, D., Petralia, R.S., Steward, O., Huganir, R.L., Worley, P., 1999.Synaptic clustering
of AMPA receptors by the extracellular immediate-early gene product Narp.
Neuron 23, 309–323.
O'Brien, R., Xu, D., Mi, R., Tang, X., Hopf, C., Worley, P., 2002. Synaptically targeted narp
plays an essential role in the aggregation of AMPA receptors at excitatory synapses
in cultured spinal neurons. J. Neurosci. 22, 4487–4498.
Perez-Pinzon, M.A., Xu, G.P., Born, J., Lorenzo, J., Busto, R., Rosenthal, M., Sick, T.J., 1999.
Cytochrome C is released from mitochondria into the cytosol after cerebral anoxia
or ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 19, 39–43.
Pezzini, A., Padovani, A., 2009.Cerebral Ischemia in Young Adults: Pathogenic and Clinical
Perspectives. Nova Biomedical Books, New York.
Portera-Cailliau, C., Price, D.L., Martin, L.J., 1997.Non-NMDA and NMDA receptor mediated
excitotoxic neuronal deaths in adult brain are morphologically distinct: further
evidence for an apoptosis–necrosis continuum. J. Comp. Neurol. 378, 88–104.
Rizzuto, R., Brini, M., Pizzo, P., Murgia, M., Pozzan, T., 1995. Chimeric green fluorescent
protein as a tool for visualizing subcellular organelles in living cells. Curr. Biol. 5,
635–642.
Rogers, J., Webster, S., Lue, L.F., Brachova, L., Civin, W.H., Emmerling, M., Shivers, B.,
Walker, D., McGeer, P., 1996. Inflammation and Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis.
Neurobiol. Aging 17, 681–686.
Russell, J.C., Szuflita, N., Khatri, R., Laterra, J., Hossain, M.A., 2006.Transgenic expression of
human FGF-1 protects against hypoxic–ischemic injury in perinatal brain by intervening
at caspase–XIAP signaling cascades. Neurobiol. Dis. 22, 677–690.
Russell, J.C., Blue, M.E., Johnston, M.V., Naidu, S., Hossain, M.A., 2007.Enhanced cell death
in MeCP2 null cerebellar granule neurons exposed to excitotoxicity and hypoxia.
Neuroscience 150, 563–574.
29 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(8.0.0.2542.1898801007 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0245
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0245
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0250
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0250
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0250
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0260
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0260
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0260
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0265
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0265
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0270
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0275
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0275
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0275
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0280
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0280
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0969-9961(14)00387-8/rf0280
Russell, J.C., Kishimoto, K., O'Driscoll, C., Hossain, M.A., 2011.Neuronal pentraxin 1 induction
in hypoxic–ischemic neuronal death is regulated via a glycogen synthase kinase-
3alpha/beta dependent mechanism. Cell. Signal. 23, 673–682.
Schlimgen, A.K., Helms, J.A., Vogel, H., Perin, M.S., 1995. Neuronal pentraxin, a secreted proteinwithhomologytoacutephaseproteinsoftheimmunesystem.Neuron14
,519 –526.
Semenza, G.L., 2001. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1: oxygen homeostasis and disease pathophysiology.
Trends Mol. Med. 7, 345–350.
Sharma, J., Johnston, M.V., Hossain, M.A., 2014.Sex differences in mitochondrial biogenesis
determine neuronal death and survival in response to oxygen glucose deprivation
and reoxygenation. BMC Neurosci. 15, 9.
Tsui, C.C., Copeland, N.G., Gilbert, D.J., Jenkins, N.A., Barnes, C., Worley, P.F., 1996. Narp, a
novel member of the pentraxin family, promotes neurite outgrowth and is dynamically
regulated by neuronal activity. J. Neurosci. 16, 2463–2478.
Watcharasit, P., Bijur, G.N., Song, L., Zhu, J., Chen, X., Jope, R.S., 2003. Glycogen synthase
kinase-3beta (GSK3beta) binds to and promotes the actions of p53. J. Biol. Chem.
278, 48872–48879.
Youle, R.J., Strasser, A., 2008. The BCL-2 protein family: opposing activities that mediate
cell death. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 9, 47–59.
Yuan, J., Yankner, B.A., 2000. Apoptosis in the nervous system. Nature 407, 802–809.
Zong, W.X., Lindsten, T., Ross, A.J., MacGregor, G.R., Thompson, C.B., 2001. BH3-only
proteins that bind pro-survival Bcl-2 family members fail to induce apoptosis in the
absence of Bax and Bak. Genes Dev. 15, 1481–1486.
Zou, H., Li, Y., Liu, X., Wang, X., 1999. An APAF-1·cytochrome c multimeric complex
is a functional apoptosome that activates procaspase-9. J. Biol. Chem. 274,
11549–11556.
30 S. Thatipamula et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 75 (2015) 15–30
(8.0.0.2542,1891710074 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
