4115

J Physiol 589.17 (2011) pp 4115–4123

SYMPOSIUM REVIEW

Ischaemic stroke: a thrombo-inflammatory disease?
Bernhard Nieswandt1 , Christoph Kleinschnitz2 and Guido Stoll2
1

The Journal of Physiology

2

Chair of Vascular Medicine, University Hospital Würzburg and Rudolf Virchow Centre, DFG Research Centre for Experimental Biomedicine and
Department of Neurology, University Hospital Würzburg, 97080 Würzburg, Germany

Abstract Ischaemic stroke is a leading cause of death and disability worldwide. The complex
cellular interactions leading from thromboembolic vessel occlusion to infarct development
within the brain parenchyma in acute stroke are poorly understood, which translates into only
one approved effective treatment, thrombolysis. Importantly, however, patients can develop
progressive stroke despite reperfusion of previously occluded major intracranial arteries, a
process referred to as ‘reperfusion injury’ which can be reproduced in the mouse model
of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO). Although pathological platelet and
coagulant activity have long been recognized to be involved in the initiation of ischaemic
stroke, their contribution to infarct maturation remained elusive. Experimental evidence now
suggests that early platelet adhesion/activation mechanisms involving the von Willebrand factor
(vWF) receptor glycoprotein (GP) Ib, its ligand vWF, and the collagen receptor GPVI are
critical pathogenic factors in infarct development following tMCAO, whereas platelet aggregation
through GPIIb/IIIa is not. Further experimental work indicates that these pathways in conjunction
with coagulation factor XII (FXII)-driven processes orchestrate a ‘thrombo-inflammatory’
cascade in acute stroke that results in infarct growth. This review summarizes these recent
developments and briefly discusses their potential clinical impact.
(Received 24 May 2011; accepted after revision 14 July 2011; first published online 18 July 2011)
Corresponding author B. Nieswandt: Chair of Vascular Medicine, University Hospital Würzburg, Rudolf
Virchow Centre, DFG Research Centre for Experimental Biomedicine, Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2, 97080 Würzburg,
Germany. Email: bernhard.nieswandt@virchow.uni-wuerzburg.de
Abbreviations ASA, acetylsalicylic acid; ECM, extracellular matrix; FX, coagulation factor X; FXI, coagulation factor
XI; FXII, coagulation factor XII; GP, glycoprotein; KKS, kallikrein–kinin system; MCA, middle cerebral artery; PolyP,
inorganic polyphosphates; tMCAO, transient middle cerebral artery occlusion; tPA, tissue plasminogen activator; vWF,
von Willebrand factor.
Bernhard Nieswandt (left) is a cell biologist with expertise in platelet
adhesion and activation mechanisms in thrombosis, haemostasis and
inflammatory disease. He received his PhD from the University of
Regensburg, Germany in 1997 having specialized in platelet surface receptor
biology in genetic mouse models. In 1998 he became a research group leader
at Witten-Herdecke University, Germany. In 2002 he moved his laboratory
to the Rudolf Virchow Center, DFG-Research Center for Experimental
Biomedicine at the University of Würzburg, Germany. Bernhard Nieswandt
holds a chair of Vascular Medicine and is coordinator of the Collaborative
Research Center 688 (‘Mechanisms and imaging of cardiovascular cell–cell
interactions’). Guido Stoll (centre) and Christoph Kleinschnitz (right) are clinical scientists and active neurologists with expertise in pathophysiology
of stroke, neuroimmunology and cellular neuroimaging. They chair the Research Group for Multiple Sclerosis and Neuroimmunology and the
clinical stroke unit at the Department of Neurology of the University of Würzburg, Germany, and established an interdisciplinary stroke research and
neuroimaging laboratory in Würzburg in 2002. G.S. is member of the board of directors of the German Heart Failure Center, Würzburg, and C.K. is
scientific secretary of the Collaborative Research Center 688.

This report was presented at The Journal of Physiology Symposium on Molecular mechanisms underlying neurovascular protection in stroke, which
took place at Experimental Biology 2011, Washington, DC, USA on 10 April 2011. It was commissioned by the Editorial Board and reflects the views
of the authors.
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.212886

4116

B. Nieswandt and others

Introduction

Cerebral ischaemia accounts for about 80% of all strokes,
the other 20% are due to intracranial haemorrhage
(Feigin et al. 2003). Atrial fibrillation and symptomatic
extracranial artery stenoses represent the main sources
of thromboembolism to the brain. Seconds after an
embolus has occluded an intracranial vessel the lack
of oxygen and glucose supply to the respective brain
territory leads to acute neurological deficits such as
hemiparesis or aphasia, a situation which is regarded a
medical emergency. In the (rare) case of spontaneous
thrombus resolution, symptoms are fully reversible and
the event is termed transient ischaemic attack (TIA).
Otherwise, a definite stroke evolves. In either circumstance
patients require a complete cardiological and neurological examination due to the high risk of recurrent
ischaemic events. Thus, one clinical aim is to identify the
source of thromboembolism and to instigate either anticoagulation or anti-platelet treatment for secondary stroke
prevention. Anticoagulation with warfarin, mainly prescribed in patients with atrial fibrillation, however, carries
a considerable risk of bleeding complications which has
led to the recent development of specific thrombin and
factor Xa-inhibitors. Platelet inhibitors such as acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) or clopidogrel are more effective in
patients with extracranial artery stenoses.
There is only one treatment option for acute stroke
when persistent neurological deficit presents on arrival
at the emergency room, namely thrombolysis with the
‘clot-buster’ agent tissue plasminogen activator (tPA; Saver
et al. 2009). Unfortunately, tPA application is restricted
to the first 4.5 h after the onset of stroke (Hacke et al.
2008). Beyond this ‘window of opportunity’, tPA-induced
bleeding complications may outweigh the benefit of
dissolving the vessel-occluding thrombus. Moreover, the
efficacy of tPA is only moderate at best: for one patient
to have a favourable outcome (a score of 0 or 1 on
the modified Rankin scale), the number needed to
treat (NNT) with tPA is 9 within the first 3 h post
stroke. With the extended time window between 3 and
4.5 h, the NNT even raises to 14 (Hacke et al. 2008).
Persistent vessel occlusion is a frequent cause of tPA
treatment failure, but a considerable number of patients
show secondary infarct growth despite successful vessel
recanalization, a phenomenon referred to as ‘reperfusion
injury’. The molecular mechanisms involved in secondary
infarct growth are still poorly understood, but targeting
‘brain injury during reperfusion’ represents an important
therapeutic goal (Stoll et al. 2008). In this review we
summarize recent insights into the pathophysiological role
of platelet receptors and related downstream signalling
pathways as well as the intrinsic coagulation system
in experimental cerebral ischaemia. By illustrating a
link between thrombus formation and inflammatory

J Physiol 589.17

pathways we introduce the tempting concept of stroke
being a ‘thrombo-inflammatory’ disease. Based on
these findings, novel pharmacological targets for both
acute stroke treatment and secondary stroke prevention
are highlighted.
All animal studies referred to in this review used the
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) model
to induce ischaemic stroke in mice. In this model a small
filament is advanced from the internal carotid artery to the
origin of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) to occlude the
vessel and induce tissue ischaemia. Although removal of
the occluding filament, e.g. after 1 h, allows reperfusion, a
complete MCA infarct, comprising the ipsilateral parietal
neocortex as well as the basal ganglia, evolves within
24 h. Infarction can then be visualized by histological
techniques or in vivo by magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) (Kleinschnitz et al. 2007; Pham et al. 2010).

Basic mechanisms of thrombus formation

At sites of vascular injury, the subendothelial extracellular
matrix (ECM) is exposed to the flowing blood, which
triggers adhesion and activation of blood platelets
(primary haemostasis), followed by the activation of the
coagulation system (secondary haemostasis). Primary and
secondary haemostasis synergize to form a fibrin-rich
thrombus that seals the wound and initiates wound healing
(Ruggeri, 2002) (Fig. 1). The ECM contains multiple
adhesive macromolecules, such as laminins, fibronectins
and collagens. Platelets can bind these macromolecules
via specific receptors that have distinct functions in the
haemostatic cascade (Varga-Szabo et al. 2008b). The
mechanisms of platelet adhesion at sites of injury are to
a large extent determined by the prevailing rheological
conditions. Shear forces generated between adjacent layers
of the flowing blood, which are maximal at the wall,
produce a drag that opposes platelet adhesion and
aggregation. The initial tethering of platelets to the ECM
of the injured vessel wall under conditions of high shear
rates (>500 s−1 ), found for instance in small arteries
and arterioles, is strictly dependent on the interaction
between the platelet receptor glycoprotein (GP)Ib and
von Willebrand factor (vWF) (Savage et al. 1998). The
GPIb-vWF binding has a fast off-rate and does not
produce stable platelet adhesion but rather reduces the
velocity of the flowing platelets thereby allowing their
interaction with highly thrombogenic collagens through
the immunoglobulin superfamily receptor GPVI. GPVI is
a powerful signal-transducing receptor exclusively found
in platelets and their precursors, the megakaryocytes.
GPVI ligation leads to full platelet activation, characterized
by a rise in the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+ ]i ),
cytoskeletal rearrangements resulting in a change from
discoid to spheric shape, fusion of intracellular α- and
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

J Physiol 589.17

Ischaemic stroke: a thrombo-inflammatory disease?

dense granules with the plasma membrane and release
of secondary platelet agonists, most notably adenosine
diphosphate (ADP), adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
serotonin and thromboxane A2 . These agonists, together
with locally produced thrombin, act on platelet-expressed
G-protein-coupled receptors thereby enhancing cellular
activation and recruitment of additional platelets from the
bloodstream to the site of injury. This fine-tuned interplay
of extra- and intracellular signalling events leads to the
functional upregulation of integrin adhesion receptors,
most notably integrin αIIbβ3 (also called GPIIb/IIIa),
resulting in the establishment of stable platelet–ECM
contacts and platelet aggregation, through the binding of
plasma fibrinogen. These basic mechanisms of thrombus
formation may in principle also apply to cerebral blood
vessels during the course of ischaemic stroke (del Zoppo
& Mabuchi, 2003), but it is not established that this is a
major pathomechanism in stroke development.

Anti-thrombotic treatment in clinical stroke

Excessive platelet activity and continuous platelet
adherence to the brain microvasculature during
reperfusion has long been recognized to be involved
in experimental stroke (Choudhri et al. 1998; del
Zoppo, 1998). The pathophysiological significance of these
findings in human stroke patients, however, remained
poorly understood as did the underlying mechanisms.
Accordingly, it is still a matter of debate whether the

modest clinical benefit of applying platelet inhibitors
such as ASA or clopidogrel within the early phase
of stroke (48 h) is due to prevention of recurrent
thromboembolism originating from outside the brain (e.g.
heart, atherosclerotic arteries) or local anti-thrombotic
effects within the brain vasculature (Adams et al. 2007).
An attempt to more effectively block platelet aggregation
by antibodies against GPIIb/IIIa receptors failed: a clinical
trial testing the monoclonal antibody abciximab had to
be stopped prematurely due to excess bleeding-related
mortality (Adams et al. 2008) and in an experimental study
in which the JON/A F(ab)2 was applied intravenously 1 h
before tCMAO more than 60% of mice died from intracranial haemorrhages (Kleinschnitz et al. 2007). Most
importantly, surviving animals exhibited large cerebral
infarcts similar to control mice, which can be taken as
a first hint that final platelet aggregation via GPIIb/IIIa
is not a mandatory step in stroke development in the
reperfusion phase. A completely different picture emerged
when early platelet adhesion and activation events rather
than terminal platelet aggregation were targeted in the
tMCAO model.

Platelet inhibition and experimental stroke:
the GPIb–vWF–GPVI axis

Platelet tethering at sites of vascular injury must occur
through a receptor that functions independently of cellular
activation and allows rapid interactions that resist shear

Figure 1. Simplified model of thrombus formation
At sites of vascular injury the ECM becomes exposed to the flowing blood, allowing platelet adhesion and
aggregation as well as coagulation. GPIb initiates haemostasis and thrombosis by recruiting platelets to the injured
vessel wall, but it may also be involved in immune cell recruitment under inflammatory conditions. GPVI is the
central activating platelet collagen receptor required for thrombus formation on the ECM but may also promote
inflammation by triggering the release of PolyP. PolyP activate FXII leading to coagulation (via thrombin) and
inflammation (via bradykinin). In parallel, thrombin generation is triggered by exposed tissue factor (TF, extrinsic
pathway) also leading to coagulation and further platelet activation. Cellular activation and inside-out upregulation
of GPIIb/IIIa (integrin αIIbβ3) affinity is essential for firm platelet adhesion and aggregation, the latter through
binding of fibrinogen (Fg). EC, endothelial cell.
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

4117

4118

B. Nieswandt and others

forces. This is achieved by GPIb-V-IX, a platelet-specific
receptor complex encoded by four different genes, the
α- and β-subunits of GPIb, GPIX and GPV (Bergmeier
et al. 2000; Berndt et al. 2001). Lack or dysfunction
of GPIb or GPIX gives rise to the Bernard Soulier
syndrome, a congenital bleeding disorder characterized
by mild thrombocytopenia and giant platelets (Berndt
et al. 2001). The observed bleeding phenotype in
GPIb-V-IX-deficient humans or mice is attributed to the
loss of the extracellular domain of GPIbα which contains
the binding sites for several ligands including vWF,
thrombin, coagulation factor XI (FXI), FXII, P-selectin or
Mac-1 (Berndt et al. 2001). The critical role of GPIb-IX-V
in thrombus formation has been demonstrated in a model
of permanent femoral arteriovenous shunt implantation
in baboons by the use of F (ab) fragments of antibodies directed against the vWF binding site on GPIbα
(Cauwenberghs et al. 2000) and in mice lacking functional
GPIbα (Bergmeier et al. 2006).
Recent studies have provided compelling evidence that
GPIb might represent a novel target to efficiently prevent or treat acute ischaemic stroke. Both prophylactic
(1 h before tMCAO) and therapeutic (1 h after tMCAO)
blockade of the vWF binding site on GPIbα by intravenous injection of F (ab) fragments of the anti-GPIbα
antibody, p0p/B, dramatically protected mice from
stroke progression following tMCAO (Fig. 2). This was
associated with significantly better functional outcomes
on day 1 (Kleinschnitz et al. 2007). Importantly, no

J Physiol 589.17

increased incidence of intracranial haemorrhage was
noted in these animals, although GPIbα inhibition
resulted in increased tail bleeding times (Kleinschnitz et al.
2007) thereby confirming that there is no clear correlation
between bleeding time and bleeding risk (Rodgers & Levin,
1990). Ultrahigh field MRI studies at 17.6 T employing
perfusion-weighted imaging revealed that blockade of
GPIb 1 h after tMCAO maintained blood flow during
the reperfusion phase, while blood flow continuously
decreased in control animals leading to large infarcts
of the MCA territory after 24 h (Pham et al. 2011). In
line with these findings, it was found that mice lacking
phospholipase D1, which transduces activation signals
downstream of vWF-occupied GPIb and thereby critically
contributes to GPIb-dependent integrin αIIbβ3 activation
and platelet adhesion under high shear, are markedly
protected from stroke progression following tMCAO again
without displaying increased bleeding (Elvers et al. 2010).
Given the disappointing results obtained with
GPIIb/IIIa inhibitors (Kleinschnitz et al. 2007; Adams
et al. 2008), the profound and apparently safe protection
from infarct progression following tMACO achieved by
inhibition of GPIbα or downstream signalling events
was very unexpected and raised the question of whether
the pathogenetic significance of GPIb is based on its
central role in thrombus formation or other activities.
Therefore, the role of the principal GPIb ligand vWF in
stroke development was assessed. vWF is a multimeric
glycoprotein that becomes immobilized on exposed

Figure 2. Blocking of early platelet
adhesion and activation protects mice
from acute ischaemic stroke
Upper panel, representative
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazoliumchloride
(TTC)-stained coronal brain sections on day 1
after tMCAO. Ischaemic infarctions (white
areas) appear smaller in anti-GPIbα-treated
mice, vWF −/− mice and anti-GPVI-treated mice
compared with wild-type controls and this was
confirmed by infarct volumetry (lower panel). In
contrast, blocking of the final common
pathway of platelet aggregation using
anti-GPIIb/IIIa F (ab)2 could not reduce stroke
size indicating that mechanisms beyond
platelet-derived thrombus formation are
operative during infarct evolution. ∗ P < 0.05;
∗∗ P < 0.01 compared with wild-type mice
(n = 8–10/group); one-way ANOVA,
Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons post test.
(Adapted from Kleinschnitz et al. 2007, 2009.)
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

J Physiol 589.17

Ischaemic stroke: a thrombo-inflammatory disease?

collagens at sites of vessel injury and facilitates platelet
recruitment under high shear by interacting with GPIbα.
In addition, vWF contains a RGD (amino acid sequence
arginine, glycine, aspartic acid) motif that serves as an
adhesion site for platelet GPIIb/IIIa which contributes to
firm platelet attachment and thrombus growth (Ruggeri,
2003). Lack of vWF impairs haemostasis in humans
and mice and provides protection from experimental
thrombosis in the latter (Denis et al. 1998; Ruggeri,
2003). Studies in vWF −/− mice revealed a central
role of this adhesive protein in infarct progression
following tMCAO (Kleinschnitz et al. 2009). Very
similar to p0p/B-F (ab)-treated mice, these animals were
protected from stroke and showed significantly better
neurological scores 24 h after ischaemia and this was,
again, not associated with increased intracranial bleeding
(Kleinschnitz et al. 2009). In a series of studies, De
Meyer et al. could show that the observed pathogenic
function of vWF requires its binding sites for GPIbα
and collagen, but not the one for GPIIb/IIIa, thereby
further supporting the hypothesis that thrombus growth
may not be the only pathomechanism underlying infarct
progression after tMCAO (De Meyer et al. 2010). In line
with these experimental observations several prospective
clinical studies identified high plasma levels of vWF as a
strong and independent risk factor for stroke (Roldan et al.
2005; Wieberdink et al. 2010).
In further support of a decisive role of vWF–GPIb interactions, two additional groups reported independently
that mice lacking a disintegrin and metalloproteinase
with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) 13, which cleaves
highly thrombogenic ultra-large vWF (>20 million kDa)
to less active vWF, are more susceptible to infarct
progression following tMCAO (Zhao et al. 2009; Fujioka
et al. 2010; Nieswandt & Stoll, 2010). This was
accompanied by increased accumulation of immune
cells and thrombi in the ischaemic brain. Conversely,
infusion of recombinant ADAMTS13 into wild-type mice
was stroke-protective (Zhao et al. 2009). Autoantibodies
against ADAMTS13 are frequently found in patients with
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura which carry a high
risk of ischaemic strokes (Sadler, 2008).
Although GPIb–vWF interaction triggers platelet
activation, this stimulus is generally considered very weak
(Jackson et al. 2003). Among the numerous constituents
of the ECM, collagens are the most thrombogenic as
they provide an adhesion substrate for platelets and
directly activate the cells. This activation is mediated by
GPVI, a type I transmembrane receptor belonging to the
immunoglobulin superfamily that is exclusively expressed
in platelets and megakaryocytes (Nieswandt & Watson,
2003). GPVI may be a promising anti-thrombotic target as
the receptor can be depleted from the surface of circulating
platelets through antibodies in humans (Boylan et al.
2003) and mice (Nieswandt et al. 2001), resulting
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

4119

in a ‘GPVI knockout-like’ phenotype and long-term
anti-thrombotic protection in the latter (Massberg et al.
2003). Such GPVI-depleted mice displayed significantly
reduced brain infarct volumes at day 1 after tMCAO
(Kleinschnitz et al. 2007). Further studies revealed that
mice lacking components of the machinery that mediates
store-operated Ca2+ entry are likewise protected from
stroke progression in the tMCAO model. Platelets isolated from these mice show a selective functional defect
in response to GPVI agonists whereas other pathways are
apparently not affected (Varga-Szabo et al. 2008a; Braun
et al. 2009) thereby indirectly supporting the hypothesis
that GPVI-mediated activation processes are important
during stroke development. This is further confirmed by
studies showing that elevated GPVI expression levels in
platelets are associated with an increased risk of stroke
occurrence in humans (Bigalke et al. 2009), and elevated
levels of the soluble GPVI ectodomain have been detected
in acute ischaemic stroke suggesting increased GPVI
activation in this setting (Al-Tamimi et al. 2011).

Coagulation factor XII

Activated platelets facilitate the local activation of the
coagulation cascade through two major pathways. Firstly,
expression of procoagulant activity characterized by the
exposure of negatively charged phosphatidylserine (PS).
PS provides high-affinity binding sites for coagulation
factors and, hence, facilitates the assembly of tenase
and prothrombinase complexes, which generate factor
Xa and thrombin, respectively (Heemskerk et al.
2002). Secondly, activated platelets release negatively
charged inorganic polyphosphates (PolyP) that activate
coagulation factor XII (FXII, Hageman factor) (Muller
et al. 2009), which represents the starting point of the
so-called intrinsic coagulation pathway. For more than
50 years FXII was believed to play no role in blood
clotting in vivo, based on the fact that FXII-deficient
humans do not show any bleeding abnormality. In
line with this FXII-deficient mice display normal tail
bleeding times and no signs of spontaneous bleeding.
Surprisingly, however, FXII −/− mice are consistently
unable to form occlusive thrombi in different thrombosis
models, indicating that pathological thrombus formation
and haemostasis may be driven by at least partially
distinct pathways (Renne et al. 2005). In line with this
novel concept, genetic disruption or pharmacological
inhibition of FXII using the highly specific FXIIa
inhibitor rHA-infestin-4 immediately before tMCAO
profoundly reduced infarct size and this protection was
not associated with an increased risk of intracranial
bleeding (Kleinschnitz et al. 2006; Hagedorn et al. 2010).
Perfusion-weighted neuroimaging revealed that stroke
protection in FXII −/− mice was due to sustained patency of

4120

B. Nieswandt and others

intracerebral vessels during the reperfusion phase (Pham
et al. 2010). Accordingly, immunohistochemical analyses
showed reduced fibrin formation in the infarct area
in FXII-deficient mice compared to wild-type controls
indicating that FXII-dependent thrombin generation
occurs to a considerable extent during cerebral ischaemia
(Kleinschnitz et al. 2006).

J Physiol 589.17

inflammation-mediated brain injury (Thornton et al.
2010). Moreover, platelets release PolyP as potent FXII
activators (Muller et al. 2009). Activated FXII (FXIIa)
in turn not only initiates coagulation, but also triggers

Thrombo-inflammation: linking the thrombotic
cascade to innate immunity

As outlined above, cumulating evidence suggests
that platelet attachment and activation through the
GPIb–vWF–GPVI axis and subsequent FXII activation
constitute a critical pathomechanism in acute cerebral
ischaemia. However, although these events will eventually
result in intravascular thrombus formation (Stoll et al.
2008; Varga-Szabo et al. 2008b), this appears not to be
the key step in ischaemic lesion development during
the reperfusion phase as strong platelet aggregation
inhibitors, such as anti-GPIIb/IIIa antibodies, do not
afford protection from stroke (Kleinschnitz et al. 2007;
Adams et al. 2008). A number of recent observations rather
support the idea that GPIb–vWF–GPVI–FXII-triggered
pathways may promote detrimental inflammation in acute
cerebral ischaemia.
It is well established that ischaemic stroke elicits a
strong inflammatory response involving T-cells, monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils (Stoll et al. 1998;
Dirnagl et al. 1999), which is time-restricted and occurs
in ‘waves’. Early during cerebral ischaemia leukocytes
are attracted by cell adhesion molecules expressed on
the luminal endothelial surface and act within the endovascular space while infiltration into the parenchyma
occurs at later stages.
There is recent evidence that platelet receptors GPIb and
GPVI guide inflammation thereby providing a possible
link between thrombotic activity and inflammation in
ischaemic brain damage. GPIbα harbours a binding site for
Mac-1 (an integrin expressed on neutrophils and monocytes (CD11b/CD18)) and mice deficient in Mac-1 are
less susceptible to cerebral ischaemia/reperfusion injury
(Soriano et al. 1999). An important role of GPIb (and
vWF) in the recruitment of immune cells has recently
been demonstrated in a model of acute peritonitis, but
the underlying mechanisms have not been fully elucidated
(Petri et al. 2010). Similarly, GPVI probably contributes to
pro-inflammatory processes as well. Boilard et al. showed
that GPVI-induced platelet microparticle formation
promoted inflammation in experimental rheumatoid
arthritis independently of thrombus formation (Boilard
et al. 2010). Upon activation via GPVI, platelets
are also a source of the proinflammatory cytokine
interleukin-1α through which they can contribute to

Figure 3. FXII plays a central role in stroke progression in mice
Infarct volumes as measured from TTC-stained coronal brain sections
(A) and neurological Bederson score (B) on day 1 after tMCAO.
Genetic ablation (FXII−/− mice) or pharmacological blockade
(rHA-Infestin-4) of FXII immediately before stroke markedly protects
mice from acute ischaemic brain damage (white areas) as does
disruption of the bradykinin receptor B1 (B1R−/− ). B1R belongs to
the proinflammatory kallikrein–kinin system that is also activated by
FXII. ∗ P < 0.05; ∗∗ P < 0.01; ∗∗∗ P < 0.0001 compared with wild-type
mice (n = 8–10/group): one-way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s multiple
comparisons post test (A); Kruskal–Wallis test, Dunn’s multiple
comparison post test (B). Horizontal lines indicate median. (Adapted
from Kleinschnitz et al. 2006; Austinat et al. 2009; Hagedorn et al.
2010.)
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

J Physiol 589.17

Ischaemic stroke: a thrombo-inflammatory disease?

inflammation through activation of the kallikrein–kinin
system (KKS). The end product of the KKS is the
potent proinflammatory mediator bradykinin (Muller &
Renne, 2008). The hypothesis that FXII activation links
thrombotic activity with inflammation (via the KKS) was
further strengthened by the analysis of bradykinin receptor
B1 (B1R) knockout mice (Fig. 3). These animals developed
smaller infarctions and displayed markedly reduced brain
oedema formation compared with wild-type controls after
tMCAO (Austinat et al. 2009).
In conclusion, there is increasing evidence that
thrombus formation and immune-mediated processes
are strongly interrelated during cerebral ischaemia and
significantly contribute to brain damage. The considerable
impact of immune cells on stroke outcome is underlined
by the fact that immunodeficient mice lacking T-cells
are remarkably protected against focal brain ischaemia
(Yilmaz et al. 2006; Kleinschnitz et al. 2010). We are
currently only beginning to understand the cellular and
molecular interactions linking thrombus formation with
neuroinflammation. GPIb, GPVI and FXII are ‘hot’
candidates orchestrating ‘thrombo-inflammation’ and
provide potential novel targets for stroke treatment and
prevention.

References
Adams HP Jr, del Zoppo G, Alberts MJ, Bhatt DL, Brass L,
Furlan A, Grubb RL, Higashida RT, Jauch EC, Kidwell C,
Lyden PD, Morgenstern LB, Qureshi AI, Rosenwasser RH,
Scott PA & Wijdicks EF (2007). Guidelines for the early
management of adults with ischemic stroke: a guideline from
the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association Stroke Council, Clinical Cardiology Council,
Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention Council, and the
Atherosclerotic Peripheral Vascular Disease and Quality of
Care Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary Working
Groups: the American Academy of Neurology affirms the
value of this guideline as an educational tool for
neurologists. Stroke 38, 1655–1711.
Adams HP Jr, Effron MB, Torner J, Davalos A, Frayne J,
Teal P, Leclerc J, Oemar B, Padgett L, Barnathan ES &
Hacke W (2008). Emergency administration of abciximab
for treatment of patients with acute ischemic stroke: Results
of an international phase III trial. Abciximab in Emergency
Treatment of Stroke Trial (AbESTT-II). Stroke 39,
87–99.
Al-Tamimi M, Gardiner EE, Thom JY, Shen Y, Cooper MN,
Hankey GJ, Berndt MC, Baker RI & Andrews RK (2011).
Soluble glycoprotein VI is raised in the plasma of patients
with acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 42, 498–500.
Austinat M, Braeuninger S, Pesquero JB, Brede M, Bader M,
Stoll G, Renne T & Kleinschnitz C (2009). Blockade of
bradykinin receptor B1 but not bradykinin receptor B2
provides protection from cerebral infarction and brain
edema. Stroke 40, 285–293.
C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

4121

Bergmeier W, Piffath CL, Goerge T, Cifuni SM, Ruggeri ZM,
Ware J & Wagner DD (2006). The role of platelet adhesion
receptor GPIbα far exceeds that of its main ligand, von
Willebrand factor, in arterial thrombosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 103, 16900–16905.
Bergmeier W, Rackebrandt K, Schroder W, Zirngibl H &
Nieswandt B (2000). Structural and functional
characterization of the mouse von Willebrand factor
receptor GPIb-IX with novel monoclonal antibodies. Blood
95, 886–893.
Berndt MC, Shen Y, Dopheide SM, Gardiner EE & Andrews RK
(2001). The vascular biology of the glycoprotein Ib-IX-V
complex. Thromb Haemost 86, 178–188.
Bigalke B, Stellos K, Weig HJ, Geisler T, Seizer P, Kremmer E,
Potz O, Joos T, May AE, Lindemann S & Gawaz M (2009).
Regulation of platelet glycoprotein VI (GPVI) surface
expression and of soluble GPVI in patients with atrial
fibrillation (AF) and acute coronary syndrome (ACS). Basic
Res Cardiol 104, 352–357.
Boilard E, Nigrovic PA, Larabee K, Watts GF, Coblyn JS,
Weinblatt ME, Massarotti EM, Remold-O’Donnell E,
Farndale RW, Ware J & Lee DM (2010). Platelets amplify
inflammation in arthritis via collagen-dependent
microparticle production. Science 327, 580–583.
Boylan B, Rathore V, Paddock C, Friedman K, Curtis B,
Stapleton M, Newman DK, Chen H, Kahn M & Newman PJ
(2003). JAQ-2/3-like ITP – a newly recognized clinical
syndrome caused by autoantibody-mediated clearance of the
GPVI/FcRγ-chain complex from the human platelet surface.
Blood 102, 12A.
Braun A, Varga-Szabo D, Kleinschnitz C, Pleines I, Bender M,
Austinat M, Bosl M, Stoll G & Nieswandt B (2009). Orai1
(CRACM1) is the platelet SOC channel and essential for
pathological thrombus formation. Blood 113, 2056–2063.
Cauwenberghs N, Meiring M, Vauterin S, van Wyk V,
Lamprecht S, Roodt JP, Novák L, Harsfalvi J, Deckmyn H &
Kotzé HF (2000). Antithrombotic effect of platelet
glycoprotein Ib-blocking monoclonal antibody Fab
fragments in nonhuman primates. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 20, 1347–1353.
Choudhri TF, Hoh BL, Zerwes HG, Prestigiacomo CJ, Kim SC,
Connolly ESJ, Kottirsch G & Pinsky DJ (1998). Reduced
microvascular thrombosis and improved outcome in acute
murine stroke by inhibiting GP IIb/IIIa receptor-mediated
platelet aggregation. J Clin Invest 102, 1301–1310.
del Zoppo GJ (1998). The role of platelets in ischemic stroke.
Neurology 51, S9–14.
del Zoppo GJ & Mabuchi T (2003). Cerebral microvessel
responses to focal ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23,
879–894.
De Meyer SF, Schwarz T, Deckmyn H, Denis CV, Nieswandt B,
Stoll G, Vanhoorelbeke K & Kleinschnitz C (2010). Binding
of von Willebrand factor to collagen and glycoprotein Ibα,
but not to glycoprotein IIb/IIIa, contributes to ischemic
stroke in mice – Brief report. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
30, 1949–1951.
Denis C, Methia N, Frenette PS, Rayburn H, Ullman-Cullere
M, Hynes RO & Wagner DD (1998). A mouse model of
severe von Willebrand disease: defects in hemostasis and
thrombosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 9524–9529.

4122

B. Nieswandt and others

Dirnagl U, Iadecola C & Moskowitz MA (1999). Pathobiology
of ischaemic stroke: an integrated view. Trends Neurosci 22,
391–397.
Elvers M, Stegner D, Hagedorn I, Kleinschnitz C, Braun A,
Kuijpers ME, Boesl M, Chen Q, Heemskerk JW, Stoll G,
Frohman MA & Nieswandt B (2010). Impaired αIIb β3
integrin activation and shear-dependent thrombus
formation in mice lacking phospholipase D1. Sci Signal 3,
ra1.
Feigin VL, Lawes CM, Bennett DA & Anderson CS (2003).
Stroke epidemiology: a review of population-based studies
of incidence, prevalence, and case-fatality in the late 20th
century. Lancet Neurol 2, 43–53.
Fujioka M, Hayakawa K, Mishima K, Kunizawa A, Irie K,
Higuchi S, Nakano T, Muroi C, Fukushima H, Sugimoto M,
Banno F, Kokame K, Miyata T, Fujiwara M, Okuchi K &
Nishio K (2010). ADAMTS13 gene deletion aggravates
ischemic brain damage: a possible neuroprotective role of
ADAMTS13 by ameliorating postischemic hypoperfusion.
Blood 115, 1650–1653.
Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, Brozman M, Dávalos A,
Guidetti D, Larrue V, Lees KR, Medeghri Z, Machnig T,
Schneider D, von Kummer R, Wahlgren N & Toni D (2008).
Thrombolysis with alteplase 3 to 4.5 h after acute ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med 359, 1317–1329.
Hagedorn I, Schmidbauer S, Pleines I, Kleinschnitz C,
Kronthaler U, Stoll G, Dickneite G & Nieswandt B (2010).
Factor XIIa inhibitor recombinant human albumin
Infestin-4 abolishes occlusive arterial thrombus formation
without affecting bleeding. Circulation 121, 1510–1517.
Heemskerk JW, Bevers EM & Lindhout T (2002). Platelet
activation and blood coagulation. Thromb Haemost 88,
186–193.
Jackson SP, Nesbitt WS & Kulkarni S (2003). Signaling events
underlying thrombus formation. J Thromb Haemost 1,
1602–1612.
Kleinschnitz C, De Meyer SF, Schwarz T, Austinat M,
Vanhoorelbeke K, Nieswandt B, Deckmyn H & Stoll G
(2009). Deficiency of von Willebrand factor protects mice
from ischemic stroke. Blood 113, 3600–3603.
Kleinschnitz C, Pozgajova M, Pham M, Bendszus M,
Nieswandt B & Stoll G (2007). Targeting platelets in acute
experimental stroke: impact of glycoprotein Ib, VI, and
IIb/IIIa blockade on infarct size, functional outcome, and
intracranial bleeding. Circulation 115, 2323–2330.
Kleinschnitz C, Schwab N, Kraft P, Hagedorn I, Dreykluft A,
Schwarz T, Austinat M, Nieswandt B, Wiendl H & Stoll G
(2010). Early detrimental T cell effects in experimental
cerebral ischemia are neither related to adaptive immunity
nor thrombus formation. Blood 115, 3835–3842.
Kleinschnitz C, Stoll G, Bendszus M, Schuh K, Pauer HU,
Burfeind P, Renne C, Gailani D, Nieswandt B & Renne T
(2006). Targeting coagulation factor XII provides protection
from pathological thrombosis in cerebral ischemia without
interfering with hemostasis. J Exp Med 203, 513–518.
Massberg S, Gawaz M, Gruner S, Schulte V, Konrad I,
Zohlnhofer D, Heinzmann U & Nieswandt B (2003). A
crucial role of glycoprotein VI for platelet recruitment to the
injured arterial wall in vivo. J Exp Med 197, 41–49.

J Physiol 589.17

Muller F, Mutch NJ, Schenk WA, Smith SA, Esterl L, Spronk
HM, Schmidbauer S, Gahl WA, Morrissey JH & Renne T
(2009). Platelet polyphosphates are proinflammatory and
procoagulant mediators in vivo. Cell 139, 1143–1156.
Muller F & Renne T (2008). Novel roles for factor XII-driven
plasma contact activation system. Curr Opin Hematol 15,
516–521.
Nieswandt B, Schulte V, Bergmeier W, Mokhtari-Nejad R,
Rackebrandt K, Cazenave JP, Ohlmann P, Gachet C &
Zirngibl H (2001). Long-term antithrombotic protection by
in vivo depletion of platelet glycoprotein VI in mice. J Exp
Med 193, 459–470.
Nieswandt B & Stoll G (2010). The smaller, the better: VWF in
stroke. Blood 115, 1477–1478.
Nieswandt B & Watson SP (2003). Platelet-collagen interaction:
is GPVI the central receptor? Blood 102, 449–461.
Petri B, Broermann A, Li H, Khandoga AG, Zarbock A,
Krombach F, Goerge T, Schneider SW, Jones C, Nieswandt
B, Wild MK & Vestweber D (2010). von Willebrand factor
promotes leukocyte extravasation. Blood 116, 4712–4719.
Pham M, Helluy X, Kleinschnitz C, Kraft P, Bartsch AJ, Jakob
P, Nieswandt B, Bendszus M & Stoll G (2011). Sustained
reperfusion after blockade of glycoprotein-receptor-Ib in
focal cerebral ischemia: an MRI study at 17.6 Tesla. PLoS One
6, e18386.
Pham M, Kleinschnitz C, Helluy X, Bartsch AJ, Austinat M,
Behr VC, Renne T, Nieswandt B, Stoll G & Bendszus M
(2010). Enhanced cortical reperfusion protects coagulation
factor XII-deficient mice from ischemic stroke as revealed by
high-field MRI. Neuroimage 49, 2907–2914.
Renne T, Pozgajova M, Gruner S, Schuh K, Pauer HU, Burfeind
P, Gailani D & Nieswandt B (2005). Defective thrombus
formation in mice lacking coagulation factor XII. J Exp Med
202, 271–281.
Rodgers RP & Levin J (1990). A critical reappraisal of the
bleeding time. Semin Thromb Hemost 16, 1–20.
Roldan V, Marin F, Garcia-Herola A & Lip GY (2005).
Correlation of plasma von Willebrand factor levels, an index
of endothelial damage/dysfunction, with two point-based
stroke risk stratification scores in atrial fibrillation. Thromb
Res 116, 321–325.
Ruggeri ZM (2002). Platelets in atherothrombosis. Nat Med 8,
1227–1234.
Ruggeri ZM (2003). Von Willebrand factor, platelets and
endothelial cell interactions. J Thromb Haemost 1,
1335–1342.
Sadler JE (2008). Von Willebrand factor, ADAMTS13, and
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood 112,
11–18.
Savage B, Almus-Jacobs F & Ruggeri ZM (1998). Specific
synergy of multiple substrate-receptor interactions in
platelet thrombus formation under flow. Cell 94,
657–666.
Saver JL, Gornbein J, Grotta J, Liebeskind D, Lutsep H,
Schwamm L, Scott P & Starkman S (2009). Number needed
to treat to benefit and to harm for intravenous tissue
plasminogen activator therapy in the 3- to 4.5-h window:
joint outcome table analysis of the ECASS 3 trial. Stroke 40,
2433–2437.

C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

J Physiol 589.17

Ischaemic stroke: a thrombo-inflammatory disease?

Soriano SG, Coxon A, Wang YF, Frosch MP, Lipton SA, Hickey
PR & Mayadas TN (1999). Mice deficient in Mac-1
(CD11b/CD18) are less susceptible to cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Stroke 30, 134–139.
Stoll G, Jander S & Schroeter M (1998). Inflammation and glial
responses in ischemic brain lesions. Prog Neurobiol 56,
149–171.
Stoll G, Kleinschnitz C & Nieswandt B (2008). Molecular
mechanisms of thrombus formation in ischemic stroke:
novel insights and targets for treatment. Blood 112,
3555–3562.
Thornton P, McColl BW, Greenhalgh A, Denes A, Allan SM &
Rothwell NJ (2010). Platelet interleukin-1α drives
cerebrovascular inflammation. Blood 115,
3632–3639.
Varga-Szabo D, Braun A, Kleinschnitz C, Bender M, Pleines I,
Pham M, Renne T, Stoll G & Nieswandt B (2008a). The
calcium sensor STIM1 is an essential mediator of arterial
thrombosis and ischemic brain infarction. J Exp Med 205,
1583–1591.

C 2011 The Physiological Society
2011 The Authors. Journal compilation 

4123

Varga-Szabo D, Pleines I & Nieswandt B (2008b). Cell adhesion
mechanisms in platelets. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 28,
403–412.
Wieberdink RG, van Schie MC, Koudstaal PJ, Hofman A,
Witteman JC, de Maat MP, Leebeek FW & Breteler MM
(2010). High von Willebrand factor levels increase the risk of
stroke: the Rotterdam study. Stroke 41, 2151–2156.
Yilmaz G, Arumugam TV, Stokes KY & Granger DN (2006).
Role of T lymphocytes and interferon-γ in ischemic stroke.
Circulation 113, 2105–2112.
Zhao BQ, Chauhan AK, Canault M, Patten IS, Yang JJ, Dockal
M, Scheiflinger F & Wagner DD (2009). von Willebrand
factor-cleaving protease ADAMTS13 reduces ischemic brain
injury in experimental stroke. Blood 114, 3329–3334.
Acknowledgements
Research in the authors’ laboratories was supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, Bonn (SFB 688 A1, A13 and
B1).

