Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

RESEARCH

Open Access

Human neural stem cells rapidly ameliorate
symptomatic inflammation in early-stage
ischemic-reperfusion cerebral injury
Lei Huang1, Sunnie Wong1, Evan Y Snyder2, Milton H Hamblin1 and Jean-Pyo Lee1,2*

Abstract
Introduction: Clinically, a good deal of injury from stroke results from ischemic-reperfusion. There is a loss of cerebral
parenchyma and its associated cells, disruption of neuronal connections, compromise of the blood-brain barrier, and
inflammation. We tested whether exogenously engrafted human neural stem cells could migrate rapidly and
extensively to damaged regions, following transplantation into a neurogenic site where migration cues are already
underway during stroke onset, then counteract a number of these pathological processes.
Methods: One day post-injury, we injected human neural stem cells (hNSCs) into the ipsilesional hippocampus of a
mouse model of stroke with middle cerebral artery occlusion to induce focal ischemia followed by reperfusion (MCAO/R).
The time frame for hNSC transplantation corresponded to upregulation of endogenous proinflammatory cytokines. We
examined the effect of hNSC transplantation on pathological processes and behavioral dysfunction 48 hours post-injury.
Results: Twenty-four hours after transplantation, engrafted hNSCs had migrated extensively to the lesion, and infarct
volume was reduced relative to MCAO/R controls. The behavioral deficits seen in MCAO/R controls were also
significantly improved. Given this rapid response, we hypothesized that the mechanisms underlying therapeutic activity
were anti-inflammatory rather than due to cell replacement. In support of this idea, in hNSC-transplanted mice we
observed reduced microglial activation, decreased expression of proinflammatory factors (tumor necrosis factor-α,
interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1α) and adhesion
molecules (intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1), and amelioration of blood-brain barrier
damage.
Conclusions: While long-term effects of engrafted hNSCs on the amelioration of ischemic stroke-induced behavioral
dysfunction in a rodent model have been reported, our study is the first to show rapid, beneficial impacts on behavioral
function (within 24 hours) upon early delivery of hNSCs into the hippocampus.

Introduction
Neural stem cells (NSCs) possess multiple actions that are
potentially therapeutic. These include functional neural replacement in multiple central nervous system (CNS) regions [1], as well as bystander effects. The bystander or
‘chaperone’ effects, previously reported by us and others, include delivery of therapeutic gene products inherently synthesized by stem cells, which might both directly protect
* Correspondence: jeanpyol@tulane.edu
1
Tulane University School of Medicine, Center for Stem Cell Research and
Regenerative Medicine; Pharmacology, 1430 Tulane Ave, SL-99, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA
2
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Center for Neuroscience,
Aging and Stem Cells, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA

endangered host cells and inhibit toxic components of the
microenvironment (for example, anti-inflammatory actions)
[2-6].
Stroke causes long-term neurological disability and is the
second leading cause of mortality worldwide. Most strokes
are ischemic and caused by thrombosis. Thrombolysis in
occluded brain arteries can be an effective reperfusion treatment to salvage cells in the ischemic penumbra. However,
fast reperfusion contributes to secondary injury by disrupting cerebral microvascular endothelial cell tight junctions
that constitute the blood-brain barrier (BBB) accompanied
by neuronal death [7]. Loss of BBB integrity promotes extravasation of fluids and intravascular proteins into the
brain parenchyma. Compromise of the BBB in ischemic

© 2014 Huang et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

stroke may be mediated by multiple effectors, including
growth factors, upregulation of endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecules, inflammatory factors, matrix metalloproteinases, and disruption of tight junctions [8-13].
Reperfusion following ischemic injury causes biphasic
opening of the BBB [14]. The initial stage of the transient
and reversible BBB opening, which occurs several hours
post-reperfusion, leads to an irreversible second phase of
BBB opening following 24 hours to 72 hours postreperfusion. The two openings of the BBB are separated by
a refractory period. The second BBB opening contributes
significantly to neural cell death. Thus, reducing inflammation during the initial stage and ameliorating any BBB opening may lessen further neuronal damage.
NSC transplantation offers a novel, therapeutic strategy
for early-stage ischemic stroke, when inflammatory signals
are prominent, by dampening the inflammatory response.
To be therapeutically effective during this time, engrafted
NSCs must migrate quickly and extensively into the lesioned area. Others have reported on their efforts to engraft exogenous NSCs post-ischemia into various regions
of the brain in stroke models [15,16]. Yet, reported outcomes repeatedly show an insufficient number of stem
cells migrating into stroke lesions and poor recovery of
behavioral functions 24 hours post-transplantation. None
of these reports describe NSCs being engrafted into the
hippocampal region of the brain as we report here.
In this study, we investigated the role of human NSCs
(hNSCs) on the expression of adhesion molecules, proinflammatory cytokines and BBB repair in a mouse model
of ischemic/reperfusion cerebral injury. Animal models of
transient focal ischemia induced by middle cerebral artery
occlusion with subsequent reperfusion (MCAO/R) are
well-defined and widely used [17]. Our study was designed
to determine the effects of hNSCs on multiple secondary
pathological processes 24 hours to 48 hours post-MCAO/
R, the time frame that coincides with the second phase of
BBB opening. No studies to date have shown extensive
dissemination of intracranially injected hNSCs within
24 hours post-stroke. Here, we used well-characterized
hNSCs of fetal origin. We transplanted hNSCs into the
ipsilesional hippocampus after a 60-minute MCAO/
24-hour reperfusion. We evaluated how rapidly and
efficiently transplanted hNSCs migrated into the stroke
lesion and determined their pathophysiology as it relates
to BBB disruption, neuroinflammation and behavioral
dysfunction.

Materials and methods
Animals

Male C57BL/6J mice, 24 to 26 g, (Jackson Laboratory,
Bar Harbor, ME, USA) were maintained at 20 ± 2°C and
on a 12 hour light-dark cycle with food and water ad
libitum.

Page 2 of 16

Animal model of stroke

All experimental protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Tulane University (New Orleans, LA, USA). All experiments and animal
handling were performed in accordance with the guidelines of the Tulane University Protocol, American Veterinary Medical Association and National Institutes of Health
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.
Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by intraluminal
MCAO, as described previously [18]. Briefly, mice were
anesthetized with 1% isoflurane in 30% oxygen using a face
mask. The left common carotid artery and external carotid
artery were exposed through a midline neck incision. A 6-0
nylon monofilament coated with silicon rubber (Doccol
Corporation, Sharon, MA, USA) was introduced into the
left internal carotid artery through the external carotid
stump to occlude the origin of the MCA. After a 60-minute
occlusion, reperfusion was introduced by filament withdrawal. Sham-operated control mice underwent a similar
surgery but the filament was removed immediately after insertion (no occlusion, no reperfusion). Body temperature
was continuously maintained at 37 ± 0.5°C. Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) through the MCA was assessed by
laser Doppler (Perimed, Stockholm, Sweden). Successful
MCAOs resulted in an over 80% decrease in rCBF after
MCA occlusion and a post-MCAO/R recovery to 90.1% ±
4.0. Brains were collected 48 hours post-MCAO/R for
quantitative analyses.
Human neural stem cell culture

We used well-characterized hNSCs of fetal origin (generated
from fetal CNS by the Snyder Lab). Specifically, primary
hNSCs were dissociated from the telencephalon of late firsttrimester human fetal cadavers as previously described [2],
particularly the ventricular zone, which is rich in NSCs. The
hNSCs were expanded and maintained in defined medium:
(D)MEM/F12 high glucose (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA), recombinant human epidermal growth factor (EGF)
(20 ng/mL, Invitrogen), recombinant basic fibroblast growth
factor (bFGF) (20 ng/mL, Invitrogen), leukemia inhibitory
factor (LIF; 10 ng/ml, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), heparin (8 μg/ml, Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA), L-glutamine
(Invitrogen), and antibiotics (penicillin, streptomycin, and
amphotericin C). Prior to confluence, cells were transferred
enzymatically once per week during refeeding or within 48
to 72 hours prior to transplantation. RT-PCR and immunostaining confirmed nestin, Sox2, glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), doublecortin, EGF receptor and nucleostemin expression during the expansion phase. Flow cytometry
showed high levels of neural stem cell markers (for example,
CD133). These cells have not been genetically manipulated,
carry no transgenes and are propagated with mitogens
alone. The ability of hNSCs to engraft successfully (xenograft) and integrate in the mouse brain has been previously

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

documented [2,19]. Their genetic fingerprints and karyotypes have remained stable over many years. No non-neural
cell types or tumors were seen following engraftment.

Page 3 of 16

(Leica VT1000s, Heidelberg, Germany); frozen sections
were embedded in optimum cutting temperature (O.C.T.)
compound (Tissue-Tek, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA)
and cut coronally at a 20-μm thickness.

Human neural stem cell transplantation

We transplanted hNSCs 24 hours post-MCAO/R into the
hippocampus, a neurogenic site where signals for stem cell
migration are already underway. Adult C57BL/6J mice
were anesthetized with isoflurane and placed in a stereotaxic frame (Stoelting Co., Wood Dale, IL, USA). Ocular
ointment was applied to the eyes to prevent drying, animal
heads were wiped with 70% ethanol, and the skin on the
head was cut open at the midline. A small burr hole
(0.5 mm diameter, F.S.T.) was drilled into the skull (2 mm
posterior to bregma; 1.5 mm lateral to sagittal suture). A
total of 2 μl of PBS containing approximately 100,000 viable cells were injected over a 3-minute period into the
ipsilesional hemisphere of the MCAO/R-treated brain
(depth; 2 to 2.5 mm dorsal). Mock transplantation controls
received the same volume of PBS. The wound was closed
with cyanoacrylate glue (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame,
CA, USA), and brains were collected 48 hours postMCAO/R for analysis.

Infarct volume was measured by cresyl violet staining
[22]. Mice were sacrificed 48 hours post-MCAO/R by
transcardial perfusion, brains postfixed in 4% PFA for
24 hours, and 30-μm coronal vibratome sections cut at
five levels (Bregma 1.78, 0.98, 0.14, -1.22, and -1.94 mm).
In addition, triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining
was performed. Coronal sections of 1 mm were cut
48 hours post-MCAO/R and incubated in 2% TTC solution (Sigma). In viable brain tissue, TTC is converted by
mitochondria to a red substance, while the ischemic area
remains colorless. Infarct size was measured using the National Institutes of Health (NIH) program ImageJ. Infarct
volume was calculated as a percent volume of the contralateral hemisphere to compensate for edema, using the
following formula: [(volume of contralateral hemisphere −
(volume of total ipsilesional hemisphere – volume of infarct area)]/volume of contralateral hemisphere.

Behavioral tests

Immunohistochemistry

We performed adhesive removal, beam walk, and rotarod
behavioral tests on each mouse for 3 days consecutively
before MCAO (as training) and from 2 to 31 days postinjury. For the adhesive removal test, a small piece (3 mm ×
4 mm) of adhesive tape was applied using equal pressure to
the contralateral forepaw [20]. The mouse was then placed
in a transparent Perspex box to record the time for the
mouse to remove the tape (to a 120-second maximum).
For the beam walk test, mice were trained to traverse an elevated beam (700-mm long and 5-mm wide) to reach an
enclosed box. Following training, mice that reached the box
in 20 seconds without stopping were selected for the study.
After MCAO/R, latency to traverse the beam (to a 60second maximum) was recorded. The rotarod test [21] was
performed with some modifications: four velocities (10, 15,
20, and 25 rpm) were used, and three trials were performed
per velocity. The time a mouse remained on the rod was
recorded; the trial ended if the mouse fell from the rod.
Speed averages are presented as a percentage relative to the
sham mice. Data are presented as total amount of time on
the rod as a percentage relative to the sham mice.

Nonspecific binding to 30-μm coronal free-floating sections
was blocked by incubation in 10% goat serum in PBS,
pH 7.4, containing 0.1% Tween 20, 0.3% Triton X-100. Sections were then incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C
overnight. Primary antibodies used (and dilutions) were
rabbit anti-Iba-1 (1:300, Wako, Osaka, Japan), mouse antihuman cytoplasm Stem121 (1:500, Stem Cells, Inc., Palo
Alto, CA, USA), rabbit anti-human mitochondria (1:300,
Millipore), and rabbit anti-BDNF (1:400, Abcam, Cambridge,
MA, USA). Sections were then incubated in biotinylated
goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody (1:600,
Vector Laboratories), followed by avidin-peroxidase (ABC,
Vector Laboratories). The reaction products were visualized
with 3, 3-diaminobenzidine (DAB, Sigma). Immunofluorescent staining included the secondary antibodies goat antirabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 594 (1:500, Invitrogen) and goat
anti-mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488 (1:500, Invitrogen).

Tissue processing

At 48 hours post-MCAO/R (24 hours post-transplantation),
mice were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused,
first with normal saline, then with phosphate-buffered 4%
paraformaldehyde (PFA). Brains were post-fixed in 4% PFA
for 24 hours and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose; free-floating
coronal sections (30 μm) were prepared using a vibratome

Quantification of infarct volume

Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction

Total RNA was extracted from ipsilesional MCAO/R mouse
brain tissue. Brain tissue (approximately 20 to 30 mg) preserved in RNAlater (Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX, USA) was
immersed in Trizol reagent (Invitrogen) and homogenized
using MagNA Lyser (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN,
USA). After chloroform extraction, RNA fractions were
mixed with an appropriate volume of 70% ethanol and
loaded onto an RNeasy column (Qiagen, Valencia, CA,
USA). The retained material was digested with DNase I
(Qiagen). To prepare first-strand cDNA, 2 μg of total RNA

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

was reverse-transcribed with ABI high-capacity cDNA reverse transcriptase and random primers (4368814, Invitrogen). PCR amplification was performed with 2 μl of reverse
transcriptase reaction mixture in 10 μl of SsoFast Probes
Supermix with Rox (Biorad, Hercules, CA, USA) in a
CFX96 Real-time thermal cycler (Biorad). PCR reaction conditions included a 30-second hold at 95°C; 35 cycles of activation for 5 seconds at 95°C and annealing/extending for
10 seconds at 60°C. TaqMan® Gene Expression Assays
(Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) were used
(TNF-α: Mm00443258_m1; IL-6: Mm00446190_m1; IL-1β:
Mm00434228_m1; VCAM-1: Mm01320970_m1; ICAM-1:
Mm00516023_m1; Ccl2 (MCP1): Mm00441242_m1; Ccl3
(MIP-1α): Mm00441259_g1; GAPDH: Mm99999915_g1).
Ct values were normalized relative to GAPDH. The Livak
(2-ΔΔCt) method was used to calculate changes in target gene
expression relative to sham mice.
Blood-brain barrier permeability assay

BBB integrity was assessed by IgG immunostaining with
minor modifications [23] and Texas Red® (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA) dextran perfusion [24]. Free-floating
sections were incubated with biotinylated horse antimouse IgG (BA-2000, 1:500, Vector Laboratories) at 4°C
overnight following blocking in 10% normal horse serum
and 1% BSA in PBS, pH 7.4. After rinsing in 0.3% H2O2
for 30 minutes to quench endogenous peroxidase activity, sections were incubated with avidin-biotin horseradish peroxidase complex (ABC, Vector Laboratories) for
30 minutes, then visualized with DAB. Using ImageJ, the
extent of BBB damage was quantified as the percentage
of area of IgG positive staining per ipsilateral hemisphere. For Texas Red dextran perfusion, mice were
deeply anesthetized with isoflurane, and Texas Red dextran 70 kDa (D1864, Invitrogen) in PBS (50 mg/ml) was
injected into the inferior vena cava for 2 minutes of circulation. Mice were immediately killed by decapitation.
Brains were quickly extracted and post-fixed in 4% PFA for
24 hours then cryoprotected by 30% sucrose for 48 hours.
After O.C.T. embedding, brains were cut coronally in
20-μm sections. Slices were directly coverslipped using
mounting media with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) (H-1200, Vector Laboratories).

Page 4 of 16

Primary antibodies used include the following: MMP-9
(1:1000, Abcam), Iba-1 (1:500, Abcam), CD11b (1:1000,
Abcam), ZO-1 (1:500, Invitrogen), BDNF (1:1000, Abcam),
and β-actin (1:2500, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad,
CA, USA). (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) Blots were
probed with appropriate horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies (1:3000, Invitrogen) and
detected using the ECL Western blot substrate (Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Protein band intensities were quantified
using ImageJ.
Gelatin zymography

Functional matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) enzyme
was detected via SDS-PAGE zymography, as described previously [25]. Brain samples were prepared for Western blotting, except that supernatants were not denatured prior to
gel loading. Protein (30 μg/well) was loaded onto a Novex
10% gelatin zymogram gel (Invitrogen). After electrophoresis,
the gel was renatured with renaturing buffer (Invitrogen)
and incubated in developing buffer (Invitrogen) at 37°C overnight. The gel was stained with 0.5% SimplyBlue SafeStain
(Invitrogen) for 60 minutes, then destained. MMP-9 protease
activity was visualized indirectly as clear bands against a dark
background. Images were analyzed using ImageJ.
Confocal microscopy

Images were captured with a Bio-Rad MRC 1024 equipped
with a single photon Kr/Ar laser and a Bio-Rad Radiance
2100MP equipped with a multiphoton laser. Images were
acquired sequentially to negate channel cross-talk. Pixel
resolution was 1024 × 1024, with negative and positive control images taken at the same settings. Each merged image
was visualized using orthogonal projections composed of 9
to 16 optical Z-planes of 0.5 to 1 μm thickness.
Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism
6 and SPSS 19 software. One-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) with Fisher’s least significant difference (LSD)
post-hoc test assessed differences between multiple groups.
Tests were considered statistically significant at P-values
<0.05. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.

Western blot analysis

Results

At 48 hours post-MCAO/R, mice were deeply anesthetized and the ipsilesional cortex and hippocampal regions
were collected (Bregma: -1.5 mm to 3.5 mm). Total
protein was isolated by homogenization in cold NP-40
lysis buffer (Boston Bioproducts Inc., Boston, MA, USA).
Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at
12,000 rpm for 15 minutes. A total of 30 μg protein was
loaded onto 4% to 12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE Novex gels (Invitrogen) and transferred onto NC membranes (Invitrogen).

Transplanted human neural stem cells ameliorate
neurological dysfunction in a stroke model

Ischemic-reperfusion damage in rodents correlates with
neurological dysfunction [26,27]. We first investigated
hNSC effects on behavioral dysfunction caused by stroke.
We performed behavioral tests of sensorimotor, motor
and balance beginning one day after hNSC transplantation
into the hippocampus (Figure 1 IA and IB). We pinpointed the hippocampus, a naturally supportive niche of

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Figure 1 (See legend on next page.)

Page 5 of 16

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 6 of 16

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 1 Human NSC transplantation ameliorates behavioral deficits. I. (A) Experimental timeline. MCAO/R was performed in C57BL/6 J mice at time 0,
and hNSCs were transplanted into the ipsilesional hippocampus 24 hours later. Outcomes were assessed at the indicated intervals. Tx, transplantation. (B)
Relative cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was measured by laser Doppler flowmetry over the area supplied by the MCA. Pre-ischemic rCBF was assigned a value of
100%. Subsequent values are presented as a percentage of that value. MCAO promoted an 80% decrease in rCBF (86.1 ± 1.6%), and the reperfusion flow rate
60 minutes post-MCAO was 90.1 ± 4.0% (n = 18). II. (A) In the forepaw adhesive removal tests, the mean adhesive removal time for hNSC-transplanted mice
was significantly shorter than that of MCAO/R mice, showing improvement (n = 14). (B) In the beam walk tests, hNSC-transplanted MCAO/R mice improved
neurological dysfunction as shown by crossing the beam in significantly less time than did nontransplanted MCAO/R mice (n = 14). (C) In the rotarod tests,
hNSC-transplanted mice improved motor dysfunction as shown by remaining on the rod for a significantly longer time than did nontransplanted MCAO/R
mice (n = 14). Four velocities (10, 15, 20, and 25 rpm) were used, and three trials were performed at each velocity. Durations at all speeds are summed, and
data are presented as a percentage relative to the sham mice. **P <0.01, ***P <0.001 versus sham mice; ##P <0.01; ###P <0.001 versus nontransplanted MCAO/
R mice. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. MCA, middle cerebral artery; MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion; NSC, neural stem cells;
SEM, standard error of the mean.

NSCs, as the ideal injection site because signals for stem
cell proliferation and migration are widespread there.
Each mouse was subjected to three behavioral tests for
three consecutive days before surgery (pretraining) and
from 2 to 31 days post-surgery. The effects of transplanted
hNSCs for improving neurological dysfunction were
clearly evident on days 2 to 8 post-injury, and efficacy of
transplanted hNSCs on behavioral dysfunction was
maintained beyond 12 days. Thus, here we focused on
assessing the impact of hNSCs at early time points poststroke (Figure 1 II). Results for hNSC-transplanted
MCAO/R mice showed amelioration of behavioral
impairment.
For the forepaw adhesive removal test, which assesses sensorimotor deficits, mice were subjected to MCAO/R with
and without hNSC transplant. The mean time to remove
adhesive tape for MCAO/R mice was greater compared with
sham mice (P <0.001 at days 2, 4, 6, and 8; Figure 1 IIA).
However, mean removal time was significantly less for
hNSC-transplanted (MCAO/R + Tx) mice compared to
nontransplanted MCAO/R mice (P <0.001 at day 2; P <0.01
at day 4; Figure 1 IIA), demonstrating improved behavioral
function following hNSC transplantation.
The beam walk test assesses balance by measuring the
time required for an animal to walk across an elevated
narrow beam to a platform [28]. Mean walk time in
MCAO/R mice significantly increased compared with
sham controls (P <0.001). However, mean walk time significantly decreased in hNSC-transplanted mice on days 2
to 8 compared with nontransplanted MCAO/R mice,
demonstrating improved performance following hNSC
transplantation (P <0.001; Figure 1 IIB).
The rotarod test evaluates balance and motor coordination by forcing mice to remain on a rotating rod. The
time duration on the rod dramatically decreased in nontransplanted MCAO/R mice compared with sham mice
starting at 2 days post-injury and remained low for the
entire test period (P <0.001; Figure 1 IIC). In contrast,
hNSC-transplanted (MCAO/R + Tx) mice showed improved performance, although not recovering to sham
control levels, as shown by these mice, which remained

on the rod significantly longer than did MCAO/R mice
(P <0.01 at day 24; Figure 1 IIC). Sham mice showed no
behavioral dysfunction. The improved behavioral function observed with hNSC transplantation persisted beyond 1 month.
Thus, the present study suggests that transplanting
hNSCs into the hippocampus at 24 hours post-MCAO/R
can provide long-term benefits. We used heat-killed hNSCs
as a negative control to show that effects demonstrated by
engrafted hNSCs in this study are not due to inflammatory
responses induced by cell transplantation. When dead
hNSCs were transplanted, there was no improvement in
behavioral dysfunction (data not shown). Furthermore, in
order to validate that human NSC xenotransplantation is
not suboptimal in the mouse brain, we compared the effect
of hNSCs with that of mouse NSCs (mNSCs). We transplanted mNSCs, C17.2, which are well-characterized and
widely used [2,29], and obtained similar results showing
that stroke mice engrafted with mNSCs performed significantly better than nontransplanted MCAO/R mice. Based
on these findings, we used hNSCs for this study.
Human neural stem cells engraft widely following
ischemia and are associated with reduced infarct volume

We next explored potential mechanisms underlying this
behavioral improvement. We investigated the effects of
hNSCs on infarct volume 24 hours post-transplantation
(48 hours post-MCAO/R). We measured infarct volumes
by staining with cresyl violet (white, infarct) (Figure 2 IA).
Similar to previously reported results, 60 minutes of intraluminal MCAO induced ischemic lesions in both the
caudo-putamen and cortex but not in the hippocampus
[30]. Compared to nontransplanted MCAO/R mice, infarct size in transplanted brains was significantly reduced.
The mean infarct volume (white areas) in MCAO/R mice
was 45.38 ± 0.7% in the ipsilesional hemisphere and 32.5 ±
2.1% in hNSC-transplanted mice (P <0.05; Figure 2 IB).
Cresyl violet staining patterns agreed with TTC staining.
In viable brain tissue, TTC is converted by mitochondria
to a red substance, but remains colorless in the ischemic
area (Figure 2 IC; Additional file 1: Figure S1).

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Figure 2 (See legend on next page.)

Page 7 of 16

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 8 of 16

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 2 Human NSCs engraft widely and reduce infarct volume. I. (A) Infarct volume was reduced in hNSC-transplanted mice (MCAO/R + Tx)
24 hours post-transplantation (neurons are stained with cresyl violet, purple; infarct, white). (B) Quantification of II A. (n = 4, *P <0.05). (C) TTC staining
(white, infarct). Shown are two representative samples of the same brain from anterior to posterior. A, anterior; P, posterior. II. (A) Diagram of brain and
injection site. Arrowhead indicates NSC injection site; red dots, hNSC-disseminated areas. Ipsi, ipsilesional; Contra, contralesional. (B-H) hNSCs were
identified with two different human-specific antibodies (human mitochondria, hMito or human cytoplasmic protein, Stem121). Three sampling sites
are shown in rectangles, (C-H) higher magnification images: area 1, (no infarct), area 2 (infarct center), area 3 (peri-infarct). (B-E) Immunoreactivity to
human mitochondria (hMito; DAB, brown) and (F-H) to Stem121 (G, H: green). Scale bars: B, 1 mm; E, 50 μm (10 μm inset); H, 100 μm (10 μm inset).
DAB, 3,3-diaminobenzidine; MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion; NSCs, neural stem cells; TTC, triphenyl tetrazolium chloride;
Tx: Transplantation.

We next examined the distribution of engrafted hNSCs
by immunostaining with two different human-specific
antibodies (human mitochondria, hMito, or the human
cytoplasmic protein, Stem121). We found that transplanted hNSCs (24 hours post-MCAO/R into the hippocampus) migrated throughout the ischemic lesions
(Figure 2 IIB-H). It is anticipated that the earlier the intervention to prevent BBB damage, the better the clinical
outcome post-stroke. However, regarding injection time
points (other than at 24 hours post-MCAO/R), hNSCs
migrated less extensively to the injured site when injected
6 hours or 12 hours post-MCAO/R than at 24 hours (analyzed 24 hours post-transplantation) [see Additional file 2:
Figure S2]. Regarding injection sites other than the hippocampus, when hNSCs were transplanted into the ipsilesional striatum or lateral ventricle 24 hours post-MCAO/
R, there was less extensive migration to the injured sites
compared with hNSC injection into the hippocampal region [see Additional file 3: Figure S3].
Human neural stem cell transplantation reduces levels of
proinflammatory cytokines

Upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines is elicited by ischemia and reperfusion [8-11,13].
We examined the effect of hNSC transplantation on inflammation using RT-PCR. Forty-eight hours postMCAO/R and without hNSC transplantation, expression
of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β)
was upregulated in the ipsilesional hemisphere by 50.8 ±
11.77, 6.8 ± 0.6, and 8.2 ± 0.6 fold, respectively, compared
to sham animals (P <0.001; Figure 3A). By contrast,
hNSC transplantation reduced expression of these genes
(P <0.01; Figure 3A). Compared to sham animals,
MCAO/R resulted in an upregulation of expression of
the cell adhesion molecules, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, by
11.7 ± 1.7 and 3.3 ± 0.3 fold, respectively (P <0.01). However, compared to MCAO/R mice, hNSC transplantation
reduced expression of these genes by 7.9 ± 2.0 and 2.7 ±
0.3 fold, respectively (P <0.01; Figure 3A). Levels of
mRNAs encoding chemokines MCP-1 and MIP-1α, indicators of microglial/macrophage activation, also significantly increased in MCAO/R mice by 203.3 ± 27.5 and
61.8 ± 3.3 fold, compared with sham mice (P <0.001;
Figure
3B).
hNSC
transplantation
significantly

downregulated expression of both chemokines (P <0.01;
Figure 3B). These findings indicate that transplanting
hNSCs following injury decreases gene expression associated with inflammation and microglial/macrophage
activation.
Human neural stem cell transplantation ameliorates BBB
damage

Proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines that are upregulated following ischemic injury increase BBB permeability [31,32]. To determine the effect of hNSCs on
BBB permeability, we evaluated the extravasation of the
blood-borne substance IgG into the brain parenchyma.
Forty-eight hours post-MCAO/R, IgG increased in the
ipsilesional hemisphere, as indicated by increased IgG
immunostaining (Figure 4 IA), in MCAO/R brains compared to sham controls. Transplanted hNSCs reduced
IgG levels (Figure 4 IA). The percentage of the IgGpositive area within the ipsilesional hemisphere was
64.73 ± 6.51% in MCAO/R brains (P <0.001) but decreased to 44.01 ± 2.52% in hNSC-transplanted brains
(P <0.05; Figure 4 IB). BBB function was also assessed
with intravenous injection of the fluorescent tracer
Texas Red dextran (70 kDa). In the contralateral cortex,
tracer was confined to the lumen of capillaries and
showed intact vascular morphology (Figure 4 ID, a and
c). MCAO/R caused massive tracer diffusion out of the
leaky capillaries, which are shown as blurred and punctuated signals alongside the vascular segments in the ipsilateral cortex (Figure 4 ID, b). However, transplantation of
hNSCs clearly reduced this diffusion, indicating improved
BBB function (Figure 4 ID, d).
Following stroke, MMPs are upregulated in ischemic regions where they degrade the extracellular matrix, which
plays an important role in maintaining BBB integrity.
Thus, inhibiting MMPs reduces infarct size [33]. We determined the effect of hNSCs on MMP-9 and MMP-2,
proteins that participate in BBB breakdown following ischemic stroke. Western blot analysis showed that MMP-9
levels in the MCAO/R group were increased 48 hours
post-injury, compared to the sham group (P <0.001;
Figure 4 IIA and B). Yet transplanted hNSCs significantly
downregulated MMP-9 levels (P <0.001; Figure 4 IIA
and B). To validate this finding, we used gel zymography

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 9 of 16

Figure 3 Human NSC transplantation reduces proinflammatory gene expression. (A) Reduced inflammatory marker expression in the ipsilesional
hemisphere of hNSC-transplanted MCAO/R brains. Expression of inflammatory genes was measured by RT-PCR and normalized to that of GAPDH. Transcript
levels of proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, and cell adhesion molecules, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, are elevated in MCAO/R brains and downregulated
in MCAO/R + hNSC-transplanted brains compared with MCAO/R brains. **P <0.01, ***P <0.001 versus sham mice; ##P <0.01, ###P <0.001 versus MCAO/R mice.
(B) Chemokines MCP-1 and MIP-1α are dramatically elevated in the ipsilesional hemisphere 48 hours post-MCAO/R and significantly downregulated in
hNSC-transplanted brains. **P <0.01, ***P <0.001 versus sham mice; ##P <0.01, ###P <0.001 versus MCAO/R mice. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM (n = 5).
MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion; NSC, neural stem cells; SEM, standard error of the mean; Tx, transplantation.

(gelatin as a substrate) to measure MMP-9 enzymatic activity and found higher activity at 48 hours post-MCAO/
R, compared to sham controls (P <0.001; Figure 4 IIC
and D); transplanted hNSCs significantly decreased
MMP-9 activity in MCAO/R mice (P <0.001, Figure 4 IIC
and D). As to MMP-2 expression and activity, it was low
at 48 hours post-MCAO/R (consistent with previous studies by others), suggesting that at this time point MMP-2
does not play a major role in the process (Figure 4 IIC).
Tight junctions strengthen the cerebral microvascular
endothelial cell wall that defines the BBB [34]. BBB leakage
in vivo without disrupting claudin-5 and occludin networks was reported 24 hours post-MCAO [24]. However,
the tight junction protein zona occluden (ZO-1), which
links the actin cytoskeleton and transmembrane protein
occludin [35], is reportedly degraded by MMP-9 [36]. We
investigated the effect of hNSCs on ZO-1 using Western
blot analysis and found decreased ZO-1 levels in MCAO/
R mice (Figure 4 IIE and F); however, transplanted hNSCs
prevented ZO-1 degradation (P <0.01, Figure 4 IIE and F).
Our Western blot analyses showed no significant differences in the levels of claudin-5 and occludin between

groups (data not shown), suggesting that positive hNSC
effects on these protein complexes relate to maintenance
of their connection to the actin cytoskeleton.
We then asked whether transplanted hNSCs could reduce
the number of activated inflammatory cells. Immunostaining
of sham brains with the microglial/macrophage marker, Iba1 indicated the presence of resting microglia (ramified
shape) (Figure 5A). In contrast, following MCAO/R, the
number of activated inflammatory cells (Iba-1-positive and
amoeboid shape) dramatically increased throughout the infarct, compared with the sham mice (P <0.05, Figure 5B
and D). Additionally, transplanted hNSCs significantly reduced the number of Iba-1-positive activated cells (P <0.001;
Figure 5C and D). Consistent with this finding, Western blot
analysis showed reduced Iba-1 and CD11b expression (another activated microglia/macrophage marker), indicating
reduced inflammation in hNSC-engrafted brains (P <0.01,
Figure 5E-H).
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a major
neurotrophin and promotes functional recovery and
neuroprotection after stroke [37]. Thus, we analyzed and
found reduced BDNF levels in MCAO/R brains 2 days

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Figure 4 (See legend on next page.)

Page 10 of 16

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 11 of 16

(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 4 Human NSC transplantation ameliorates BBB leakage. I. (A) Representative images of IgG staining in sham, MCAO/R and MCAO/R +
hNSC-transplanted (Tx) mice showing BBB damage. Scale bar, 2 mm. (B) Quantification of IgG staining, expressed as a percentage of the volume showing
IgG-positive staining per ipsilesional hemisphere (n = 5, ***P <0.001 versus sham; #P <0.05 versus MCAO/R). (C) Brain diagram. (D) The spatial distribution of
intravenously administered Texas Red dextran 70 kDa (red) in contralateral (a, c) and ipsilateral (b, d) cortical regions of stroke mice with/without hNSC
transplantation 48 hours post-MCAO/R. Reduced extravasation was observed in hNSC-transplanted mice. Scale bar, 10 μm (10 μm, inset). II. (A) Western blot
analysis showing MMP-9 protein level in the ipsilesional cortex. (B) Quantification of A (n = 6, ***P <0.001 versus sham; ###P <0.001 versus MCAO/R). (C)
Zymography assay showing MMP-9 activity in the ipsilesional cortex. (D) Quantification of C (n = 6, ***P <0.001 versus sham; ###P <0.001 versus MCAO/R). (E)
Western blot analysis of ZO-1. (F) Quantification of E (n = 4, ***P <0.001 versus sham; ##P <0.01 versus MCAO/R). BBB, blood-brain barrier; IgG, immunoglobulin
G; MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion; MMP-9, matrix metalloproteinase-9; NSC, neural stem cells; ZO-1, zona occluden.

post-injury (Figure 6). Transplanted hNSCs increased
BDNF protein levels in the ipsilesional cortex and
hippocampus compared to equivalent regions in MCAO/R
brains (P <0.001 in cortex; P <0.01 in hippocampus,
Figure 6A and B).

Discussion
Most neurovascular diseases are complex and engage multiple processes leading to symptoms, making hNSCs promising for stroke therapy. The rodent MCAO model is
typically used for focal cerebral ischemia studies [17], although infarct progression is faster than in other species.
We explored the effects of hNSC intracranial (hippocampal) transplantation following MCAO with subsequent reperfusion (MCAO/R) in mice and found that hNSCs
transplanted 24 hours post-stroke extensively and rapidly
migrated to injured sites, intermingled with host cells, and
lessened pathophysiological symptoms 48 hours postMCAO/R. Consequently, transplanted stroke mice rapidly
recovered sensorimotor deficits.
The acute phase of transient cerebral ischemia/reperfusion involves an inflammatory response accompanying
BBB damage and leukocyte infiltration from the periphery
[38]. Initial BBB leakage concurs with brain cell death; 4
hours after reperfusion coincides with dextran extravasation post-stroke in mice [24]. These studies indicate that
to prevent ischemic brain cell death, NSC therapeutic action must take place within 4 hours of reperfusion. While
neuroinflammatory signals may recruit transplanted NSCs
to the infarct area after cerebral ischemia [19], hNSCs
transplanted within 12 hours post-MCAO have limited
migration. Therefore, we transplanted fetal hNSCs
24 hours post-MCAO/R and found rapid and extensive
cell migration into the stroke lesion.
Regarding transplantation location, we found that the
strategic area for hNSC injection is in the ipsilesional
hippocampus. Others have engrafted exogenous NSCs
into the brain post-ischemia [15,16], but these transplantations were not performed in the hippocampus. Resulting
outcomes repeatedly showed few NSCs migrating into the
stroke lesion, thus preventing fast recovery of behavioral
function. We, too, found poor hNSC migration when
hNSCs were transplanted into various locations (for example, ventricle, striatum, cortex, or infarct core). We also

claim the hippocampus as the ideal site for this type of
intervention because it is one of only two regions in the
adult mammalian brain where neurogenesis is ongoing
even under normal circumstances. Further, it is abundant
in signals for migration, proliferation, differentiation, and
integration. In contrast, the subventricular zone (SVZ),
which is the other area of ongoing adult neurogenesis,
harbors only those neural precursors (at least in the rodent) that travel solely to the olfactory bulb. Other precursors there become only glia. Furthermore, it is debatable
whether the human SVZ can give rise to neurons, whereas
it is well-established that the human hippocampus will do
so. Thus, the hippocampus has the potential to treat human conditions and provide the gateway for effective clinical intervention.
We previously reported on the anti-inflammatory role
of engrafted hNSCs in CNS disorders [2-4]. Here, we further demonstrated that transplanted hNSCs ameliorate
microvascular inflammation and BBB damage. Proinflammatory cytokines overproduced in the ischemic brain alter
endothelial cell-matrix interactions and mediate neuronal
cell death [8,9]. We showed that hNSC engraftment
downregulated expression of proinflammatory cytokines
(TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β). Endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecules (ICAM-1 and VCAM-1) mediate leukocyte rolling,
adhesion and transendothelial migration of leukocytes
[10]. These adhesion molecules are elevated post-stroke.
We now have found that transplanted hNSCs reduce expression of these factors.
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1, also
known as CCL2) can recruit monocyte lineage cells following an inflammatory stimulus and contribute to ischemic
stroke injury [11]. Macrophage inflammatory protein-1 α
(MIP-1 α) has a neutrophil chemokinetic function [13].
Thus, downregulation of MCP-1 and MIP-1α following
stroke would likely reduce transit of neutrophils and monocytes into the brain. Compatible with these findings, we
observed a decreased number of Iba-1-positive activated
myeloid cells following hNSC transplantation, compared
with nontransplanted MCAO/R brains.
MMPs, a family of zinc-binding proteolytic enzymes,
are implicated in ischemic injury. Elevated MMP-9 level
and activity correlates with BBB breakdown after stroke
[12,36]. We showed that engrafted hNSCs significantly

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 12 of 16

Figure 5 Human NSC transplantation reduces microglial activation. Immunofluorescence staining for Iba-1 (red), a microglial marker, and
Stem121, an hNSC marker, (A) sham, (B) MCAO/R, and (C) MCAO/R + hNSC engrafted mice (Insets, higher magnification). Microglial activation was
increased 48 hours post-MCAO/R, while hNSC transplantation suppressed activation by 24 hours post-transplantation (arrowhead, hNSC transplantation
site). (D) Quantification of Iba-1-positive active microglia per area (0.15 mm2) in different mouse groups (n = 4, *P <0.05, ***P <0.001 versus sham;
###
P <0.001 versus MCAO/R). (E) Western blot analysis showing the Iba-1 protein level in the ipsilesional cortex. (F) Quantification of E (n = 3, ***,
P <0.001 versus sham group; ##, P <0.01 versus MCAO/R group. (G) Western blot analysis showing the CD11b protein level in the ipsilesional cortex.
(H) Quantification of G (n = 3, ****, P <0.0001 versus sham group; ####, P <0.0001 versus MCAO/R group). Data expressed as mean ± SEM. Rectangles
indicate sampling regions. Gray region indicates infarct. MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion; NSC, neural stem cell; SEM,
standard error of the mean.

reduced the stroke-induced elevated MMP-9 level
48 hours post-MCAO/R, suggesting that hNSCs can
ameliorate BBB disruption by inhibiting the elevated

enzyme’s associated harmful events. MMP-9 induction is
linked with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)-induced
hemorrhage in stroke patients [39] and animal models

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 13 of 16

Figure 6 Human NSC transplantation increases BNDF expression in the ipsilesional hemisphere. (A) Representative Western blot showing BDNF
expression in the cortex and hippocampus. (B) Quantification of A. (n = 4; **P <0.01, ***P <0.001 versus sham; ##P <0.01, ###P <0.001 versus MCAO/R).
(C) Representative confocal photomicrographs showing BDNF (red) immunofluorescence in the ipsilesional hippocampus. DAPI staining is shown in blue
(c, d: High magnification of rectangles shown in a, b, respectively). Scale bar, 100 μm (a, b); 30 μm (c, d). (D) BDNF-positive endogenous cells (red),
Stem121-positive hNSCs (green), and BDNF-positive hNSCs, as indicated by arrow (arrow, yellow; merge). Scale bar, 30 μm. BNDF, brain-derived
neurotrophic factor; DAPI, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion with reperfusion; NSC, neural stem cell.

[40,41]. Thus, our studies showing an MMP-9 reduction
suggest that hNSC treatment could be a potential adjunct therapy following tPA treatment in the acute stage
of ischemic stroke.
The tight junctions formed by cerebral microvascular
endothelial cells define the BBB [34], and the proteins
claudin-5 and occludin are integral to tight junction
integrity. MMP-9 mediates BBB damage by degrading
tight junctions [42]. BBB leakage occurs 24 hours postMCAO despite the absence of a disrupted claudin-5 network and any reduction in occludin [24]. However,
MCAO/R does degrade the tight junction protein ZO-1,

which connects the actin cytoskeleton and transmembrane protein occludin [35]. MMP-9 reportedly degrades
ZO-1 [36], suggesting a link between MMP-9 expression
in stroke and BBB leakage. In support of this idea, we
found increased ZO-1 expression 48 hours post-MCAO/
R in hNSC-transplanted brains, signifying a potential
role for hNSCs in protecting ZO-1 from degradation.
Consistent with previous findings, our Western blot results showed no significant differences in claudin 5 or
occludin levels. Furthermore, recovery of BBB integrity
was confirmed by the much reduced extravasation of both
IgG and fluorescent dextran (injected) in hNSC-engrafted

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

brains 48 hours post-MCAO/R. Our results suggest that
engrafted hNSCs can ameliorate secondary inflammatory
brain damage by reducing cytokine production and ameliorating later phase BBB leakage. Furthermore, neurotrophins
promote functional recovery after stroke [37]. As well, we
observed significantly increased BDNF expression 24 hours
post-transplantation, suggesting that BDNF upregulation
may add a protective mechanism to this system.
Certainly, improving the physiological parameters for
transplanting hNSCs following MCAO/R is important
but improved behavior is the ultimate readout of any
stroke therapy. We found that neurological function
rapidly improved in mice 48 hours post-MCAO/R after
hNSC transplantation at 24 hours, compared with nontransplanted MCAO/R controls. Although survival of
engrafted stem cells was reduced between 3 to 5 days
post-transplantation, behavioral function recovery persisted
during the 1 month we monitored. This suggests that early
intervention (as reported here) is paramount for lasting
positive outcomes in stroke patients.
Current therapy using recombinant tPA has a less than
5 hour therapeutic window [43]. However, potential side
effects of tPA include exacerbated BBB damage through
leakage [44]. Our data show reduced pathophysiology and
behavioral deficits seen 24 hours after hNSC transplantation
(48 hours post-MCAO/R), suggesting that the therapeutic
window for hNSC-mediated protection is much longer.
Thus, the multifaceted actions attributed to hNSCs could
offer a novel adjunct therapy after tPA treatment alone or if
the window for tPA is missed.
There is a growing recognition in the stem cell field
that NSCs (and other stem cell types) have multiple actions beyond simply neuronal replacement in the CNS.
The teleological role of NSCs is not only to produce
neurons but to produce support cells that elaborate
homeostasis-promoting factors for their clonally-related
progeny (for example, trophic factors, neuroprotective
factors, and anti-inflammatory factors) [2,4-6]. In some
cases, as demonstrated here, those actions can be even
more impactful than neuronal replacement.

Page 14 of 16

Additional files
Additional file 1: Figure S1. Human NSC transplantation reduces infarct
volume. Infarct volume in MCAO/R mouse brains was measured using TTC
staining (Red, viable tissue; White, infarct). Sixty minutes of MCAO and
48-hour reperfusion induced ischemic damage in both the caudo-putamen
and cortex. Infarct volume was reduced in hNSC-transplanted mice (MCAO/
R + Tx) 24 hours post-transplantation. Sections are from the same animal
and are shown from anterior to posterior (top to bottom). A, anterior,
P, posterior. Shown are (A) sham, (B, C) MCAO/R, and (D, E) MCAO/R with
transplantation. Tx: transplantation, Scale bar, 3 mm.
Additional file 2: Figure S2. hNSC transplantation 24 hours
post-MCAO/R shows the most extensive migration into stroke lesion.
(A-C) Human NSCs were identified with the human cytoplasmic marker,
Stem121 (green), following different transplantation time points:
(A) 6 hours, (B) 12 hours, (C) 24 hours post-MCAO/R. (Insets, higher
magnification images). White arrow indicates Stem121-positive cells.
Sampling sites are shown in rectangle of diagram. Ipsi, ipsilesional;
Contra, contralesional. Scale bar, 10 μm (100 μm inset).
Additional file 3: Figure S3. hNSCs transplanted into hippocampus
24 hours post-MCAO/R migrate most extensively into stroke lesion.
(A-C) Diagrams show the distribution of NSCs 24 hours posttransplantation into the ipsilateral hippocampus, striatum, and lateral
ventricle, respectively. Green arrows indicate transplantation site. Red dots
indicate hNSC-disseminated areas. Ipsi, ipsilesional; Contra, contralesional.
(D-F) hNSCs were identified with the human cytoplasmic marker,
Stem121 (green). White arrows indicate Stem121-positive cells. The
sampling sites are shown in the inset rectangles of A-C. Insets show
higher magnification images. MCAO/R, middle cerebral artery occlusion
with subsequent reperfusion. Scale bar, 10 μm (100 μm inset). Tx,
transplantation.

Abbreviations
BBB: blood-brain barrier; BDNF: brain-derived neurotrophic factor;
BSA: bovine serum albumin; CCL2: chemokine ligand 2; CNS: central nervous
system; DAB: 3,3-diaminobenzidine; (D)MEM: (Dulbecco’s) modified Eagle’s
medium; EGF: epidermal growth factor; FGF: fibroblast growth factor;
GAPDH: glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GFAP: glial fibrillary
acidic protein; hNSCs: human neural stem cells; Iba-1: ionized
calcium-binding adapter molecule-1; ICAM-1: intercellular adhesion
molecule-1; IL-1β: interleukin-1 beta; IL-6: interleukin-6; LIF: leukemia
inhibitory factor; MCAO/R: middle cerebral artery occlusion/reperfusion;
MCP-1: monocyte chemotactic protein-1; MIP-1α: macrophage inflammatory
protein-1 alpha; MMP: matrix metalloproteinase; mNSCs: mouse neural stem
cells; PBS: phosphate-buffered saline; PFA: paraformaldehyde; rCBF: regional
cerebral blood flow; RT-PCR: reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction;
SVZ: subventricular zone; TNF-α: tumor necrosis factor-alpha; tPA: tissue
plasminogen activator; TTC: triphenyl tetrazolium chloride; VCAM-1: vascular
cell adhesion molecule-1.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Conclusions
We have shown that transplanting hNSCs into the hippocampus 24 hours post-ischemia resulted in both fast and
far-reaching migration to sites of pathology and a lessening of pathophysiological symptoms. hNSCs made quick
work of reducing inflammation in ischemic-reperfusion
cerebral injury via downregulating proinflammatory cytokines and ameliorating BBB damage. This important finding demonstrates not only the role of the NSC but its
intrinsic biological action. Here we have been able to harness that capacity for a very important clinical problem:
reperfusion injury after stroke.

Authors’ contributions
JPL conceived the study, designed experiments, analyzed and interpreted
data, and wrote and revised the manuscript and contributed financial
support; LH executed experiments, collected and assembled data, and
contributed to manuscript writing; SW contributed to Western blot analysis
and participated in manuscript writing, EYS participated in data analysis and
interpretation; MH contributed to data analysis, interpretation, manuscript
writing, and editing. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Gary Rosenberg, University of New Mexico, for his helpful
scientific discussions and Courtney Louvre and Justin Chen, Tulane
University, for technical assistance. This work was supported by startup funds
from the Tulane Center for Stem Cell Research and Regenerative Medicine.

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 15 of 16

Received: 4 May 2014 Revised: 4 November 2014
Accepted: 4 November 2014 Published: 23 November 2014
References
1. Yandava BD, Billinghurst LL, Snyder EY: “Global” cell replacement is feasible
via neural stem cell transplantation: evidence from the dysmyelinated
shiverer mouse brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999, 96:7029–7034.
2. Lee JP, Jeyakumar M, Gonzalez R, Takahashi H, Lee PJ, Baek RC, Clark D,
Rose H, Fu G, Clarke J, McKercher S, Meerloo J, Muller FJ, Park KI, Butters TD,
Dwek RA, Schwartz P, Tong G, Wenger D, Lipton SA, Seyfried TN, Platt FM,
Snyder EY: Stem cells act through multiple mechanisms to benefit mice
with neurodegenerative metabolic disease. Nat Med 2007, 13:439–447.
3. Park KI, Teng YD, Snyder EY: The injured brain interacts reciprocally with
neural stem cells supported by scaffolds to reconstitute lost tissue.
Nat Biotechnol 2002, 20:1111–1117.
4. Jeyakumar M, Lee JP, Sibson NR, Lowe JP, Stuckey DJ, Tester K, Fu G,
Newlin R, Smith DA, Snyder EY, Platt FM: Neural stem cell transplantation
benefits a monogenic neurometabolic disorder during the symptomatic
phase of disease. Stem Cells 2009, 27:2362–2370.
5. Ourednik J, Ourednik V, Lynch WP, Schachner M, Snyder EY: Neural stem
cells display an inherent mechanism for rescuing dysfunctional neurons.
Nat Biotechnol 2002, 20:1103–1110.
6. Redmond DE Jr, Bjugstad KB, Teng YD, Ourednik V, Ourednik J, Wakeman
DR, Parsons XH, Gonzalez R, Blanchard BC, Kim SU, Gu Z, Lipton SA,
Markakis EA, Roth RH, Elsworth JD, Sladek JR Jr, Sidman RL, Snyder EY:
Behavioral improvement in a primate Parkinson’s model is associated
with multiple homeostatic effects of human neural stem cells. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2007, 104:12175–12180.
7. Hacke W, Schwab S, Horn M, Spranger M, De Georgia M, von Kummer R:
‘Malignant’ middle cerebral artery territory infarction: clinical course and
prognostic signs. Arch Neurol 1996, 53:309–315.
8. Defilippi P, Silengo L, Tarone G: Alpha 6.beta 1 integrin (laminin receptor)
is down-regulated by tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-1 beta
in human endothelial cells. J Biol Chem 1992, 267:18303–18307.
9. Pettigrew LC, Kindy MS, Scheff S, Springer JE, Kryscio RJ, Li Y, Grass DS:
Focal cerebral ischemia in the TNFalpha-transgenic rat.
J Neuroinflammation 2008, 5:47.
10. Rossi B, Angiari S, Zenaro E, Budui SL, Constantin G: Vascular inflammation
in central nervous system diseases: adhesion receptors controlling
leukocyte-endothelial interactions. J Leukoc Biol 2011, 89:539–556.
11. Lu B, Rutledge BJ, Gu L, Fiorillo J, Lukacs NW, Kunkel SL, North R, Gerard C,
Rollins BJ: Abnormalities in monocyte recruitment and cytokine
expression in monocyte chemoattractant protein 1-deficient mice. J Exp
Med 1998, 187:601–608.
12. Gasche Y, Fujimura M, Morita-Fujimura Y, Copin JC, Kawase M, Massengale J,
Chan PH: Early appearance of activated matrix metalloproteinase-9 after
focal cerebral ischemia in mice: a possible role in blood-brain barrier
dysfunction. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1999, 19:1020–1028.
13. Wolpe SD, Davatelis G, Sherry B, Beutler B, Hesse DG, Nguyen HT, Moldawer LL,
Nathan CF, Lowry SF, Cerami A: Macrophages secrete a novel heparin-binding
protein with inflammatory and neutrophil chemokinetic properties. J Exp Med
1988, 167:570–581.
14. Kuroiwa T, Ting P, Martinez H, Klatzo I: The biphasic opening of the blood-brain
barrier to proteins following temporary middle cerebral artery occlusion.
Acta Neuropathol 1985, 68:122–129.
15. Darsalia V, Allison SJ, Cusulin C, Monni E, Kuzdas D, Kallur T, Lindvall O,
Kokaia Z: Cell number and timing of transplantation determine survival
of human neural stem cell grafts in stroke-damaged rat brain. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2011, 31:235–242.
16. Kelly S, Bliss TM, Shah AK, Sun GH, Ma M, Foo WC, Masel J, Yenari MA,
Weissman IL, Uchida N, Palmer T, Steinberg GK: Transplanted human fetal
neural stem cells survive, migrate, and differentiate in ischemic rat
cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004, 101:11839–11844.
17. O'Neill MJ, Clemens JA: Rodent models of focal cerebral ischemia.
Curr Protoc Neurosci 2001, Chapter 9: Unit 9.6. doi:10.1002/0471142301.
ns0906s12.
18. Clark WM, Lessov NS, Dixon MP, Eckenstein F: Monofilament intraluminal
middle cerebral artery occlusion in the mouse. Neurol Res 1997,
19:641–648.
19. Imitola J, Raddassi K, Park KI, Mueller FJ, Nieto M, Teng YD, Frenkel D, Li J,
Sidman RL, Walsh CA, Snyder EY, Khoury SJ: Directed migration of neural

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.
32.

33.

34.
35.

36.

37.

38.
39.

40.

41.

stem cells to sites of CNS injury by the stromal cell-derived factor
1alpha/CXC chemokine receptor 4 pathway. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2004, 101:18117–18122.
Bouet V, Boulouard M, Toutain J, Divoux D, Bernaudin M, Schumann-Bard P,
Freret T: The adhesive removal test: a sensitive method to assess
sensorimotor deficits in mice. Nat Protoc 2009, 4:1560–1564.
Hamm RJ, Pike BR, Odell DM, Lyeth BG, Jenkins LW: The rotarod test - an
evaluation of its effectiveness in assessing motor deficits following
traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma 1994, 11:187–196.
Tureyen K, Vemuganti R, Sailor KA, Dempsey RJ: Infarct volume quantification in
mouse focal cerebral ischemia: a comparison of triphenyltetrazolium chloride
and cresyl violet staining techniques. J Neurosci Methods 2004, 139:203–207.
Tanno H, Nockels RP, Pitts LH, Noble LJ: Breakdown of the blood-brain
barrier after fluid percussive brain injury in the rat. Part 1: distribution
and time course of protein extravasation. J Neurotrauma 1992, 9:21–32.
Kuntz M, Mysiorek C, Petrault O, Petrault M, Uzbekov R, Bordet R, Fenart L,
Cecchelli R, Berezowski V: Stroke-induced brain parenchymal injury drives
blood-brain barrier early leakage kinetics: a combined in vivo/in vitro
study. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2014, 34:95–107.
Hu X, Beeton C: Detection of functional matrix metalloproteinases by
zymography. J Vis Exp 2010, doi:10.3791/2445.
Hunter AJ, Hatcher J, Virley D, Nelson P, Irving E, Hadingham SJ, Parsons AA:
Functional assessments in mice and rats after focal stroke.
Neuropharmacology 2000, 39:806–816.
Virley D, Beech JS, Smart SC, Williams SC, Hodges H, Hunter AJ: A temporal
MRI assessment of neuropathology after transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion in the rat: correlations with behavior. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2000, 20:563–582.
Quinn LP, Perren MJ, Brackenborough KT, Woodhams PL, Vidgeon-Hart M,
Chapman H, Pangalos MN, Upton N, Virley DJ: A beam-walking apparatus
to assess behavioural impairments in MPTP-treated mice: pharmacological
validation with R-(-)-deprenyl. J Neurosci Methods 2007, 164:43–49.
Cartwright P, McLean C, Sheppard A, Rivett D, Jones K, Dalton S: LIF/STAT3
controls ES cell self-renewal and pluripotency by a Myc-dependent
mechanism. Development 2005, 132:885–896.
Nagasawa H, Kogure K: Correlation between cerebral blood flow and
histologic changes in a new rat model of middle cerebral artery
occlusion. Stroke 1989, 20:1037–1043.
Carmichael ST: Gene expression changes after focal stroke, traumatic
brain and spinal cord injuries. Curr Opin Neurol 2003, 16:699–704.
Barone FC, Feuerstein GZ: Inflammatory mediators and stroke: new
opportunities for novel therapeutics. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1999,
19:819–834.
Romanic AM, White RF, Arleth AJ, Ohlstein EH, Barone FC: Matrix
metalloproteinase expression increases after cerebral focal ischemia in
rats: inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase-9 reduces infarct size.
Stroke 1998, 29:1020–1030.
Risau W, Wolburg H: Development of the blood-brain barrier.
Trends Neurosci 1990, 13:174–178.
Fanning AS, Jameson BJ, Jesaitis LA, Anderson JM: The tight junction
protein ZO-1 establishes a link between the transmembrane protein
occludin and the actin cytoskeleton. J Biol Chem 1998, 273:29745–29753.
Asahi M, Wang XY, Mori T, Sumii T, Jung JC, Moskowitz MA, Fini ME, Lo EH:
Effects of matrix metalloproteinase-9 gene knock-out on the proteolysis
of blood-brain barrier and white matter components after cerebral
ischemia. J Neurosci 2001, 21:7724–7732.
Emanueli C, Schratzberger P, Kirchmair R, Madeddu P: Paracrine control of
vascularization and neurogenesis by neurotrophins. Br J Pharmacol 2003,
140:614–619.
Jin R, Yang G, Li G: Inflammatory mechanisms in ischemic stroke: role of
inflammatory cells. J Leukoc Biol 2010, 87:779–789.
Castellanos M, Leira R, Serena J, Pumar JM, Lizasoain I, Castillo J, Davalos A:
Plasma metalloproteinase-9 concentration predicts hemorrhagic
transformation in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 2003, 34:40–46.
Wang X, Lee SR, Arai K, Lee SR, Tsuji K, Rebeck GW, Lo EH: Lipoprotein
receptor-mediated induction of matrix metalloproteinase by tissue
plasminogen activator. Nat Med 2003, 9:1313–1317.
Mishiro K, Ishiguro M, Suzuki Y, Tsuruma K, Shimazawa M, Hara H: A
broad-spectrum matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor prevents hemorrhagic
complications induced by tissue plasminogen activator in mice.
Neuroscience 2012, 205:39–48.

Huang et al. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014, 5:129
http://stemcellres.com/content/5/6/129

Page 16 of 16

42. Rosell A, Lo EH: Multiphasic roles for matrix metalloproteinases after
stroke. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2008, 8:82–89.
43. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. The National
Institute of Neurological isorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study Group.
N Engl J Med 1995, 333:1581–1587.
44. Yepes M, Yepes M, Sandkvist M, Moore EG, Bugge TH, Strickland DK,
Lawrence DA: Tissue-type plasminogen activator induces opening of the
blood-brain barrier via the LDL receptor-related protein. J Clin Invest
2003, 112:1533–1540.
doi:10.1186/scrt519
Cite this article as: Huang et al.: Human neural stem cells rapidly
ameliorate symptomatic inflammation in early-stage ischemic-reperfusion
cerebral injury. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2014 5:129.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

