European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; volume 57:e38

1

J. Pelz, W. Härtig, C. Weise,
C. Hobohm,1 D. Schneider,1 M. Krueger,3
J. Kacza,4 D. Michalski1
1

N
on

-c

al

ci

om

While the concept of the Neurovascular Unit
(NVU) is increasingly considered for exploring
mechanisms of tissue damage in ischemic
stroke, immunohistochemical analyses are of
interest to specifically visualize constituents
like the endothelium. Changes in immunoreactivity have also been discussed to reflect functional aspects, e.g., the integrity of the bloodbrain barrier (BBB). This study aimed to characterize the endothelial barrier antigen (EBA)
as addressed by the antibody SMI-71 in a rat
model of embolic stroke, considering FITC-albumin as BBB leakage marker and serum levels of
BBB-associated matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) to explore its functional significance.
Five and 25 h after ischemia onset, regions with
decreased BBB integrity exhibited a reduction
in number and area of EBA-immunopositive
vessels, while the stained area per vessel was
not affected. Surprisingly, EBA content of
remaining vessels tended to be increased in
areas of BBB dysfunction. Analyses addressing
this interrelation resulted in a significant and
inverse correlation between the vessels’ EBA
content and degree of BBB permeability. In conclusion, these data provide evidence for a functional relationship between EBA-immunoreactivity and BBB dysfunction in experimental
ischemic stroke. Further studies are required to
explore the underlying mechanisms of altered
EBA-immunoreactivity, which might help to
identify novel neuroprotective strategies.

er

Abstract

us

e

Department of Neurology, University of
Leipzig
2
Paul Flechsig Institute for Brain
Research, University of Leipzig
3
Institute of Anatomy, University of
Leipzig
4Institute of Anatomy, Histology and
Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Leipzig, Germany

Correspondence: Dr. Dominik Michalski,
University of Leipzig, Department of Neurology,
Liebigstr. 20, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
Tel. +49.341.9724206 - Fax: +49.341.9724199.
E-mail: dominik.michalski@medizin.uni-leipzig.de
Keywords: ischemic stroke, embolic model, EBA,
blood-brain barrier, matrix metalloproteinase.
Acknowledgments: the authors would like to
thank Dr. Johannes Boltze (Fraunhofer Institute
for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Leipzig, and
Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Leipzig, Germany) for assistance in
planning the animal experiments. Further, Dr.
Fink Madaj-Sterba and Ms. Sigrid Weisheit
(Medizinisch-Experimentelles Zentrum, University of Leipzig) are acknowledged for animal
care, Dr. Manja Kamprad (Institute of Clinical
Immunology and Transfusion Medicine,
University of Leipzig) for initial quantification on
MMP serum levels, and Ms. Ute Bauer (Paul
Flechsig Institute for Brain Research, University
of Leipzig) for supporting tissue preparation.

ly

2

As consequence of numerous neuroprotective failures in acute ischemic stroke,1 the perspective of tissue damage shifted from the initial neurocentric to an extended view considering the vasculature as an essential component
of the so-called Neurovascular Unit (NVU).2-4
The NVU including endothelial and associated
cells like neurons and glia also forms the bloodbrain barrier (BBB),5-7 which critically impacts
on local homeostasis and ischemia-related complications like edema generation and hemorrhagic transformation.8 However, to gain further insight into the functional role of NVU constituents, their reliable visualization under
experimental conditions is required and largely
based on specific markers allowing the simultaneous detection of multiple vascular compartments. In this context, antibodies directed
against the endothelial barrier antigen (EBA)
have frequently been applied to address the
cerebral endothelium in rodents also under
pathological conditions like ischemic stroke,9-12
intracerebral hemorrhage,13 experimental allergic encephalomyelitis,14 traumatic brain
injury,15 and spinal cord trauma.16 Initially
described in 1987 by Sternberger and
Sternberger,17 anti-EBA is a monoclonal mouse
antibody of the immunoglobulin M (IgM) class,
that binds to the luminal side of cerebral
endothelial cells. The name EBA was chosen
due to the assumption that antigen reactivity is
associated with parts of the cerebral vasculature
exhibiting a selective permeability barrier,
since EBA-immunoreactivity in the rat brain
was found to be absent or diminished in regions
with naturally restricted BBB integrity like the
area postrema and the choroid plexus.17
Subsequently, EBA was also detected in
endothelial cells in the reproductive tract of
male rats, probably as a part of the blood-testis
barrier.18 However, the distribution of EBA
varies strongly in the CNS with a mixture of
EBA-immunopositive and -immunonegative
cells in pial vessels,19 a complete lack of EBA in
cerebral arterioles and a mosaic pattern in capillaries and venules.20 Notably, previous studies
demonstrated that cerebral areas with reduced
EBA-positive vessels provide increased BBBpermeability for endogenous albumin and
IgG,13,21,22 leading to the hypothesis that EBAimmunoreactivity might represent a potential
tool to explore functional characteristics of the
NVU with a special focus on BBB integrity.
However, this perspective has so far not been
investigated under ischemic conditions,
although such a feature might notably complement further research while covering ischemiarelated consequences in more detail.
The present study therefore aimed to charac-

m

1

Introduction

on

Endothelial barrier antigenimmunoreactivity is conversely
associated with blood-brain
barrier dysfunction after
embolic stroke in rats

Contributions: DM, CH, WH, conceived the
underlying study setup; DS, facilitated funding;
DM, CW, conducted animal experiments; JP, WH,
performed tissue preparation and serial staining;
JP, JK, developed strategy for quantitative analyses; MK, performed additional imaging analyses;
JP, analyzed the data; JP, DM, wrote the manuscript; WH, JK, manuscript critical revisions.
Conflict of interests: the authors declare no conflict of interests.
Received for publication: 25 May 2013.
Accepted for publication: 18 October 2013.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution NonCommercial 3.0 License (CC BYNC 3.0).
©Copyright J. Pelz et al., 2013
Licensee PAGEPress, Italy
European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38
doi:10.4081/ejh.2013.e38

terize EBA in a descriptive and functional fashion using an embolic model of focal cerebral
ischemia in rats. For this purpose, EBAimmunoreactivity was analyzed to identify the
spatio-temporal pattern in ischemia-affected
areas exhibiting increased BBB permeability as
identified by leakage of intravenously applied
fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-albumin.
Moreover, relationships between different
aspects of EBA-immunoreactivity and BBB permeability as well as matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), known to promote disintegration of
the BBB during stroke, 8,23 were analyzed by correlation coefficients to further explore the functional significance of EBA under ischemic conditions.

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

[page 255]

Original Paper

-c

N
on

Experimental induction of focal
cerebral ischemia and sham
procedure
Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by an
embolic model originally described by Zhang et
al.,25 with some minor modifications as previously reported.24 Briefly, animals were anaesthetized breathing 2.0-2.5% isoflurane in a
mixture of 70% N2O and 30% O2. During the
surgical procedure the body temperature was
adjusted to 37°C using a warming pad with a
rectal probe (Fine Science Tools, Heidelberg,
Germany). After preparation of left femoral
[page 256]

Fluorescence-based measurements were
done by a blinded investigator using an
Axioplan 2 microscope (Zeiss) with a structured-light confocal system (OptiGrid; Qioptiq,
Fairport, NY, USA) and a digital camera (ORCAER; Hamamatsu, Hamamatsu City, Japan).
Applying a 10x magnification, brain sections
were first scanned for regions with clear
extravascular green fluorescence signal in
terms of FITC-albumin leakage arising from the
inner part of the vessels indicating increased
BBB permeability. Within those regions, 2
microscopic fields (each covering an area of
about 0.55 mm2) were digitized and the total
number as well as the stained area of EBAimmunopositive vessels vessels were assessed
automatically using the imaging software
Volocity 4.3.2 (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA,
USA). Criteria to identify a vessel were a length
of at least 12 µm and an area of at least 100 µm².
Thereby, the following settings were applied:
Find objects by intensity and exclude objects by
size (<100 µm²), while the overall technical
standard was a 10x magnification with numerical aperture 0.3. Further settings were:
Immersion medium air, exposure time 400 ms,
gain 0, offset 0, binning 1, grid wide field, Cy2:
excitation 480 nm, emission 527 nm, Cy3: excitation 545 nm and emission 610 nm. The
stained area per vessel was obtained by dividing
the area of vessels by their total number. To
obtain intensity of the EBA-immunofluorescence signal per µm² vessel area, representing
the vessels’ EBA content, the total fluorescence
intensity of the microscopic field was measured
by Volocity 4.3.2 and manually corrected for the
surprisingly low background staining. Finally,
the background-corrected intensity of the EBAimmunofluorescence signal was divided by the
previously obtained vessel area. For control
issues on the ischemia-affected hemisphere,
number and area of EBA-immunopositive vessels, area per vessel and the intensity of the
EBA-immunofluorescence signal per µm2 vessel
area were also measured in the hippocampus.
Due to the nature of embolic stroke with varying
infarct degrees and locations between animals,26 we also analyzed corresponding regions
of the contralateral (non-ischemic) hemisphere, allowing the calculation of a ratio
between the ischemic and non-ischemic hemispheres for vessels’ EBA content, finally
enabling intergroup comparison. In sections
from sham-processed animals devoid of FITCalbumin leakage, 4 microscopic fields in both
hemispheres (each 0.55 mm²), covering hypothalamus, striatum, parietal cortex and hippocampus, were analyzed as described above.
For illustration of data, high-resolution images
were taken from selected sections using the
confocal laser-scanning microscopes 510

ci

al

us

e

on

A first series of brain sections was washed 3
times for 10 min with TBS before being rinsed
with distilled water, mounted on fluorescencefree glass slides, air-dried and coverslipped with
Entellan in toluene (Merck, Darmstadt,
Germany). Afterwards, sections were screened
using a fluorescence microscope (Axioplan;
Zeiss, Germany) to identify regions with
increased BBB permeability indicated by green
fluorescence of extravasated FITC-albumin.
Preceding brain sections were then applied to
indirect red fluorescent Cy (carbocyanine) 3
staining of EBA-immunoreactivity and concomitant enhancement of FITC-albumin fluorescence. In detail, brain sections were washed 3
times for 10 min each with TBS before being
blocked for 1 hour with TBS containing 5% normal donkey serum and 0.3% Triton X-100 (TBSNDS-T) followed by an overnight incubation
with SMI-71, an IgM mouse monoclonal antibody directed against EBA (1:400 in TBS-NDS-T;
Covance, Emeryville, CA, USA). After further 3
washings with TBS for 10 min each, a cocktail
was added for 1 h containing Cy2-anti-FITC-IgG
(20 µg/mL TBS-BSA; Dianova, Hamburg,
Germany), for enhancement and long-term stabilization of the green fluorescent signal of
FITC-albumin, and Cy3-donkey-anti-mouse-IgM
(20 µg/mL TBS-BSA; Dianova) visualizing SMI71.
In additional experiments, selected brain
sections from animals that underwent middle
cerebral artery occlusion and injection of FITCalbumin were blocked with TBS-NDS-T for 1 h
and then incubated overnight with a mixture
of two endothelial markers, biotinylated
Solanum tuberosum agglutinin (20 µg/mL
TBS-NDS-T; Vector, Burlingame, CA, USA) and
SMI-71 (1:200). Next, the sections were rinsed
with TBS and processed with a cocktail composed of Cy5-streptavidin (Dianova), Cy2-antiFITC-IgG and Cy3-donkey-anti-mouse-IgM (all
at 20 µg/mL TBS-BSA) for 1 h. Finally, brain
sections were washed, mounted, air-dried and
coverslipped as described above.

Quantification of EBA-immunoreactivity

ly

Immunofluorescence labeling
of EBA and enhancement
of FITC-albumin

om

Seventeen male Wistar rats (mean body
weight 324 g), provided by Charles River
(Sulzfeld, Germany), underwent embolic middle cerebral artery occlusion as described
below and were consecutively assigned to an
observation period of 5 or 25 h, respectively.
Premature death occurred in one animal,
resulting in a total of 16 animals (8 in each
group) that finished the study addressing spatio-temporal characteristics of EBA-immunoreactivity. In control experiments, 4 rats (mean
body weight 358 g) underwent sham-operation, while additional 2 rats suffering from
embolic middle cerebral artery occlusion
(mean body weight 322 g) were used for triple
fluorescence labeling of vascular constituents.
For visualizing ischemia-associated changes
in BBB integrity, 4 or 24 h after ischemia onset
FITC-albumin (molecular weight about 70 kDa;
20 mg dissolved in 1 mL saline; Sigma,
Taufkirchen, Germany), usually not crossing
the BBB under physiological conditions, 24 was
applied intravenously via a femoral catheter.
After an additional 1-hour circulation period
animals were sacrificed and blood was sampled for measuring serum levels of MMPs, followed by transcardial perfusion with a fixative
containing 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Next, brains
were removed from the skulls and immersed in
the same fixative for 24 hours before their
equilibration in 30% phosphate-buffered
sucrose. Free-floating 30 µm thick coronal sections from the entire forebrain, stored in 0.1 M
Tris-buffered saline, pH 7.4 (TBS), containing
sodium azide, served for subsequent histological analyses. The experimental protocol involving animals was approved by local authorities
(Regierungspräsidium Leipzig, reference
numbers TVV-02/09 and TVV-34/11). Care and
treatment of animals conformed to the standards of the European Communities Council
Directive (86/609/EEC).

er

Study design and tissue preparation

vessels and catheter insertion, a tissue-conserving preparation of right cervical vessels
was performed. Afterwards, a pointed PE-50
catheter was inserted into the right external
carotid artery and advanced into the distal
internal carotid artery where a blood clot with
a length of approximately 45 mm was released.
Finally, the catheter was removed and the
stump of the external carotid artery ligated.
The sham-procedure was performed in analogous manner, except of catheter insertion into
cervical vessels and thus without clot release.

m

Materials and Methods

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

Original Paper

Sham-proceeded animals showed no differences in number of EBA-immunopositive vessels, stained area of vessels and area per vessel between both hemispheres (data not
shown). Compared to corresponding regions
in the non-affected hemisphere, 5 h after
ischemia onset the number of EBAimmunopositive vessels was significantly
reduced in the area of decreased BBB integrity as indicated by FITC-albumin leakage
(Wilcoxon, P=0.02; overview in Table 1), while
stained vessel area provided the same tendency, scarcely missing statistical significance
(Wilcoxon, P=0.09). Similar findings were
obtained at 25 h after ischemia onset with a
significant decrease in the stained area of ves-

-c
N
on

Results

EBA-immunoreactivity after experimental ischemic stroke
In sham-processed animals devoid of focal
cerebral ischemia, anti-EBA reliably detected

sels (Wilcoxon, P=0.04) and a reduction in
number of EBA-immunopositive vessels
(Wilcoxon, P=0.05), simultaneously occurring
with FITC-albumin leakage (Figure 2).
Surprisingly, the stained area per vessel did
not change at both time points (Wilcoxon, 5 h:
P=0.12; 25 h: P=0.35).
Additionally, at both time points no significant changes in number of EBA-immunopositive vessels, stained vessel area or area per
vessel were found between the ipsi- and contralateral hippocampus (Wilcoxon, P>0.05
each).

Vessels’ EBA content in regions
with BBB dysfunction

ly

Five and 25 h after ischemia onset, intensity of EBA-immunofluorescence signal per µm²
vessel area as surrogate for vessels’ EBA content tended to be increased in areas with FITCalbumin leakage compared to corresponding
regions on the non-affected hemisphere, however, failing statistical significance (Wilcoxon,
P=0.12 and P=0.17). Even clearer in the hippocampus, no significant change in vessels’
EBA content was found at both time points
(Wilcoxon, P>0.05 each). Concerning the general time course, regions with decreased BBB
integrity exhibited a slightly increased EBAimmunofluorescence signal per µm2 vessel
area towards the 25 h time point, which, however, failed statistically significance when
compared to 5 h (t-test, P=0.58).

on

e

us

Diverse aspects of EBA-immunoreactivity in regions with decreased
BBB integrity

om

Calculations were performed with SPSS version 20.0 (IBM Corp.; New York, NY, USA). The
Wilcoxon test was utilized to check for statistical significance between values of the
ischemic vs the non-ischemic hemisphere at a
single time point. For inter-group comparisons
at different time points the t-test was used. To
explore interrelations between assessed variables, partial correlations, controlled for observation time, were applied. In general, a P<0.05
was considered as statistically significant.

al

Statistical analysis

ci

Quantification of BBB permeability in
ischemia-affected brain regions using FITCalbumin as leakage marker as well as acquisition of MMP-2 and MMP-9 serum levels were
described previously.27 The resulting ratio of
extra-/intravascular Cy2-enhanced FITC-albumin as surrogate for BBB integrity as well as
MMP serum levels were utilized for calculations in the present study.

er

Quantification of BBB integrity and
measurement of BBB-related
serum markers

cerebral vessels in neocortical and subcortical
regions except of the circumventricular
organs, e.g., the choroid plexus and some pial
vessels showing an incomplete staining.
Compared to the neocortex and striatum, the
number of EBA-immunopositive vessels
appeared to be symmetrically reduced in the
hippocampus.
To ensure the specificity of endothelial EBAimmunolabeling in ischemia-affected brain
regions, triple fluorescence labeling was
applied resulting in nearly complete congruence of EBA-immunoreactivity and the
endothelium as visualized by Solanum tuberosum lectin (STL), confirmed by FITC-albumin
that remained intravascularly (Figure 1A). In
contrast to the surrounding tissue with regular
BBB integrity and to the non-affected contralateral hemisphere, vessel-associated EBAimmunoreactivity was found to be rarefied in
areas with ischemia-related BBB dysfunction,
indicated by FITC-albumin leakage (Figure
1B). Apart from the striatum as primary region
of ischemia, this feature was also seen in the
neocortex if affected by ischemia. A remarkably weak background staining in all animals,
facilitated quantitative analyses of the red fluorescence signal.

m

(Meta) or 700 (both from Zeiss) as well as an
Olympus BX51 microscope equipped with an
XM10 digital camera (Olympus, Hamburg,
Germany). In addition, a coronal brain section
was scanned using a photo scanner (2.000 dpi;
ScanMaker 9800 XL; Microtek, Willich,
Germany). Original images were generally
processed with CorelDraw/ Photo-Paint version
12.0 (Corel Corp., Ottawa, Canada); if indicated,
brightness, contrast or intensity were slightly
adjusted without creating or deleting signals.

Interrelations among number of
EBA-immunopositive vessels,
stained vessel area, vessels’ EBA
content and degree of BBB dysfunction
As previously described, in the applied
model of focal cerebral ischemia affected brain
regions displayed a decreased tendency of the
extra-/intravascular FITC-albumin ratio as surrogate for BBB dysfunction between 5 and 25 h
after ischemia onset, indicating an increase in
BBB integrity in the early phase of stroke.27
However, in areas with increased BBB perme-

Table 1. Parameters of endothelial barrier antigen (EBA)-immunoreactivity in the rat brain affected by focal cerebral ischemia.
Number of
EBA-immunopositive
vessels
5h
25 h

Area with BBB dysfunction
Hippocampus

↓
(0.02)
=

↓
(0.05)
=

Stained vessel
area
5h

↓
(0.09)
=

25 h

↓
(0.04)
=

Area per vessel
5h

25 h

=
=

=
=

Intensity of
EBA-immunosignal /
µm2 vessel area
5h
25 h
↑
(0.12)
=

↑
(0.17)
=

EBA, endothelial barrier antigen; BBB, blood-brain barrier. Arrows indicate an increased (↑ ), decreased (↓ ), or equal (=) reaction of listed parameters in regions of ischemia-related BBB dysfunction compared to the contralateral (non-affected) hemisphere. P-values originating from the Wilcoxon test are shown in brackets.

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

[page 257]

Original Paper

inverse manner with the ratio of extra-/intravascular FITC-albumin in regions of increased BBB
permeability (r= –0.68, P=0.02; r=0.60 P=0.05;
Figure 3). No correlation was found between
intensity of either EBA-immunosignal per µm²
vessel area or ratio of vessels’ EBA content and
serum levels of both MMP-2 and -9 (MMP-2: r=
–0.03, P=0.91; r= –0.2, P=0.52; MMP-9: r=
–0.02, P=0.95; r= –0.11, P=0.72).

Discussion
Following previous investigations, regular
establishment of EBA has been considered to
be associated with an intact cerebral vasculature as well as unaltered BBB integrity,13,17,21,22
although clear evidence for such a functional
perspective is still missing, especially under

N
on

-c

om

m

er

ci

al

us

e

on

ly

ability no significant correlation (corrected for
time points) was found between the number or
area of EBA-immunopositive vessels and the
ratio of extra-/intravascular FITC-albumin
(r=0.22, P=0.47; r=0.05, P=0.87).
When further corrected for serum levels of
MMP-2 and -9, the ratio of vessels’ EBA content
and the intensity of EBA-immunofluorescence
signal per µm2 vessel area correlated in an

Figure 1. Characteristics of endothelial barrier antigen (EBA)-immunoreactivity associated with ischemia-related decrease in bloodbrain barrier (BBB) integrity, shown in representative coronal rat brain sections within 25 h after embolic stroke. Triple fluorescence
labeling of EBA (A) and Solanum tuberosum lectin (STL;A’) as endothelial markers, as well as fluorescein isothiocyanate FITC-albumin (A’’) as indicator for impaired BBB integrity revealed a clear allocation in the overlay (A’’’), validating EBA as part of the vasculature in ischemia-affected brain areas. Detection of extravasated fluorescein FITC-albumin, enhanced by carbocyanine (Cy)2-anti-FITCIgG, marked the area with increased BBB permeability (left part in B). Cy3-immunolabeling of EBA using the SMI-71 antibody resulted in a clearly cut differentiation between the intact appearing vasculature in regions devoid of ischemia (right part in B’) and affected
vasculature in subcortical ischemic areas (left part in B’), which became obvious by an opposite immunosignal in the merged composition (B’’). Scale bars: A,A’,A’’,A’’’, 30 µm; B,B’,B’’, 200 µm.

[page 258]

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

Original Paper

et al.11 the stained area per vessel did not
change significantly at both time points investigated, probably indicating a lack of vessel
fragmentation. This discrepancy might be
attributed to several reasons, e.g., differing
stroke models (embolic vs filament-based) and
localization of measurement (associated with
impaired BBB vs infarcted area itself). Indeed,
Michalski et al.24 could show that the applied
model of embolic stroke in rats leads to FITCalbumin leakage that is restricted to ischemiaaffected areas, but vice versa loss of neurons
could naturally exceed the area of increased
BBB-permeability. Mismatch between previous
immunohistochemical studies9-12,28 might also

result from considerably differing staining
methods, e.g., SMI-71 was utilized in dilutions
ranging from 1:10028 to 1:200010 for
immunoperoxidase labeling with diaminobenzidine as chromogen.
So far, a loss of EBA-immunopositive vessels
has predominantly been interpreted as a loss
of EBA-immunoreactivity linked to an increase
in BBB permeability,13,21,22 but specific data on
the functional role in focal cerebral ischemia
are lacking, especially whether reduced EBAimmunolabeling is the cause or the consequence of BBB dysfunction. Bhattacharjee et
al. showed that papaverine, when applied in
vivo, resulted in an opening of the BBB as

m

er

ci

al

us

e

on

ly

ischemic conditions. To the best of our knowledge, the present study for the first time provides descriptive details and spatio-temporal
characteristics of EBA-immunoreactivity in
brain regions with decreased BBB integrity
due to focal cerebral ischemia using an embolic model of stroke in rats.
Five and 25 h after ischemia induction, both
number of EBA-immunopositive vessels and
stained area of vessels were reduced in
regions with increased BBB permeability. At
first glance, these findings confirm previous
reports about a decrease of EBA-immunopositive vessels under ischemic conditions,10,11,12
but contrary to Lin and Ginsberg10 as well as Lu

N
on

-c

om

Figure 2. Representative overview scan from a coronal rat brain section 25 h after embolic stroke (center). Lateral inserts indicate cerebral vessels immunolabeled with anti-endothelial barrier antigen (EBA) on the ischemia-affected hemisphere (A,B,C) and the nonaffected hemisphere (J,K,L), while fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-albumin, enhanced by carbocyanine (Cy)2-anti-FITC-IgG, indicated increased vascular permeability in terms of leakage (D, E and F on the ischemic vs G, H and I on the contralateral hemisphere).
Generally, different parameters of EBA-immunolabeled structures in the striatum (middle inserts) as primarily affected area in the
applied model of focal cerebral ischemia, as well as the hypothalamus (lower inserts), which was also involved in several cases, while
the hippocampus (upper insets) with apparently intact blood-brain barrier served as control. Scale bars: A-L, 100 µm.

Figure 3. Scatter plots indicating interrelations between the ratio of extra-/intravascular fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-albumin as
surrogate for blood-brain barrier integrity and the ratio of the vessels’ endothelial barrier antigen (EBA) content between the ischemic
and non-ischemic hemisphere (A), as well as the vessels’ EBA content (B).

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

[page 259]

Original Paper

6.

7.

8.

ly

9.

11.

er

ci

al

us

e

10.

12.

m

-c

N
on

[page 260]

5.

the vascular pathophysiology of ischemic
stroke. Thromb Res 2000;98:73-81.
Ballabh P, Braun A, Nedergaard M. The
blood-brain barrier: an overview.
Structure, regulation, and clinical implications. Neurobiol Dis 2004;16:1-13.
Bechmann I, Galea I, Perry VH. What is the
blood-brain barrier (not)? Trends
Immunol 2007;28:5-11.
Iadecola C, Nedergaard M. Glial regulation
of the cerebral microvasculature. Nat
Neurosci 2007;10:1369-76.
Sandoval KE, Witt KA. Blood-brain barrier
tight junction permeability and ischemic
stroke. Neurobiol Dis 2008;32:200-19.
Nishigaya K, Yagi S, Sato T, Kanemaru K,
Nukui H. Impairment and restoration of
the endothelial blood-brain barrier in the
rat cerebral infarction model assessed by
expression of endothelial barrier antigen
immunoreactivity. Acta Neuropathol 2000;
99:231-7.
Lin B, Ginsberg MD. Quantitative assessment of the normal cerebral microvasculature by endothelial barrier antigen (EBA)
immunohistochemistry:application
to
focal cerebral ischemia. Brain Res 2000;
865:237-44.
Lu A, Clark JF, Broderick JP, PyneGeithman GJ, Wagner KR, Ran R, et al.
Reperfusion activates metalloproteinases
that contribute to neurovascular injury.
Exp Neurol 2008;210:549-59.
Suofu Y, Clark J, Broderick J, Wagner KR,
Tomsick T, Sa Y, et al. Peroxynitrite decomposition catalyst prevents matrix metalloproteinase activation and neurovascular
injury after prolonged cerebral ischemia in
rats. J Neurochem 2010;115:1266-76.
Katsu M, Niizuma K, Yoshioka H, Okami
N, Sakata H, Chan PH. Hemoglobininduced oxidative stress contributes to
matrix metalloproteinase activation and
blood-brain barrier dysfunction in vivo. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010;30:1939-50.
Sternberger NH, Sternberger LA, Kies MW,
Shear CR. Cell surface endothelial proteins altered in experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis. J Neuroimmunol 1989;
21:241-8.
Lin B, Ginsberg MD, Zhao W, Alonso OF,
Belayev L, Busto R. Quantitative analysis
of microvascular alterations in traumatic
brain injury by endothelial barrier antigen
immunohistochemistry. J Neurotrauma
2001;18:389-97.
Perdiki M, Farooque M, Holtz A, Li GL,
Olsson Y. Expression of endothelial barrier
antigen immunoreactivity in blood vessels
following compression trauma to rat spinal
cord. Temporal evolution and relation to
the degree of the impact. Acta Neuropathol
1998;96:8-12.

on

icant correlation between the total number or
area of EBA-immunopositive vessels in
regions with decreased BBB integrity and the
degree of BBB dysfunction itself.
Concerning the time course of BBB dysfunction after ischemic stroke, currently 2 hypotheses exist: the monophasic model postulates a
continuous opening of the BBB beginning as
early as 25 min after ischemia induction,32,33
while the widely accepted biphasic model
describes a first rise in BBB permeability at 3
to 6 h after ischemia onset, followed by a second opening at 24 to 72 h.34-36 Thereby, the
biphasic opening is thought to be attributed,
amongst others, to a temporally differing
release of enzymes degrading components of
the NVU, notably MMPs.37,38 However, the
underlying cause for BBB stabilization
between the first and the second opening is
still unclear,8 since degrading effects of initially released enzymes would probably continue
between these time points.23 Considering EBA,
the findings of the present study lead to the
hypothesis that a pathological stimulus like
stroke results in an upregulation of EBA in
membranes of still viable cerebral endothelial
cells. This increase in vessels’ EBA content
might be a cause for observed amelioration of
BBB dysfunction between the first and the second phase of opening. The transient stabilization of the BBB would also require the involvement of proteins that are not affected by proteases like MMPs. In line with this assumption, no significant correlation was found
between the vessels’ EBA content and serum
levels of MMPs, excluding at least direct effects
of MMPs 2 and 9 on EBA.
In summary, our data provide evidence for a
functional relationship between EBAimmunoreactivity and BBB dysfunction in a rat
model of ischemic stroke, whereas its upregulation is accompanied by an amelioration of
BBB dysfunction. Hence, further research is
required to clarify the underlying mechanisms
of observed dynamics in EBA-immunoreactivity, which might help to identify novel neuroprotective approaches in stroke.

om

early as 1 h after injection, whilst an ongoing
reduction of EBA-immunopositive vessels was
not seen until 3 h and an increase of MMP-9
did not occur until 24 h.28 On the other hand,
Ghabriel et al. demonstrated that administering anti-EBA in vivo led to a widespread, dosedependent and monophasic opening of the
BBB with extravasation of horseradish peroxidase into brain parenchyma.18,29,30
In the present study, indirect red fluorescent
Cy3-immunolabeling allowed quantitative
measurement of vessels’ EBA content.
Remarkably, as number of EBA-immunopositive vessels and stained vessel area were
reduced in regions with FITC-albumin extravasation 5 and 25 h after ischemia onset, the
intensity of the EBA-immunofluorescence signal per µm2 vessel area tended to increase in
the remaining vessels. This rise in vessels’
EBA content in ischemia-affected areas
exhibiting impaired BBB integrity strengthened previous data on a highly dynamic distribution and regulation of EBA, which was also
described by Saubaméa et al., even on a cell-tocell basis.20 Further support for a highly variable expression level of EBA in endothelial
cells emerges from an electron microscopic
study showing that EBA was not only located in
the luminal membrane of endothelial cells but
also in the cytoplasm and nuclei, denoting a
pool of EBA which might quickly replenish or
reinforce the membranes’ content of EBA proteins.31 However, even more than 25 years after
the first description of anti-EBA recognizing a
protein triplet of 30, 25 and 23.5 kD, respectively,17 substantial information on the EBA’s
protein identity and its exact (patho-)physiological role in the cerebral endothelium is still
lacking. With respect to potential effects on
BBB integrity, EBA seems to be regulated differently than other well-established BBB markers like the endothelial glucose transporter
(GLUT)-1. In a model that used anti-Thy-1
immunotoxin to achieve neuronal loss and
astroglial damage, EBA-expression was transiently decreased but nearly completely
restored 4 weeks later, while GLUT-1immunoreactivity remained unaltered during
the whole observational period.21
Furthermore, the total EBA content of vessels in regions with a BBB dysfunction as well
as the ratio of the vessels’ EBA content
between the ischemic and non-ischemic hemisphere were found to correlate significantly
with the ratio of extra-/intravascular FITCalbumin as a surrogate for BBB integrity,
remarkably, in an inverse manner. To the best
of our knowledge, our quantitative data for the
first time support the original assumption of
Sternberger and Sternberger about EBA’s association with parts of the vasculature that possess a selective permeability barrier.17
However, the present study revealed no signif-

References
1. O'Collins VE, Macleod MR, Donnan GA,
Horky LL, van der Worp BH, Howells DW.
1,026 experimental treatments in acute
stroke. Ann Neurol 2006;59:467-77.
2. del Zoppo GJ. Virchow's triad: the vascular
basis of cerebral injury. Rev Neurol Dis
2008;5(Suppl. 1):12-21.
3. del Zoppo GJ. The neurovascular unit in
the setting of stroke. J Intern Med 2010;
267:156-1.
4. del Zoppo GJ, Hallenbeck JM. Advances in

13.

14.

15.

16.

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

Original Paper

27.

28.

35.

36.

37.

m

31.

er

ci

30.

al

us

e

29.

34.

ly

26.

33.

38.

N
on

-c

32.

Marinkovic I, Tatlisumak E, Pedrono E.
The blood-brain barrier is continuously
open for several weeks following transient
focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience
2008;153:175-81.
Durukan A, Marinkovic I, Strbian D,
Pitkonen M, Pedrono E, Soinne L. Postischemic blood-brain barrier leakage in
rats:One-week follow-up by MRI. Brain Res
2009;1280:158-65.
Preston E, Sutherland G, Finsten A. Three
openings of the blood-brain barrier produced by forebrain ischemia in the rat.
Neurosci Lett 1993;149:75-8.
Belayev L, Busto R, Zhao W, Ginsberg MD.
Quantitative evaluation of blood-brain barrier permeability following middle cerebral
artery occlusion in rats. Brain Res 1996;
739:88-96.
Pillai DR, Dittmar MS, Baldaranov D,
Heidemann RM, Henning EC, Schuierer G,
et al. Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
in rats - A 3 T MRI study on biphasic bloodbrain barrier opening and the dynamics of
edema formation. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 2009;29:1846-55.
Rosenberg GA, Estrada EY, Dencoff JE.
Matrix metalloproteinases and TIMPs are
associated with blood-brain barrier opening after reperfusion in rat brain. Stroke
1998;29:2189-95.
Yang Y, Estrada EY, Thompson JF, Liu W,
Rosenberg GA. Matrix metalloproteinasemediated disruption of tight junction proteins in cerebral vessels is reversed by
synthetic matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor in focal ischemia in rat. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2007;27:697-709.

on

25.

D, Weise C, Bauer U, et al. A novel quantification of blood-brain barrier damage and
histochemical typing after embolic stroke
in rats. Brain Res 2010;1359:186-200.
Zhang Z, Zhang RL, Jiang Q, Raman SB,
Cantwell L, Chopp M. A new rat model of
thrombotic focal cerebral ischemia. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1997;17:123-35.
Bräuninger S, Kleinschnitz C. Rodent
models of focal cerebral ischemia:procedural pitfalls and translational problems.
Exp Transl Stroke Med 2009;1:8.
Michalski D, Pelz J, Weise C, Kacza J,
Boltze J, Grosche J, et al. Early outcome
and blood-brain barrier integrity after coadministered thrombolysis and hyperbaric
oxygenation in experimental stroke. Exp
Transl Stroke Med 2011;3:5.
Bhattacharjee AK, Kondoh T, Ikeda M,
Kohmura E. MMP-9 and EBA immunoreactivity after papaverine mediated opening
of the blood-brain barrier. Neuroreport
2002;13:2217-21.
Ghabriel MN, Lu JJ, Tadros R, Hermanis G.
A narrow time-window for access to the
brain by exogenous protein after immunological targeting of a blood-brain barrier
antigen. J Comp Pathol 2004;131:52-60.
Ghabriel MN, Zhu C, Hermanis G, Allt G.
Immunological targeting of the endothelial barrier antigen (EBA) in vivo leads to
opening of the blood-brain barrier. Brain
Res 2000;878:127-35.
Ghabriel MN, Zhu C, Leigh C. Electron
microscope study of blood-brain barrier
opening induced by immunological targeting of the endothelial barrier antigen.
Brain Res 2002;934:140-51.
Strbian D, Durukan A, Pitkonen M,

om

17. Sternberger NH, Sternberger LA. Bloodbrain barrier protein recognized by monoclonal antibody. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
1987;84:8169-73.
18. Ghabriel MN, Lu JJ, Hermanis G, Zhu C,
Setchell BP. Expression of a blood-brain
barrier-specific antigen in the reproductive tract of the male rat. Reproduction
2002;123:389-97.
19. Cassella JP, Lawrenson JG, Lawrence L,
Firth JA. Differential distribution of an
endothelial barrier antigen between the
pial and cortical microvessels of the rat.
Brain Res 1997;744:335-8.
20. Saubaméa B, Cochois-Guégan V, Cisternino S, Scherrmann J. Heterogeneity in
the rat brain vasculature revealed by quantitative confocal analysis of endothelial
barrier antigen and P-glycoprotein expression. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012;32:
81-92.
21. Krum JM, Kenyon KL, Rosenstein JM.
Expression of blood-brain barrier characteristics following neuronal loss and
astroglial damage after administration of
anti-Thy-1 immunotoxin. Exp Neurol
1997;146:33-45.
22. Zhu C, Ghabriel M, Blumbergs P, Reilly P,
Manavis J, Youssef J, et al. Clostridium
perfringens prototoxin-induced alteration
of endothelial barrier antigen (EBA)
immunoreactivity at the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Exp Neurol 2001;169:72-82.
23. Candelario-Jalil E, Yang Y, Rosenberg GA.
Diverse roles of matrix metalloproteinases
and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in neuroinflammation and cerebral
ischemia. Neuroscience 2008;158:983-94.
24. Michalski D, Grosche J, Pelz J, Schneider

[European Journal of Histochemistry 2013; 57:e38]

[page 261]

