Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257
DOI 10.1007/s00401-014-1381-0

ORIGINAL PAPER

Neutrophil recruitment to the brain in mouse and human
ischemic stroke
Isabel Perez‑de‑Puig · Francesc Miró‑Mur · Maura Ferrer‑Ferrer ·
Ellen Gelpi · Jordi Pedragosa · Carles Justicia · Xabier Urra ·
Angel Chamorro · Anna M. Planas 

Received: 10 October 2014 / Revised: 20 December 2014 / Accepted: 21 December 2014 / Published online: 30 December 2014
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014

Abstract  Neutrophils are rapidly recruited in response
to local tissue infection or inflammation. Stroke triggers a
strong inflammatory reaction but the relevance of neutrophils in the ischemic brain is not fully understood, particularly in the absence of reperfusion. We investigated brain
neutrophil recruitment in two murine models of permanent
ischemia induced by either cauterization of the distal portion of the middle cerebral artery (c-MCAo) or intraluminal
MCA occlusion (il-MCAo), and three fatal cases of human
ischemic stroke. Flow cytometry analyses revealed progressive neutrophil recruitment after c-MCAo, lesser neutrophil

I. Perez-de-Puig and F. Miró-Mur equally contributed to this
work.
Electronic supplementary material  The online version of this
article (doi:10.1007/s00401-014-1381-0) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
I. Perez‑de‑Puig · M. Ferrer‑Ferrer · J. Pedragosa · C. Justicia ·
A. M. Planas 
Department d’Isquèmia Cerebral i Neurodegeneració, Institut
d’Investigacions Biomèdiques de Barcelona (IIBB), Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain
F. Miró‑Mur · M. Ferrer‑Ferrer · J. Pedragosa · C. Justicia ·
X. Urra · A. Chamorro · A. M. Planas (*) 
Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer
(IDIBAPS), Rosselló 161, planta 6,
08036 Barcelona, Spain
e-mail: ampfat@iibb.csic.es; anna.planas@iibb.csic.es
E. Gelpi 
Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobanc-Hospital Clinic,
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain
X. Urra · A. Chamorro 
Functional Unit of Cerebrovascular Diseases, Hospital Clínic,
Barcelona, Spain

recruitment following il-MCAo, and absence of neutrophils
after sham operation. Confocal microscopy identified neutrophils in the leptomeninges from 6 h after the occlusion,
in the cortical basal lamina and cortical Virchow–Robin
spaces from 15 h, and also in the cortical brain parenchyma
at 24 h. Neutrophils showed signs of activation including
histone-3 citrullination, chromatin decondensation, and
extracellular projection of DNA and histones suggestive
of extracellular trap formation. Perivascular neutrophils
were identified within the entire cortical infarction following c-MCAo. After il-MCAo, neutrophils prevailed in the
margins but not the center of the cortical infarct, and were
intraluminal and less abundant in the striatum. The lack of
collaterals to the striatum and a collapsed pial anastomotic
network due to brain edema in large hemispheric infarctions could impair neutrophil trafficking in this model.
Neutrophil extravasation at the leptomeninges was also
detected in the human tissue. We concluded that neutrophils extravasate from the leptomeningeal vessels and can
eventually reach the brain in experimental animal models
and humans with prolonged arterial occlusion.
Keywords  Leptomeninges · Perivascular · Brain ·
Ischemia · Rodent · Human

Introduction
The only treatment showing efficacy in acute ischemic
stroke is thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) when it is administered within the first
4.5 h after symptom onset. However, a majority of stroke
patients arrive to the hospital later than 4.5 h and cannot be
treated with tPA [16]. It is estimated that spontaneous recanalization of the occluded vessel occurs in only one quarter

13

	
240

of the stroke population by 24 h of clinical onset [46] and
in up to half of the patients by 1 week [39, 51]. However,
the benefits derived from such a protracted recanalization
are negligible. In sharp contrast with these data that illustrate that the archetypical stroke patient in the clinic suffers long lasting or permanent ischemia, most experimental
studies are performed using experimental models of transient brain ischemia [29].
Acute ischemic stroke is a hypoxic-ischemic disorder associated with a sterile inflammatory reaction [7].
Ischemic injury triggers an immune response that promotes
immune cell migration and infiltration to the brain parenchyma according to an orchestrated temporal pattern [23,
30]. Neutrophils have received special attention for many
years as these cells have a remarkable destructive potential,
either through the direct neurotoxic effects from the release
of proteolytic enzymes [1, 48], or through indirect effects
that result from intravascular neutrophil accumulation, capillary blood flow obstruction and the no-reflow phenomenon [14, 15]. Experimental studies showed that neutrophils
migrate to cerebral ischemic regions during the first few
hours after the onset of ischemia. However, they have not
determined the exact anatomic location of neutrophil infiltration within the neurovascular unit and brain parenchyma
[4, 15, 22, 24, 52]. More recently, it has been disputed
whether neutrophils are able to cross the multiple physical
barriers in the blood–brain barrier (BBB) that separate the
intracerebral vessel lumen from the brain parenchyma after
ischemia/reperfusion, or whether neutrophils penetrate the
parenchyma in sufficient numbers to be of clinical significance [18]. Alternatively, it has been posited that the neurovascular unit is the site of neutrophil action after CNS
ischemia/reperfusion [18].
So far, interventions aiming to prevent neutrophil
recruitment to the ischemic brain have not shown benefits
in human stroke [34]. In experimental animals, several
lines of evidence support a pathogenic role of neutrophils
in ischemia/reperfusion but not in permanent ischemia
[9, 10, 21, 32, 45, 53]. However, increased numbers of
neutrophils have been detected after permanent brain
ischemia and infiltration into the parenchyma was found
to begin 12 h after the onset of the arterial occlusion [8,
22, 52]. Remarkably, increasing data attest that neutrophils cross talk and shape the maturation and effector
functions of other leukocytes, show diverse phenotypes
[12, 19], and could play an important role in several pathological conditions [31, 36, 40]. In this study, we investigated the route of entry of neutrophils to the brain while
the circulation remained arrested in experimental models of permanent occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
(MCAo) in mice. In addition, we assessed the anatomical localization of neutrophil infiltration in fatal cases of
human stroke.

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257

Methods
Animals
Adult (3–4 months old) Balb/C male mice (n  = 89) were
purchased from Charles River (Lyon, France). Animal work
was carried out according to the local regulations and in
compliance with the Spanish laws (Real Decreto 53/2013)
following the Directives of the European Community and
with approval of the Ethics Committee (CEEA) of University of Barcelona.
Brain ischemia
Focal brain ischemia was induced by permanent right
MCAo in mice, either by cauterization of the distal portion
of the MCA (c-MCAo) (n = 43), or by intraluminal MCA
occlusion (il-MCAo) (n = 28). c-MCAo restricts blood flow
within a limited portion of the cortex, whereas il-MCAo
affects the entire MCA territory causing striatal and cortical infarctions. A detailed description of the experimental
procedures is provided in the Supplementary Materials. In
brief, c-MCAo was carried out under isoflurane anesthesia
as reported [43]. Two mice were excluded from the study
due to unsuccessful surgery. None of the mice died during
the study. For sham operation (n  = 7), all surgical procedures were carried out but the MCA was not cauterized
and the mice were killed at 24 h. To exclude any effects of
cauterization, in a small group of mice (n = 3) we carried
out MCA ligature (8/0 black-braided silk suture) and the
mice were studied at 24 h. il-MCAo was performed under
isoflurane anesthesia introducing a filament through the
right internal carotid artery up to the level where the MCA
branches out, as reported [13] with modifications. Cerebral
perfusion was assessed with laser Doppler flowmetry (Perimed AB, Järfälla Sweden). Three mice died before 24 h
after il-MCAo. Sham-operated mice (n = 4) were subjected
to surgery but the filament was only briefly introduced into
the internal carotid artery and was immediately removed,
and mice were killed after 24 h. Control mice (n = 4) were
naïve mice not subjected to surgery or anesthesia.
Isolation of cells from tissues
Mice were anesthetized and transcardially perfused with
40 mL saline. The ischemic brain tissue (ipsilateral to
the MCAo) and the identical regions of the non-ischemic
hemisphere (contralateral) were dissected out and analyzed
separately. For the c-MCAo model the cortex was dissected out, whereas for the il-MCAo model the dissected
tissue included the cortex and the striatum. The tissue was
processed to obtain cells as described in Supplementary
Materials.

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

241

Table 1  Antibodies for immunofluorescence
Antibody
Anti-mouse
 Ly6G (clone 1A8)
  Recognizes neutrophils
 Ly6G/C (NIMP-R14)
  Recognizes neutrophils and a subset of monocytes/macrophages
 Elastase
  Recognizes neutrophils and precursors, and certain monocytes express low levels
 Histone-3 citrulline
  Citrullination is a histone modification typical of neutrophil extracellular traps
 pan-Laminin
  Recognizes the laminin protein family widely expressed in basal laminae
 α4-Laminin
  Recognizes a laminin protein specific of the endothelial basal lamina
 PDGFRβ
  This PDGF receptor is mainly expressed in pericytes
 vWF
  Labels the vascular endothelium
 Glut-1
  Mainly labels the vascular endothelium
 CD31
  Mainly labels the endothelial cells
 β-Catenin
  Is involved in cell–cell adhesion, labels endothelial cell junctions
 Caspase-3
  Apoptosis effector protein
Anti-human
 Neutrophil elastase
  Recognizes neutrophils and precursors, and certain monocytes express low levels
 Myeloperoxidase
  Enzyme found mainly in neutrophil primary granules and monocyte lysosomes
 pan-Laminin
  Recognizes the laminin protein family widely expressed in basal laminae
 vWF
  Labels the vascular endothelium

Flow cytometry
Isolated brain cells were processed as described in the Supplementary Materials and incubated with the following
primary antibodies: rat anti-mouse CD11b (clone M1/70,
Alexa Fluor 647, BD Pharmingen), CD45 (clone 30-F11,
FITC, BD Pharmingen), and Ly6G (clone 1A8, PE-Cy7,
BD Pharmingen). Isotype controls were rat IgG2bκ (clone
A95-1, Alexa Fluor 647 or FITC, BD Pharmingen), rat
IgG2a (FITC, Hycult Biotech), and rat IgG2aκ (clone R3595, PE-Cy7, BD Pharmingen). Data acquisition was carried
out in a BD FacsCantoII cytometer (BD Biosciences) using
the FacsDiva software (BD Biosciences). Data analysis

Species

Reference

Supplier

Dilution

Rat monoclonal

127601

BIOLEGEND

1:200

Rat monoclonal

ab2557

ABCAM

1:100

Rabbit polyclonal

ab68672

ABCAM

1:50

Rabbit polyclonal

ab5103

ABCAM

1:400

Rabbit polyclonal

Z0097

DAKO

1:100

Goat polyclonal

AF3837

R&D

1:20

Goat polyclonal

AF1042

R&D

1:100

Sheep polyclonal

ab11713

ABCAM

1:100

Rabbit polyclonal

07-1401

MILLIPORE

1:200

Mouse monoclonal

sc-46694

SANTA CRUZ

1:50

Mouse monoclonal

61015

BD

1:500

Rabbit polyclonal

ab52293

ABCAM

1:100

Mouse monoclonal

M0752

SEROTEC

1:200

Rabbit polyclonal

A 0398

DAKO

1:100

Rabbit polyclonal

Z0097

DAKO

1:200

Sheep polyclonal

ab11713

ABCAM

1:100

was carried out with FlowJo software (version 7.6.5, TreeStar Inc., Ashland, OR, USA). Flow-Count Fluorospheres
(Beckman-Coulter) were used for absolute cell number
quantification.
Immunofluorescence
Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and perfused intracardially with saline followed by paraformaldehyde (PFA,
4 %) in phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The brain was removed,
post-fixed with PFA overnight, cryoprotected in 30 %
sucrose, frozen, and 14-μm-thick sections were obtained in
a cryostat. The sections were fixed with ethanol, blocked

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257

Yes
3 h
Cardio-embolic
No
None
No vessel imaging
Woman 9

Vertebro-basilar
infarct
89
3

Vertebro-basilar
infarc
Woman 1

Man

Basilar artery
86
2

None

1 day

Yes pneumonia
3 h
3 days
Cardio-embolic

4 h
5 days
Left MCA infarct Left M2

13

4
79
1

None

Parieto-occipital
parenchymal
hematoma
type 2
No

Large vessel
disease

No

Exitus to necropsy timelapse
Vascular territory Intracranial
occlusion site
Case Age Gender Admission
NIHSS

Table 2  Clinical data of the stroke patients

Acute revascular- Hemorrhagic
ization therapy
transformation
(HT)

Etiology

Exitus (days
after onset)

Acute infection

	
242

with normal serum and incubated overnight at 4 °C with
combinations of primary antibodies (see Table 1). We generally combined antibodies made in different species to
avoid cross-reactions. Then, sections were incubated for
2 h at room temperature with secondary antibodies (Alexa
Fluor-488, -546, -647, LifeTechnologies). Immunoreaction
controls were always carried out by omission of the primary antibodies. Sections were counterstained with either
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) or ToPro-3 (Invitrogen) to visualize the cell nuclei and they were observed
under a confocal laser microscope (Leica, SP5 or TCS
SPE).
Postmortem tissue of stroke patients
The brains of three patients suffering from acute stroke
who died between 1 and 5 days after stroke onset at the
Stroke Unit of the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona were
used in this study, after obtaining written consent from
their families for tissue removal after death for diagnostic and research purposes at the Neurological Tissue Bank
of the Biobank-Hospital Clinic-Institut d’Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS). The study
had the approval of the Ethics Committee of this Hospital.
The patients included two women and one man, and had
a mean age of 84.7 years (ranging from 79 to 89 years).
A summary of the characteristics of the patients is shown
in Table 2. All patients had radiologically confirmed
ischemic infarcts. These infarcts affected the territory of
the middle cerebral artery in one case and the cerebellum
in two cases (Supplementary Fig. 1). The elapsed time
from stroke onset to death ranged from 1 to 5 days, and
the time from death to autopsy ranged from 3 to 4 h. An
expert neuropathologist (EG) dissected the ischemic core,
the peripheral region, the leptomeninges, and a portion of
non-ischemic tissue obtained from an unaffected region
distant to the infarction (Supplementary Fig. 2). Samples of the tissue from each region were either formalin
fixed, paraffin embedded and sectioned in a microtome
at 5 µm, or embedded in OCT and immediately frozen in
liquid nitrogen for later sectioning in a cryostat at 5 µm.
Paraffin sections were stained with hematoxylin and
eosin, or were used for immunohistochemistry applying a rabbit polyclonal antibody against myeloperoxidase
(Table  1), and processed with the avidin–biotin peroxidase (ABC, Vector, Vectastain, Palex Medical S.A., Sant
Cugat del Vallés, Spain) method. Cryostat sections were
processed for immunofluorescence as described above
with the antibodies listed in Table 1. For cell counting,
we obtained 5–6 immunofluorescence pictures for each
brain region using the ×40 objective in two different sections. The numbers of immunoreactive cells located either
within the vessel lumen (intravascular), surrounding the

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

243

Fig. 1  Identification of neutrophils in the brain after ischemia by
flow cytometry. Flow cytometry gates of brain cells for representative
mice after cauterization (c-MCAo) (a) and intraluminal (il-MCAo)
occlusion (b), at the indicated time points and in a control nonischemic brain (top of panel a). Cell populations are first identified
by side and forward scatter (SSC and FSC) (left graphs), followed
by the expression of CD11b and CD45, which shows a progressive
increase of myeloid cells (CD11bhiCD45hi) (middle graphs) in the
ischemic brain tissue. Separation of the latter population by CD11b
and Ly6G allows the identification of neutrophils (CD11bhiLy6G+)
(graphs on the right of each panel). The percentage of cells in each
gate is indicated in the graphs. a After illustrating the gating strategy
from left to right, the panel on the right shows from top to bottom
the increase in neutrophils (gate CD11bhi Ly6G +) with time after
c-MCAo. b Neutrophils are also found in the il-MCAo model (right

panel). c Quantification of brain tissue neutrophil numbers obtained
after 10 min (n = 2), 3 (n = 5) and 15 (n = 9) hours, and 1 (n = 8),
2 (n = 3), and 15 (n = 2) days after c-MCAo are shown for the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres. Two-way ANOVA by time and
hemisphere followed by the Bonferroni post hoc test shows significant increases at 1 day in the ipsilateral versus the contralateral hemisphere (***p < 0.001). The increase in neutrophil number seen 24 h
after c-MCAo (n = 8) in the ipsilateral hemisphere was not detected
after sham operation (n  = 5) (Mann–Whitney test, **p < 0.005). d
Quantification of brain tissue neutrophil numbers obtained in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres 1 day after il-MCAo (n  = 8)
or sham operation (sham) (n  = 2). Two-way ANOVA by surgery
(MCAo vs sham) and hemisphere followed by Bonferroni post hoc
test shows a significant increase of neutrophils in the ipsilateral hemisphere after il-MCAo (*p < 0.05)

vascular endothelium (perivascular), or in the parenchyma
(extravascular) were counted in each picture. The average
count in all pictures was taken as representative for each
region per subject.

Statistical analyses
Cell numbers at different time points were compared with
two-way ANOVA. For the il-MCAo model, comparisons

13

	
244

between two groups were carried out with the Mann–Whitney U test. Cell numbers in human samples were compared
with the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by the Dunn’s Multiple Comparison test. Data were analyzed using GraphPad
software.

Results
Neutrophils reach the ischemic territory after permanent
ischemia in mice
The presence of neutrophils in the ischemic brain has
been reported in experimental models of permanent
ischemia [8, 22, 52]. After intracardiac perfusion of the
mice, isolation of cells from the brain, and flow cytometry analysis, we found neutrophils in the ipsilateral hemisphere 24 h after permanent ischemia (Fig. 1). Given that
blood within the branches of the occluded vessels is not
washed out after intracardiac perfusion of the animals, we
first asked whether the stagnated blood was the source of
neutrophils in the infarcted tissue. To answer this question we carried out flow cytometry in brain tissue samples at different time points after induction of permanent
ischemia by c-MCAo (Fig. 1a). The number of neutrophils (CD45 + CD11b + Ly6G + cells) in the ipsilateral
hemisphere increased with time reaching a peak at 24 h
(Fig. 1c). This finding was not observed in the contralateral hemisphere or after sham operation (Fig. 1c). For the
intraluminal ischemia model (il-MCAo), FACS analysis
of the ischemic tissue at 24 h also showed increased numbers of neutrophils compared with the contralateral hemisphere and compared with tissue of sham-operated mice
(Fig.  1d). Comparatively, neutrophils were less abundant
after il-MCAo than after c-MCAo. c-MCAo requires
invasive surgery involving partial craniectomy and causing a hole in the leptomeninges to access the MCA for
direct occlusion. Although surgery might contribute to the
local presence of neutrophils in the leptomeninges, sham
operation, where all the surgical procedures excepting
cauterization of the MCA were carried out, induced a negligible presence of neutrophils at 24 h (Fig. 1c). To ensure
that MCA cauterization was not the cause of neutrophil
recruitment, we carried out direct occlusion of the MCA
by means of a ligature. This procedure induced a large
cortical infarction that was visually apparent when the
brain was removed from the skull at 24 h, and abundant
neutrophils were detected in the ipsilateral hemisphere
by FACS (mean ± SEM number of cells per ischemic
cortex  = 21,234 ± 7,524, n  = 3). Overall, this experiment showed that ischemia triggered neutrophil recruitment after direct occlusion of the MCA in the absence of
reperfusion.

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257
Fig. 2  Neutrophils in the brain after cauterization of the MCA ▸
(c-MCAo). a Polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) on the brain surface and reaching the Virchow–Robin space of an occluded cortical arteriole containing erythrocytes (white) in the vessel lumen. All
the cell nuclei are stained with DAPI and the characteristic multilobular nucleus of PMNs is apparent surrounding the cortical arteriole. b–m NIMP-R14+ cells (green) and n–u Ly6G+ cells (green).
b–f NIMP-R14+ leukocytes cross the glia limitans (GFAP red,
pan-laminin blue) in the ipsilateral hemisphere at 6 h (b) and 15 h
(c, d), but they are not seen in the contralateral hemisphere (e, f). g
NIMP-R14+ cells located underneath the parenchymal basal lamina
(red pan-laminin) along the vessel wall in cortical layer I after 6 h of
ischemia. Images z1–z3 are confocal 1-μm-thick sections along the z
axis. h–j NIMP-R14+ cells (arrowheads) are seen on the parenchymal basal lamina of the ischemic cortex and along the vessels in the
superficial cortical layers (h). A detail of the cells on the parenchymal cortical basal lamina is shown in (i) and the cellular invasion to
the perivascular space of the cortical arterioles located in the core of
infarction is illustrated in (j). Red is pan-laminin; blue shows all the
cell nuclei with To-Pro3. k NIMP-R14+ cells lie on the endothelial
basal lamina (EBL, blue, α4-laminin) that surrounds the endothelium
(E, red, Glut-1). l–m NIMP-R14+ cells accumulate in perivascular
spaces (arrows) and extravasate to the parenchyma of the infarcted
core (arrowheads) while erythrocytes (white in l) remain in the vessel
lumen. Red is pan-laminin. n–o Ly6G+ neutrophils surrounding and
outside a large leptomeningeal vessel (n), and extravasated from a
leptomeningeal vessel (o). Erythrocytes (purple) are contained inside
the vessel lumen. Blue is PDGFRβ. p, s Neutrophils in the infarcted
core located in the perivascular space between the endothelial (red,
α4-laminin, EBL) and the parenchymal (blue, pan-laminin, PBL)
basal laminae of blood vessels containing erythrocytes (purple) 24 h
after MCAO. q–r Neutrophils surround the basal lamina of blood
vessels (red, pan-laminin) in perivascular spaces and are free in the
parenchyma of the infarcted core (arrowheads). t–u Neutrophils in
perivascular spaces of a cortical vessel (t) and a leptomeningeal arteriole (u), and free (arrowheads) in the infarcted parenchyma. Red is
α4-laminin and blue is To-Pro3. The time after c-MCAo is indicated
in each panel. Number of mice at 6 h, 15 h and 24 h are 3, 3, and 6,
respectively. Bar scale a–g, i, k, m, p–u 10 μm; j, o 20 μm; h, n
50 μm

Neutrophils leave the circulation at the leptomeninges
and invade perivascular spaces after c‑MCAo
By confocal laser microscopy we found polymorphonuclear cells extravasated from leptomeningeal vessels, in the
subpial space and on the parenchymal basal lamina of the
ischemic cortex, and entering the Virchow–Robin spaces
surrounding cortical vessels of the ischemic region 6 h after
c-MCAo (Fig. 2a). We then studied these cells by immunofluorescence using NIMP-R14 (Fig. 2b-l) and Ly6G
(Fig. 2m-t) antibodies. The NIMP-R14 antibody is widely
used to study neutrophils, but in fact it recognizes Ly6G
and also Ly6C, which is expressed not only by neutrophils
but also by a subpopulation of monocytes and, therefore,
can label infiltrating macrophages in addition to neutrophils. In contrast, the Ly6G+ cells are taken as neutrophils.
Nonetheless, in the flow cytometry study we observed a
subpopulation of Ly6G+ cells in the ischemic brain that
were CD45+ but CD11b− (Fig. 1a) and, therefore, did not

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

245

13

	
246

conform to the typical neutrophil phenotype. Although in
immunofluorescence the Ly6G antibody could recognize
both Ly6G+ CD11b+ (neutrophils) and Ly6G+ CD11b−
cells, only 4.5 % of the total Ly6G+ cells were CD11b− at
24 h post-ischemia according to the FACS analysis. This
result showed that the majority of the Ly6G+ cells detected
by immunofluorescence at 24 h should be neutrophils.
NIMP-R14+ cells were detected extravasated from leptomeningeal vessels of the ipsilateral hemisphere from 6 h
following c-MCAo. NIMP-R14+ cells were seen around
the cortical glia limitans in the proximity of the ischemic
territory, and surrounding superficial cortical blood vessels
located in the ischemic region (Fig. 2b–d), but not in the
contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 2e, f). In the ischemic cortical territory, NIMP-R14+ cells were located in the perivascular spaces between the parenchymal basal lamina and the
endothelium (Fig. 2g, k), and in many instances the shape
of the cell nucleus was compatible with that of polymorphonuclear cells (e.g., Fig. 2g–z1). At 24 h, NIMP-R14+
cells were abundant in the leptomeninges and on the parenchymal cortical basal lamina of the ipsilateral hemisphere
(Fig.  2h, i) and invading the cavities of cortical arterioles
located in the infarcted core (Fig. 2j). They were also seen
extravasated to the infarcted parenchyma (Fig. 2l, m), while
erythrocytes remained in the vessel lumen in the absence of
overt hemorrhagic transformation (Fig. 2l).
With the antibody against Ly6G (Fig. 2n–u) we identified
positive cells outside leptomeningeal vessels and adjacent to
the parenchymal basal lamina of the ischemic cortex (Fig. 2n,
o). Ly6G+ cells were also seen in perivascular spaces of cortical vessels located between the parenchymal basal lamina
(pan-laminin) and the endothelial basal lamina expressing α4-laminin (Fig. 2p, s). The parenchyma basal lamina
seemed to contain the Ly6G+ cells during the early hours
after MCAo, as previously reported [18]. After 24 h, Ly6G+
cells were seen perivascularly and also extravasated to the
parenchyma of the infarcted core, near the vessels (Fig. 2q,
t, u) and mainly in superficial cortical layers (Fig. 2u). Adhesion of intravascular NIMP-R14+ or Ly6G+ cells to postcapillary venules was occasionally observed, and these cells
egressed to perivascular spaces and across the basal lamina
(Supplementary Fig. 3a–d). In addition, we detected NIMPR14+ and Ly6G+ cells in the lumen of occluded capillaries (Supplementary Fig. 3e–f), presumably corresponding to
neutrophils stagnated in the vessels of the ischemic region.
Neutrophils after permanent intraluminal occlusion of the
MCA (il‑MCAo)
For comparative purposes we also studied the permanent
il-MCAo model by confocal laser microscopy. Immunofluorescence showed NIMP-R14+ cells surrounding
veins and arteries of the leptomeninges and on the cortical

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257
Fig. 3  Neutrophils in the brain after permanent intraluminal MCAo ▸
(il-MCAo). a–g NIMP-R14 + cells (green) and h–q Ly6G+ cells
(green). a–b NIMP-R14+ cells (arrowheads) are seen in the leptomeninges outside a vein (blue, α4-laminin) and an arteriole (red,
Glut-1) at the ventral part of the brain and in the infarcted brain
parenchyma. c A similar phenomenon is observed in this region
after staining the glia limitans (red GFAP, blue pan-laminin). d–g
NIMP-R14+ cells (blue are the nuclei; To-Pro3) are seen adjacent to
the basal lamina (red, pan-laminin) of an arteriole in the dorsal cortex (d), nearby a small blood vessel (e), extravasated in the cortical
parenchyma at the ventral part of the brain (f), and in the capillary
lumen (g), where spread and punctuate staining is seen suggesting
intravascular degranulation. h–j Ly6G+ neutrophils on the parenchymal basal lamina of the dorsal cortex (h), in perivascular spaces
and lumen of a cortical arteriole (i), and in the ventral leptomeninges (j). Red (pan-laminin) shows the basal laminae, and blue shows
the cell nuclei (To-Pro3). k–n Ly6G+ neutrophils are seen in the
ventral leptomeninges (k), trapped in the lumen of a blood vessel
in the ischemic striatum (l), and in perivascular spaces between the
endothelial basal lamina (EBL red, α4-laminin) and the parenchymal basal lamina at the margins of the infarcted cortical region (PBL
blue, pan-laminin) in the ventral part of the brain. o Ly6G+ neutrophils at the cortical parenchymal basal lamina (red pan-laminin) and
in cortical layer I within the dorsal part of the brain at the margins
of infarction. Cell nuclei are shown in blue (To-Pro3). p–q Neutrophils (arrowheads) along blood vessels in the dorsal cortex (p) and
extravasated in the parenchyma in the ventral part of the brain (q).
Red is α4-laminin and blue is pan-laminin. The time after il-MCAO
is indicated in each panel. Number of mice at 6 and 24 h are 5 and 8,
respectively. Bar scale in a 20 μm, b 15 μm, c 30 μm, d–q 10 μm

parenchymal basal lamina (Fig. 3a–c) from 6 h onwards, and
in the perivascular spaces of large cortical vessels mainly
at the margins of the ischemic core from 15 h (Fig. 3d). At
24 h, the NIMP-R14+ cells were observed not only perivascularly but also free in the cortical parenchyma in infarcted
zones at the boundary of the infarcted core (Fig. 3e, f). However, in the infarcted striatum, NIMP-R14+ cells were less
abundant and were mainly located in the lumen of capillaries
(Fig. 3g). Although in some instances it was apparent that the
nuclear morphology of the NIMP-R14+ cells was in compliance with that of neutrophils (e.g., arrowheads in Fig. 3d, e);
we carried out a study using the neutrophil-specific Ly6G
antibody. Ly6G+ cells were seen on the cortical parenchymal basal lamina (Fig. 3h, o), the perivascular spaces of cortical vessels (Fig. 3i), and extravasated from leptomeningeal
vessels (Fig. 3j, k). Some Ly6G+ cells were trapped in brain
capillaries (Fig. 3l), while others were found in the cortical
perivascular spaces between the endothelial basal lamina
(α4-laminin+) and the parenchymal basal lamina (Fig. 3m,
n). Some Ly6G+ cells were seen in the cortical infarcted
parenchyma (Fig. 3n, q).
Comparative regional location of neutrophils between the
c‑MCAo and the il‑MCAo models
In the c-MCAo model, the distal portion of the MCA
is occluded resulting in a cortical infarction (Fig. 4a).

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

247

13

	
248

Neutrophils were seen in the leptomeninges of the ipsilateral cortex and in the infarcted tissue, but were not detected
in neighboring non-infarcted tissue (Fig. 4b, c). In the ilMCAo model, the MCA is occluded at its origin in the circle of Willis and the resulting infarction affects the cortex
and the striatum (Fig. 4d). In this model, neutrophils were
seen within the infarcted cortex and were more prominent
at the boundaries of the cortical infarction than in the core.
They were seen in cortical perivascular spaces and extravasated to the parenchyma in ventral and dorsal parts of the
cortex (Fig. 4e–h). In the striatum, which lacks collateral
flow, most Ly6G+ cells were located in the vessel lumen
and extravasation to the infarcted parenchyma was very
rare (Fig. 4i). Occasionally, a few neutrophils were seen
in the choroid plexus and the surrounding white matter
(Fig. 4j).
Neutrophils showed signs of activation in the ischemic
brain
Neutrophils have granules containing proteases, such as
neutrophil elastase (Supplementary Fig. 4). Upon activation, these enzymes are released to the extracellular environment after neutrophil degranulation. As part of their
antimicrobial function, neutrophils are known to project
extracellular traps (NETs) releasing enzymes, histones,
and DNA out of the cells, and die through a distinctive
process called NETosis [2]. Prior to releasing NETs, neutrophil enzymes access the cell nucleus and promote chromatin decondensation [42] involving histone modifications.
Histone citrullination is believed to be a hallmark of NET
formation [49]. To identify signs of NET formation in the
ischemic brain, we used an antibody against citrullinated
histone 3 (Cit-H3). No Cit-H3-positive reactions were seen
in the control brain or in the contralateral hemisphere (not
shown). However, in both experimental MCAo models
some neutrophils showed Cit-H3-positive labeling (Fig. 4).
Cit-H3 neutrophils became apparent after 24 h of ischemia
but were rare at earlier time points. Cit-H3 + neutrophils
were located in perivascular spaces (Fig. 4a), in the brain
parenchyma nearby blood vessels (Fig. 5b), and in the
lumen of capillaries (Fig. 4c). In the c-MCAo model, we
estimated that about 15–20 % of the neutrophils were CitH3+ at 24 h, and were found in all of the different locations described above. However, in the il-MCAo model,
most of the Cit-H3+ neutrophils were located intravascularly, particularly in the striatum.
By examining the DNA in the Cit-H3-positive neutrophils (Ly6G+) we found some evidence of NET formation
in the ischemic cortex at 24 h (Fig. 4d–h). Certain Ly6G+
neutrophils showed the presence of DNA (DAPI) and CitH3 surrounding the cell body, suggesting projection of
DNA and histones to the extracellular milieu (Fig. 4d).

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257
Fig. 4  Regional localization of neutrophils in the experimen- ▸
tal MCAo models. The macroscopic appearance of the infarction
is illustrated with MRI brain images (T2 maps) of mice 24 h after
c-MCAo (a) and il-MCAo (d) showing a pale area corresponding to
the infarcted region. Squares in the MRI images indicate the approximate zones from where the microscopic images were obtained.
Green is Ly6G; red is pan-laminin in all panels excepting in panel j,
which is Glut-1; blue illustrates the nuclei stained with ToPro-3. For
the c-MCAo model (n = 6), a cortical zone at the margin of infarction is shown in (b). The dashed line is drawn to indicate the margins of infarction as assessed from the apparent difference in intensity of blood vessel basal lamina staining with pan-laminin. Ly6G+
neutrophils are abundant at the leptomeninges (arrow), and are only
seen in the cortex (arrowhead) within the infarcted region. c Cortical infarcted region showing abundant Ly6G+ neutrophils in the leptomeninges (arrow) and in the cortex (arrowhead). For the il-MCAo
model (n = 8), neutrophils are seen in the leptomeninges and mainly
in marginal zones of the infarcted tissue as illustrated with images
corresponding to the dorsal (e), lateral (f), and ventral (g, h) parts of
the cortex, where neutrophils are seen associated to the parenchymal
basal lamina or vessels (arrows), and are also seen free in the parenchyma (arrowheads). Neutrophils in the striatum (i) are mainly seen
inside the vasculature (i1, i2) and only very rarely they are free in the
infarcted striatal parenchyma (arrowhead in i3). Occasionally, neutrophils (arrowheads) are seen in the choroid plexus (arrow) (j1) and
surrounding white matter (j2) in mice with very large infarctions. Bar
scale 30 μm (excepting in e1, e3, g1, i2, i3, and j2 15 μm)

Other Cit-H3+ neutrophils lost their typical lobular nuclei
and showed diffuse DNA staining indicative of chromatin
decondensation (Fig. 4e). Extracellular DNA and histones
were also observed adjacent to neutrophils located inside
the capillary lumen (Fig. 4f). Occasionally NET-like structures were seen surrounding pericytes (PDGFRβ+) (Supplementary Fig. 5), suggesting that NETs might damage
components of the BBB. Altogether, the confocal images
strongly supported that after prolonged ischemia some neutrophils can expel DNA and other intracellular components
out of the cells indicative of NET formation.
We searched for some evidence of caspase-dependent
apoptosis by immunostaining for active caspase-3. Caspase-3+ cells were detected in the ischemic tissue but they
did not co-localize with neutrophil markers (not shown).
Although we cannot exclude that neutrophils undergoing cell death might down-regulate the typical membrane
markers preventing their identification, our results provide
evidence of NETosis and do not support that caspasedependent apoptosis is involved in neutrophil death during
the first 24 h of ischemia.
Neutrophils in the postmortem brain of stroke patients
We investigated the brain of three stroke patients that died
within 1–5 days after stroke onset (see Table 2 for clinical
case description and Supplementary Fig. 1 for illustration
of intracranial occlusion sites). In all of the patients, conventional histological staining (hematoxylin and eosin) of

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

paraffin-embedded brain sections showed the presence of
polymorphonuclear cells with typical features of neutrophils in the leptomeninges surrounding the ischemic tissue

249

(Fig. 6a, e, g), but not in the leptomeninges located in distant non-affected areas (Fig. 6b). In the ischemic tissue,
polymorphonuclear cells were found in perivascular spaces

13

	
250

of brain vessels (Fig. 6c, d, f, h) and, to a lesser extent, free
in the infarcted parenchyma (Fig. 6d, f, h), particularly at
the boundaries of the infarcted tissue. Immunostaining of
paraffin sections with myeloperoxidase (MPO) showed
positive cells in the leptomeninges and the ischemic tissue,
where they were seen inside the vessels, in perivascular
spaces, and to a lesser extent, in the parenchyma (Supplementary Fig. 6).
Cryostat sections were stained for neutrophil elastase
(NE) together with laminin. We observed NE + cells
in three different locations, i.e., intravascular (Fig. 7a),
perivascular (Fig. 7b), and extravascular (Fig. 7c, d).
MPO and NE co-localized in the same cells (Fig. 7e). We
counted the numbers of NE+ cells in each of the above
locations (Fig. 7f–h) within different brain regions: the
core of infarction, the periphery, and a control non-affected
region distant from the infarction, and in the leptomeninges
surrounding ischemic and non-affected zones. The number of intravascular NE+ cells (Fig. 7f) was higher in the
infarcted tissue and surrounding the leptomeninges than
in the corresponding non-affected regions, but differences
were only statistically significant for the leptomeninges
(Fig. 7f). NE+ cells were also seen in perivascular spaces
(Fig.  7g) and, to a lesser extent, free in the parenchyma
within the infarct (Fig. 7h); but differences did not reach
statistical significance when compared to the non-affected
(control) regions presumably due to the small number of
patients and intra-group variability. Extravasated NE+
cells were detected in the leptomeninges surrounding the
ischemic tissue, with statistically significant differences
compared to distant leptomeninges (Fig. 7h).

Discussion
Neutrophils play an essential function in building up a
rapid innate immune response against invading pathogens,
but can also damage the tissues due to their high proteolytic enzyme content and capacity of generating reactive
oxygen intermediates [27] and activating the complement
system [41]. Therefore, neutrophil activation must be
tightly regulated to avoid uncontrolled release of its intracellular content. Leukocyte access to the brain is prevented
by the BBB, but under pathological conditions leukocytes
can adhere to activated post-capillary venules and infiltrate the brain parenchyma across the BBB [17]. However,
in ischemic stroke, blood flow is arrested and peripheral
leukocytes cannot reach the ischemic territory through the
circulation, unless they accessed it through collateral blood
vessels, peripheral regions, or after the occluded vessels are
reperfused. This is why it is generally believed that neutrophils play a more prominent role in ischemia/reperfusion
than in permanent ischemia. In this study we found that

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257
Fig. 5  Some neutrophils show histone-3 citrullination (Cit-H3) 24 h ▸
after MCAo. a–b, d–e c-MCAo model (n  = 6) and c, f il-MCAo
model (n  = 8). a–c Cit-H3+ neutrophils are seen at perivascular
locations (a) and extravascular (b) in the infarcted cortex, but they
are located inside blood capillaries in the infarcted striatum (c). The
shape of the vessels (blue) is apparent after staining PDGFRβ (a, b),
which labels the surrounding pericytes, or pan-laminin (c) labeling
the basal lamina. d Illustrates a neutrophil (green, Ly6G+) (arrowhead) showing histone-3 citrullination (red, Cit-H3) extending outside the cell body together with DNA (blue, DAPI) (arrow). The
phase contrast image merged with the fluorescence images and z-projections is shown on the right to illustrate co-localization of markers in the same cell. The neutrophil extracellular projections were
occasionally directed towards isolated dense elements with a shape
and size compatible with isolated erythrocytes (asterisk) free in the
parenchyma. e Two neutrophils (green, Ly6G+) (arrowheads), one of
them (left) shows a polymorphonuclear structure with DAPI staining
(blue), while the other (right, arrow) shows a diffuse nuclear structure indicative of chromatin decondensation and is positive for CitH3 (red). f A neutrophil (green, Ly6G+) (arrowhead) inside a capillary (blue, α4-laminin) is positive for Cit-H3 (red) and shows most of
the DNA (white, DAPI) and Cit-H3 outside the cell (arrow) forming
structures suggestive of intravascular NETosis. Bar scale a, b 20 μm;
c 10 μm; d–f 5 μm

the numbers of neutrophils present in the ischemic territory increased with time after permanent MCAo in rodents,
in agreement with previous studies [8, 22]. Although we
found evidence of neutrophil adhesion to the walls of postcapillary venules, we report that a major pathway through
which neutrophils can invade the ischemic tissue during
the arterial occlusion is via leaving the circulation at the
leptomeningeal vessels. Neutrophils were seen in perivascular spaces of cortical arterioles. Inflammatory cells in
the subarachnoid space are able to cross the pia matter and
access the subpial space under certain pathological conditions [28]. From the subpial space the cells can reach the
parenchymal basal lamina of the cortex and the perivascular spaces of cortical arterioles, since the Virchow–Robin
space is communicated to the subpial space [28, 37, 54]. A
previous intravital microscopy study showed the presence
of rolling and adherent leukocytes in pial venules and in
arterioles of the ischemic tissue after permanent focal cerebral ischemia in mice [33]. Our study identified neutrophils
in these locations but has the limitation that the results were
obtained from static microscopic images. In vivo imaging
studies will be required to provide a full demonstration of
the impact of this trafficking pathway in neutrophil recruitment after stroke. The presence of polymorphonuclear cells
in the subarachnoid space, as assessed by classic histology,
was reported after permanent intraluminal MCAo in rats
[22], and a previous study in mice found Ly6G+ neutrophils in the leptomeninges and perivascular spaces after
ischemia/reperfusion in mice [18]. Our results confirm the
latter findings showing that the perivascular spaces are a
niche for neutrophils after brain ischemia, and extend the

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

251

13

	
252

findings to the situation of permanent ischemia showing
that neutrophil extravasation at the leptomeninges provides
a pathway for neutrophil recruitment to the ischemic cortical territory in the absence of reperfusion.
Typically, bacterial meningitis causes massive neutrophil infiltrates in the leptomeninges and intraparenchymal vasculitis is characterized by perivascular neutrophil
infiltration [28, 35]. Although the effect is comparatively
much more modest after stroke, some underlying molecular mechanism could be similar. Indeed, neutrophils sense
the presence of pathogens but they also respond to danger signals and chemoattractants under sterile inflammation [7]. After stroke, chemokines and danger signals are
released to the extracellular space [6, 30]. Interstitial fluid
can drain through the perivascular spaces of cortical arterioles towards the leptomeninges and out of the brain [5,
11, 25, 50]. However, perivascular drainage appears to be
mediated by arterial vessel pulsations [26] and it was found
to be impaired during experimental ischemia [3]. This finding suggests that during ischemia the perivascular spaces
of cortical arterioles might accumulate signals capable of
attracting neutrophils. We found neutrophils in perivascular
spaces of cortical ischemic regions but not in the infarcted
striatum. The anatomy of the periarterial spaces in the
basal ganglia differs from that in the cerebral cortex [44],
and the terminal vessels supplying blood to the subcortical
regions lack collateral blood flow with adjacent arteries. In
contrast, pial arterioles on the cortical surface form a rich
anastomotic network. Regional differences in the anatomic
structure of the specific vascular beds may condition the
process of interstitial fluid drainage and the regional capacity to allow trafficking of inflammatory cells during the
arterial occlusion.
Neutrophils progressively accumulated in the perivascular spaces as the duration of ischemia increased and the
parenchymal basal lamina seemed to act as a containment
barrier preventing the free passage of the neutrophils to the
parenchyma, as was previously reported after ischemia/
reperfusion [18]. However, after long periods of ischemia,
we detected neutrophils extravasated to the cortical parenchyma, as previously described by classical histology
after 12 h of permanent intraluminal MCAo in rats [22].
Although isolated erythrocytes were occasionally detected
in the parenchyma within the infarcted core at 24 h likely
due to capillary damage, the presence of neutrophils in the
cortical parenchyma was observed in the absence of hemorrhagic transformation. Activated neutrophils cause vascular
damage by generating oxidative stress [27] and complement activation [47], and neutrophil elastase enhances vascular permeability and is involved in ischemic brain damage [48]. It is feasible that perivascular neutrophils accessed
the parenchyma after some of them suffered NETosis,
involving the loss of their typical nuclear morphology,

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257

release of their content and cell death [2, 42]. Although the
triggers of such changes are currently unknown, sustained
hypoxia, or extravasation of plasma components or erythrocytes might play a role. Neutrophils were also found in
the capillary lumen within the ischemic area in the cortex
and striatum, likely remaining in the blood stagnated in the
vessels after the arterial occlusion. After prolonged periods
of ischemia, these intraluminal neutrophils also showed
signs of NETosis. NETs formed in the blood promote coagulation and thrombosis [20, 38]. Therefore, intravascular
NETosis might induce secondary microthrombosis. These
events might be relevant for delayed restoration of reperfusion when the duration of ischemia is long enough to allow
intravascular NETosis to take place, and could contribute to
the no-reflow phenomenon.
In this study, neutrophils were more abundant after
c-MCAo than after il-MCAo. Although this observation
could suggest that the surgery was involved in attracting
neutrophils, such an effect was not seen after sham operation, pointing to brain ischemia as the driver of neutrophil
recruitment. Experimental stroke models normally involve
surgery causing mechanical injuries to the tissues or arteries that could contribute to neutrophil recruitment. Alternatively, neutrophils can strongly respond to post-surgical
local infection. However, neutrophils were found in the
ischemic brain after taking high precaution in sterilizing surgical material and working under clean conditions,
and they were focally localized in the ischemic zone. Furthermore, the mild functional deficits [43] and good general status of the mice after c-MCAo argue against the
possibility of meningeal infection. Several differences
in the ischemia models might account for the differences
in neutrophil infiltration. il-MCAo induces occlusion of
the entire MCA tree, while only the distal portion of the
MCA is occluded in the c-MCAo model. Therefore, the
leptomeningeal branches of the proximal portion of the
MCA are patent after c-MCAo and can supply neutrophils
to the anastomotic network of pial arteries near the cortical
infarction. In contrast, in the il-MCAo model, the access of
neutrophils to the leptomeninges of the ischemic territory
would be limited to possible anastomoses of pial arterioles
with branches from the external carotid artery and with
collateral vessels from other arterial trees. Another important difference between these experimental models is the
intracranial pressure that can develop after il-MCAo due
to edema, which is comparatively negligible after c-MCAo
as a consequence of partial craniectomy. It is possible that
increased edema and intracranial pressure in this model
would impair neutrophil trafficking to the core of the cortical ischemic region.
In human stroke, we identified the presence of polymorphonuclear cells in the leptomeninges proximal to infarction and in perivascular spaces of the ischemic tissue, but

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

253

Fig. 6  Polymorphonuclear cells
in human stroke. Representative
hematoxylin and eosin paraffin
sections of the 3 stroke patients:
a–d patient 1; e, f patient 2; g,
h patient 3. a Leptomeninges
nearby the infarcted region.
Dark purple cells morphologically compatible with polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) are
abundant in the leptomeninges
adjacent to the infarction. b
PMNs are not apparent in the
leptomeninges adjacent to
non-affected tissue and distant
from the infarction. c, d PMNs
are seen in the vessels (arrows)
and in marginal zones of the
infarcted parenchyma (arrowhead) in the temporal lobe. e
PMNs are seen in the leptomeninges proximal to the infarcted
core in the cerebellum. f PMNs
are seen associated to blood
vessels (arrow) and extravasated from the vasculature
(arrowhead). g PMNs located
inside and surrounding a large
meningeal vessel in the cerebellum. The inset is magnified in h
showing the adjacent infarcted
cerebellar parenchyma where
an extravasated PMN is seen
in the molecular cell layer. The
asterisk indicates a red hypoxic
Purkinje cell. Insets illustrate
the cells in more detail after
magnification of the area inside
the box in each picture (×2
in d; ×2.5 in a; ×3 in e). Bar
scale (a, b, d–g) 20 μm; (c, h)
10 μm

not in the non-affected territories. Cells with the characteristic morphology of neutrophils carrying the typical enzymes MPO and neutrophil elastase were seen in
perivascular spaces of the infarcted tissue and to a lower

extent extravasated from the vessels, but their numbers
were comparatively more discrete than in the surrounding
leptomeninges. In the human cases we have some evidence
of permanent arterial occlusions but we are not certain

13

	
254

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	

◂ Fig. 7  Neutrophil elastase positive cells in human stroke. a–d

Staining is shown for neutrophil elastase (green), laminin (red),
DAPI (blue), and the merged images. a Unaffected non-ischemic
brain region showing an intravascular elastase + cell (arrow). b
Infarcted core region showing perivascular elastase + cells (arrow).
c Elastase + cells extravasated at the meninges proximal to the
ischemic tissue (arrow). d Elastase + cells extravasated from a vessel (arrow). e Double staining with neutrophil elastase and myeloperoxidase (MPO) show colocalization in the same cell. a is from patient
number 2; b is from patient number 3; c–e are from patient number
4. f–h Quantification of the number of neutrophil elastase + cells
per area in brain sections according to their intravascular, perivascular, or extravascular localization shows the values corresponding to a
control non-affected region, the periphery of infarction, and the core
of infarction, as well as the zone of the leptomeninges proximal to
the core (ischemic) or to a non-affected region (control). Values are
expressed as the mean ± SEM for n = 3 patients. There was a nonsignificant trend to higher neutrophil elastase + cell numbers/area in
the core region versus the corresponding control region. A significant
increase in neutrophil elastase + cell numbers/area was found in the
meninges adjacent to the ischemic tissue versus the meninges adjacent to the non-affected brain tissue. *p < 0.05. Bar scale 10 μm

about the precise status of blood flow at the time of death
since imaging studies for research purposes cannot often
be performed in critical stroke patients. This fact may be
an important confounding factor given that, from the animal results, we would only expect substantial neutrophil
infiltration to the parenchyma through the leptomeninges
pathway after prolonged periods of ischemia. Nevertheless, the majority of patients that do not recanalize in the
acute phase of stroke have long-lasting occlusions [39, 46,
51]. Although the small number of stroke patients and the
heterogeneity of the infarcted territories are limitations of
this study, we detected neutrophils in the leptomeninges
proximal to the infarction in all the patients. This finding
is a proof of concept that our experimental results could be
relevant to human stroke.
In summary, we showed that during MCAo, neutrophils
reached cortical brain territories devoid of blood flow after
extravasating from leptomeningeal vessels surrounding
the infarcted tissue and reaching the cortical parenchymal
basal lamina as well as the perivascular spaces of cortical
arterioles. After prolonged periods of ischemia, neutrophils
became activated showing signs of NET formation inside
the vessel lumen and around the blood vessels suggesting
that the neurovascular unit is a target of action of neutrophils in stroke. The presence of neutrophils in the leptomeninges surrounding the infarcted regions was confirmed in
postmortem human brain tissue supporting that this pathway is also relevant for neutrophil recruitment in human
ischemic stroke.
Acknowledgments Supported by the Spanish Ministries of
Economy (SAF2011-30492) and Health (FIS PI12/01437), and
FP7 EU projects ERANET-NEURON (PRI-PIMNEU-2011-1342)
and InMIND (grant agreement no 278,850). We acknowledge Alba

255
Hernández, Unai Perpiñá and Ana Guerrero for technical assistance.
We thank the Cytometry and Image Platforms of IDIBAPS, and Dr.
Maria Calvo and Anna Bosch of the Confocal Microscopy Unit of the
Serveis Cientifico-Tècnics of the University of Barcelona for technical advice and support. We are indebted to the Neurological Tissue
Bank of the Biobank-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS for sample and data
procurement, and to patient’s relatives for giving consent to this study.
We thank Dr. Vanessa Brait for helpful comments and editing.
Conflict of interest  The authors declare no disclosures.

References
	 1.	 Allen C, Thornton P, Denes A, McColl BW, Pierozynski A, Monestier M, Pinteaux E, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM (2012) Neutrophil cerebrovascular transmigration triggers rapid neurotoxicity
through release of proteases associated with decondensed DNA.
J Immunol 189:381–392
	2.	 Amulic B, Hayes G (2011) Neutrophil extracellular traps. Curr
Biol 21:R297–R298
	 3.	 Arbel-Ornath M, Hudry E, Eikermann-Haerter K, Hou S, Gregory
JL, Zhao L, Betensky RA, Frosch MP, Greenberg SM, Bacskai BJ
(2013) Interstitial fluid drainage is impaired in ischemic stroke and
Alzheimer’s disease mouse models. Acta Neuropathol 126:353–364
	4.	 Barone FC, Hillegass LM, Price WJ, White RF, Lee EV, Feuerstein GZ, Sarau HM, Clark RK, Griswold DE (1991) Polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltration into cerebral focal ischemic tissue: myeloperoxidase activity assay and histologic verification. J
Neurosci Res 29:336–345
	5.	 Carare RO, Bernardes-Silva M, Newman TA, Page AM, Nicoll
JA, Perry VH, Weller RO (2008) Solutes, but not cells, drain from
the brain parenchyma along basement membranes of capillaries
and arteries: significance for cerebral amyloid angiopathy and
neuroimmunology. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 34:131–144
	 6.	 Chamorro A, Meisel A, Planas AM, Urra X, van de Beek D, Veltkamp R (2012) The immunology of acute stroke. Nat Rev Neurol
8:401–410
	7.	Chen GY, Nuñez G (2010) Sterile inflammation: sensing and
reacting to damage. Nat Rev Immunol 10:826–837
	 8.	 Chu HX, Kim HA, Lee S, Moore JP, Chan CT, Vinh A, Gelderblom M, Arumugam TV, Broughton BR, Drummond GR, Sobey
CG (2014) Immune cell infiltration in malignant middle cerebral
artery infarction: comparison with transient cerebral ischemia. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 34:450–459
	 9.	 Clark WM, Madden KP, Rothlein R, Zivin JA (1991) Reduction
of central nervous system ischemic injury by monoclonal antibody to intercellular adhesion molecule. J Neurosurg 75:623–627
	10.	 Connolly ES Jr, Winfree CJ, Springer TA, Naka Y, Liao H, Yan
SD, Stern DM, Solomon RA, Gutierrez-Ramos JC, Pinsky DJ
(1996) Cerebral protection in homozygous null ICAM-1 mice
after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Role of neutrophil adhesion in the pathogenesis of stroke. J Clin Invest 97:209–216
	11.	 Cserr HF, Harling-Berg CJ, Knopf PM (1992) Drainage of brain
extracellular fluid into blood and deep cervical lymph and its
immunological significance. Brain Pathol 2:269–276
	12.	 Cuartero MI, Ballesteros I, Moraga A, Nombela F, Vivancos J,
Hamilton JA, Corbí AL, Lizasoain I, Moro MA (2013) N2 Neutrophils, novel players in brain inflammation after stroke: modulation by the PPARγ agonist rosiglitazone. Stroke 44:3498–3508
	13.	 de la Rosa X, Cervera A, Kristoffersen AK, Valdés CP, Varma
HM, Justicia C, Durduran T, Chamorro Á, Planas AM (2014)
Mannose-binding lectin promotes local microvascular thrombosis
after transient brain ischemia in mice. Stroke 45:1453–1459

13

	
256
	14.	 del Zoppo GJ, Mabuchi T (2003) Cerebral microvessel responses
to focal ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23:879–894
	15.	del Zoppo GJ, Schmid-Schönbein GW, Mori E, Copeland BR,
Chang CM (1991) Polymorphonuclear leukocytes occlude capillaries following middle cerebral artery occlusion and reperfusion
in baboons. Stroke 22:1276–1283
	16.	 Dirks M, Niessen LW, Huijsman R, van Wijngaarden J, Minkman MM, Franke CL, van Oostenbrugge RJ, Koudstaal PJ, Dippel DW, PRomoting ACute Thrombolysis in Ischemic StrokE
(PRACTISE) Investigators (2007) Promoting thrombolysis in
acute ischaemic stroke. Int J Stroke 2:151–159
	17.	 Engelhardt B, Ransohoff RM (2005) The ins and outs of T-lymphocyte trafficking to the CNS: anatomical sites and molecular
mechanisms. Trends Immunol 26:485–495
18.	Enzmann G, Mysiorek C, Gorina R, Cheng YJ, Ghavam	
pour S, Hannocks MJ, Prinz V, Dirnagl U, Endres M, Prinz M,
Beschorner R, Harter PN, Mittelbronn M, Engelhardt B, Sorokin
L (2013) The neurovascular unit as a selective barrier to polymorphonuclear granulocyte (PMN) infiltration into the brain after
ischemic injury. Acta Neuropathol 125:395–412
19.	Fridlender ZG, Albelda SM (2012) Tumor-associated neutro	
phils: friend or foe? Carcinogenesis 33:949–955
	20.	 Fuchs TA, Brill A, Duerschmied D, Schatzberg D, Monestier M,
Myers DD Jr, Wrobleski SK, Wakefield TW, Hartwig JH, Wagner
DD (2010) Extracellular DNA traps promote thrombosis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 107:15880–15885
	21.	 Garcia JH, Liu KF, Bree MP (1996) Effects of CD11b/18 monoclonal antibody on rats with permanent middle cerebral artery
occlusion. Am J Pathol 148:241–248
	22.	Garcia JH, Liu KF, Yoshida Y, Lian J, Chen S, del Zoppo GJ
(1994) Influx of leukocytes and platelets in an evolving brain
infarct (Wistar rat). Am J Pathol 144:188–199
	23.	 Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, Behrens D, Choe CU,
Siler DA, Arumugam TV, Orthey E, Gerloff C, Tolosa E, Magnus
T (2009) Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell
accumulation in stroke. Stroke 40:1849–1857
	24.	 Hallenbeck JM, Dutka AJ, Tanishima T, Kochanek PM, Kumaroo
KK, Thompson CB, Obrenovitch TP, Contreras TJ (1986) Polymorphonuclear leukocyte accumulation in brain regions with low blood
flow during the early postischemic period. Stroke 17:246–253
	25.	 Hawkes CA, Härtig W, Kacza J, Schliebs R, Weller RO, Nicoll
JA, Carare RO (2011) Perivascular drainage of solutes is impaired
in the ageing mouse brain and in the presence of cerebral amyloid
angiopathy. Acta Neuropathol 121:431–443
	26.	 Hawkes CA, Jayakody N, Johnson DA, Bechmann I, Carare RO
(2014) Failure of perivascular drainage of & #x03B2;-amyloid in
cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Brain Pathol 2:396–403
	27.	 Hernandez LA, Grisham MB, Twohig B, Arfors KE, Harlan JM,
Granger DN (1987) Role of neutrophils in ischemia-reperfusioninduced microvascular injury. Am J Physiol 253:H699–H703
28.	Hutchings M, Weller RO (1986) Anatomical relationships of
	
the pia mater to cerebral blood vessels in man. J Neurosurg
65:316–325
29.	Howells DW, Porritt MJ, Rewell SS, O’Collins V, Sena ES,
	
van der Worp HB, Traystman RJ, Macleod MR (2010) Different strokes for different folks: the rich diversity of animal
models of focal cerebral ischaemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
30:1412–3110
	30.	 Iadecola C, Anrather J (2011) The immunology of stroke: from
mechanisms to translation. Nat Med 17:796–808
	31.	 Jaillon S, Galdiero MR, Del Prete D, Cassatella MA, Garlanda
C, Mantovani A (2013) Neutrophils in innate and adaptive immunity. Semin Immunopathol 35:377–394
	32.	Jiang N, Chopp M, Chahwala S (1998) Neutrophil inhibitory
factor treatment of focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Brain Res
788:25–34

13

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257
	33.	 Kataoka H, Kim SW, Plesnila N (2004) Leukocyte-endothelium
interactions during permanent focal cerebral ischemia in mice. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 24:668–676
	34.	 Krams M, Lees KR, Hacke W, Grieve AP, Orgogozo JM, Ford
GA; ASTIN Study Investigators (2003) Acute Stroke Therapy by Inhibition of Neutrophils (ASTIN): an adaptive doseresponse study of UK-279,276 in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke
34:2543–2548
	35.	 Malipiero U, Koedel U, Pfister HW, Levéen P, Bürki K, Reith
W, Fontana A (2006) TGFbeta receptor II gene deletion in leucocytes prevents cerebral vasculitis in bacterial meningitis. Brain
129:2404–2415
	36.	 Mantovani A, Cassatella MA, Costantini C, Jaillon S (2011) Neutrophils in the activation and regulation of innate and adaptive
immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 11:519–531
	37.	Marín-Padilla M, Knopman DS (2011) Developmental aspects
of the intracerebral microvasculature and perivascular spaces:
insights into brain response to late-life diseases. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol 70:1060–1069
	38.	 Massberg S, Grahl L, von Bruehl ML, Manukyan D, Pfeiler S,
Goosmann C, Brinkmann V, Lorenz M, Bidzhekov K, Khandagale AB, Konrad I, Kennerknecht E, Reges K, Holdenrieder S,
Braun S, Reinhardt C, Spannagl M, Preissner KT, Engelmann B
(2010) Reciprocal coupling of coagulation and innate immunity
via neutrophil serine proteases. Nat Med 16:887–896
	39.	 Meves SH, Muhs A, Federlein J, Buttner T, Przuntek H, Postert
T (2002) Recanalization of acute symptomatic occlusions of the
internal carotid artery. J Neurol 249:188–192
	40.	 Müller I, Munder M, Kropf P, Hänsch GM (2009) Polymorphonuclear neutrophils and T lymphocytes: strange bedfellows or
brothers in arms? Trends Immunol 30:522–530
41.	Nathan C (2006) Neutrophils and immunity: challenges and
	
opportunities. Nature Rev Immunol 6:173–182
	42.	 Papayannopoulos V, Zychlinsky A (2009) NETs: a new strategy
for using old weapons. Trends Immunol 30:513–521
	43.	 Pérez-de Puig I, Miró F, Salas-Perdomo A, Bonfill-Teixidor E,
Ferrer-Ferrer M, Márquez-Kisinousky L, Planas AM (2013)
IL-10 deficiency exacerbates the brain inflammatory response to
permanent ischemia without preventing resolution of the lesion. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33:1955–1966
	44.	 Pollock H, Hutchings M, Weller RO, Zhang ET (1997) Perivascular spaces in the basal ganglia of the human brain: their relationship to lacunes. J Anat 191:337–346
	45.	 Prestigiacomo CJ, Kim SC, Connolly ES Jr, Liao H, Yan SF, Pinsky DJ (1999) CD18-mediated neutrophil recruitment contributes
to the pathogenesis of reperfused but not nonreperfused stroke.
Stroke 30:1110–1117
46.	Rha JH, Saver JL (2007) The impact of recanalization on
	
ischemic stroke outcome: a meta-analysis. Stroke 38:967–973
	47.	 Rørvig S, Honore C, Larsson LI, Ohlsson S, Pedersen CC, Jacobsen LC, Cowland JB, Garred P, Borregaard N (2009) Ficolin-1 is
present in a highly mobilizable subset of human neutrophil granules and associates with the cell surface after stimulation with
fMLP. J Leukoc Biol 86:1439–1449
	48.	 Stowe AM, Adair-Kirk TL, Gonzales ER, Perez RS, Shah AR,
Park TS, Gidday JM (2009) Neutrophil elastase and neurovascular injury following focal stroke and reperfusion. Neurobiol Dis
35:82–90
	49.	 Wang Y, Li M, Stadler S, Correll S, Li P, Wang D, Hayama R,
Leonelli L, Han H, Grigoryev SA, Allis CD, Coonrod SA (2009)
Histone hypercitrullination mediates chromatin decondensation and neutrophil extracellular trap formation. J Cell Biol
184:205–213
	50.	 Weller RO, Kida S, Zhang ET (1992) Pathways of fluid drainage
from the brain–morphological aspects and immunological significance in rat and man. Brain Pathol 2:277–284

Acta Neuropathol (2015) 129:239–257	
	51.	 Zanette EM, Roberti C, Mancini G, Pozzilli C, Bragoni M, Toni
D (1995) Spontaneous middle cerebral artery reperfusion in
ischemic stroke: a follow-up study with transcranial Doppler.
Stroke 26:430–433
	52.	 Zhang RL, Chopp M, Chen H, Garcia JH (1994) Temporal profile of ischemic tissue damage, neutrophil response, and vascular
plugging following permanent and transient (2H) middle cerebral
artery occlusion in the rat. J Neurol Sci 125:3–10

257
	53.	Zhang RL, Chopp M, Jiang N, Tang WX, Prostak J, Manning
AM, Anderson DC (1995) Anti-intercellular adhesion molecule-1
antibody reduces ischemic cell damage after transient but not permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in the Wistar rat. Stroke
26:1438–1442
	54.	 Zhang ET, Inman CB, Weller RO (1990) Interrelationships of the
pia mater and the perivascular (Virchow–Robin) spaces in the
human cerebrum. J Anat 170:111–123

13

