brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

www.elsevier.com/locate/brainres

Research Report

Neuroprotective effect of nobiletin on cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion injury in transient middle
cerebral artery-occluded rats
Nodoka Yasudaa,1, Takayuki Ishiia,1, Dai Oyamaa, Tatsuya Fukutaa,
Yurika Agatoa, Akihiko Satoa, Kosuke Shimizua, Tomohiro Asaia,
Tomohiro Asakawab, Toshiyuki Kanb, Shizuo Yamadac,
Yasushi Ohizumid,e,f, Naoto Okua,n
a
Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku,
Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan
b
Department of Synthetic Organic and Medicinal Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka,
52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan
c
Department of Pharmacokinetics and Pharmacodynamics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka,
52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan
d
Department of Molecular Toxicology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku,
Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan
e
Department of Anti-dementia Functional Food Development, Graduate School of Engineering, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan
f
Yokohama College of Pharmacy, Yokohama, Japan

ar t ic l e in f o

abs tra ct

Article history:

Nobiletin, a citrus polymethoxylated ﬂavone, is reported to possess various pharmacolo-

Accepted 3 February 2014

gical activities such as anticancer, anti-inﬂammation, and antioxidant effects. Recently,

Available online 15 February 2014

nobiletin was shown to provide therapeutic beneﬁt for the treatment of Alzheimer's
disease by activating cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB). In the present study,

Keywords:

we investigated whether nobiletin could protect the brain against ischemia–reperfusion

Nobiletin
Citrus polymethoxylated ﬂavone
Ischemic stroke

(I/R) injury and improve functional outcome in cerebral I/R model rats, since CREB
activation is known to protect neuronal cells in cerebral ischemia. Nobiletin was injected
twice at 0 and 1 h after the start of reperfusion in transient middle cerebral artery occlusion

Neutrophil inﬁltration

(t-MCAO) rats. Cerebral I/R induced prominent brain damage in the ischemic hemisphere

Motor function deﬁcit

of t-MCAO rat brains; however, nobiletin treatment signiﬁcantly reduced the infarct

Neuroprotectant

volume and suppressed the brain edema. Immunohistochemical and TUNEL staining
indicated that nobiletin treatment signiﬁcantly suppressed neutrophil invasion into the

Abbreviations: CREB,
MPO,

cAMP-response element-binding protein; I/R,

myeloperoxidase; I/R,

ischemia–reperfusion; t-MCAO,

TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
n
Corresponding author. Fax: þ81 54 264 5705.
E-mail address: oku@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp (N. Oku).
1
These authors contributed equally to this work.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2014.02.007
0006-8993 & 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

HCO-60, polyoxyethylene (60) hydrogenated castor oil;

transient middle cerebral artery occlusion; TG,

TokyoGreen;

47

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

ischemic region and signiﬁcantly decreased apoptotic brain cell death in ischemic hemisphere, suggesting that the anti-inﬂammatory effect and anti-apoptotic effect should be
regarded as the neuroprotective mechanism of nobiletin. Moreover, nobiletin treatment
ameliorated motor functional deﬁcits in the ischemic rats compared with those deﬁcits of
the vehicle-treated group. These results indicate that nobiletin is a potential neuroprotectant for the treatment of cerebral I/R injury.
& 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

Ischemic stroke is caused by a reduction in the blood supply
to a part of the brain, resulting in fatal brain damage.
Thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) is
approved in many countries for the treatment of ischemic
stroke (Young et al., 2007). Although this therapy leads to the
temporal survival of cerebral cells in the ischemic region by
recovering the oxygen and nutrient supply, a secondary
impairment, namely, cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)
injury, often occurs after recovery from ischemia (Eltzschig
and Eckle, 2011; Wong and Crack, 2008). This injury is a
complex disorder caused by oxidative damage, inﬂammation,
glutamate neurotoxicity, and cerebral edema (GursoyOzdemir et al., 2004; Huang et al., 2006). The suppression of
brain damage from this injury is essential to obtain a good
stroke outcome and to prevent a decrease in the quality of life
of stroke patients. However, a therapeutic strategy for cerebral I/R injury has not been established yet (Ginsberg, 2009;
Hishida, 2007; Tuma and Steffens, 2012).
Nobiletin, a ﬂavonoid present in the peel of citrus fruits,
possesses several biological activities (Nakajima et al., 2007;
Onozuka et al., 2008; Matsuzaki et al., 2008; Ishiwa et al., 2000;
Kandaswami et al., 1991). We previously reported that intraperitoneal treatment with nobiletin for 7 consecutive days
suppresses neuronal cell death induced by 20 min ischemia
in the mouse hippocampus (Yamamoto et al., 2009). Moreover, learning memory deﬁcits following 5 min ischemia is
improved by the consecutive treatment with nobiletin
through stimulated phosphorylation of calcium/calmodulindependent protein kinase II (CAMK II) and cyclic-AMP-responsible-element-binding protein (CREB). Another report demonstrated that nobiletin shows an anti-neuroinﬂammatory effect
by suppressing microglial activation in a microglial cell culture
model (Cui et al., 2011). In addition pretreatment with nobiletin
decreases H2O2-induced cytotoxicity in PC12 cells by several
mechanisms, including those causing an increase in superoxide
dismutase and glutathione activity (Lu et al., 2010). Thus,
nobiletin acts as an antioxidant. In light of the above facts,
nobiletin has the potential to improve cerebral I/R injury by these
multiple mechanisms.
In the present study, we assessed the therapeutic effect of
intravenously injected nobiletin on cerebral I/R injury as an
adjunctive drug after t-PA treatment in cerebral I/R model
rats, namely, transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(t-MCAO) rats. The intravenous injection of drugs is considered as a suitable route of administration for the treatment of
cerebral I/R injury both because neuronal cell death

progresses rapidly after I/R and because stroke patients
cannot be administered drugs orally. However, nobiletin is
hard to dissolve in water because of its hydrophobic property.
Therefore, polyoxyethylene hydrogenated castor oil 60 (HCO60) was used as the vehicle for nobiletin in this study. HCO-60
is an emulsiﬁer for the formulation of some drugs and is
employed clinically (Hanawa et al., 2003; Ali et al., 2010). Also,
some studies have shown that HCO-60 has no effect on the
outcome of ischemia in animal stroke models (Sharkey and
Butcher, 1994; Zhang et al., 2005).

2.

Results

2.1.

Nobiletin reduced cerebral damage in t-MCAO rats

At ﬁrst, we investigated the therapeutic effect of nobiletin on
cerebral I/R injury in the t-MCAO rats. Ischemic brain damage
and brain swelling were evaluated at 24 h after the start of
reperfusion (Fig. 1). As assessed by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride (TTC) staining, nobiletin greatly reduced brain
damage compared with the vehicle (Fig. 1A and B). This
reduction in brain cell death by nobiletin was observed in
the ischemic region. Brain swelling was calculated by the
increase in the size of the right hemisphere as compared with
that of the left one (Fig. 1C). One hour of ischemia and 24 h of
reperfusion increased the volume of the ischemic hemisphere compared with that of the non-ischemic one. The
degree of brain swelling was signiﬁcantly reduced by the
administration of nobiletin. Brain swelling was not observed
in the sham-operated group. In addition, nobiletin treatment
did not induce hemorrhage.

2.2.
Fluorescence-labeled nobiletin accumulated in the
ischemic region of t-MCAO rats
To conﬁrm the delivery of nobiletin to the damaged region,
we performed ex vivo ﬂuorescence imaging of TokyoGreenconjugated nobiletin (TG-nobiletin) injected into t-MCAO rats
after reperfusion (Fig. 2). Although the ﬂuorescence of TGnobiletin was detected both in ischemic and non-ischemic
hemispheres, a higher accumulation was observed in the
ischemic region. These data suggest that nobiletin given
immediately after the start of reperfusion rapidly accumulated in the ischemic region and provided a prompt therapeutic effect on I/R injury.

48

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

MPO-positive cells were never observed in the brain section
of sham-operated rats.

2.4.
Nobiletin prevented neuronal apoptosis after
transient cerebral ischemia in rats
DNA fragmentation after t-MCAO was determined by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL) staining (Fig. 4A and B). TUNEL-positive cells were
not detected in the non-ischemic hemisphere. However,
many of them were found in both the striatum and the
cortex of the vehicle-treated group. Treatment with nobiletin
resulted in signiﬁcantly fewer TUNEL-positive cells in both
regions compared with their numbers in the vehicle-treated
group (Fig. 4C and D), indicating that nobiletin was associated
with decreased apoptotic cell death following cerebral I/R
injury.

2.5.
Nobiletin ameliorated motor function deﬁcit in tMCAO rats

Fig. 1 – Therapeutic effect of nobiletin on ischemia/
reperfusion injury in t-MCAO rats; (A) t-MCAO rats (n ¼ 5)
were injected with vehicle or nobiletin (15 mg/kg) via a tail
vein at 0 and 1 h after the start of reperfusion. The brains
were then dissected and stained with TTC solution. (B) The
infarct volume, and (C) the degree of brain edema were
calculated by using Image J. Data are presented as the
mean7S.D. Signiﬁcant differences are indicated as follows:
n
po0.05, nnpo0.01 nnnpo0.001 vs. vehicle.

2.3.
Nobiletin suppressed neutrophil invasion in the
ischemic hemisphere of t-MCAO rats
To evaluate the anti-inﬂammatory effect of nobiletin in
t-MCAO rats, we investigated neutrophil inﬁltration into the
ischemic region immunohistochemically. Representative
photographs of neutrophils immunostained for myeloperoxidase (MPO) at 24 h after the start of reperfusion are shown in
Fig. 3A. In the non-ischemic hemisphere, almost no neutrophil inﬁltration was observed in either the striatum or
cerebral cortex. In the ischemic hemisphere of the vehicletreated group, a large number of MPO-positive cells were
observed in the brain parenchyma (Fig. 3B). In contrast,
nobiletin treatment signiﬁcantly decreased the number
of neutrophils in both the striatum and the cerebral
cortex compared with that for the vehicle-treated group.

Finally to evaluate the outcome of nobiletin treatment on
cerebral I/R injury in the t-MCAO rats, we monitored motor
function of the animals for 7 days post-reperfusion (Fig. 5).
The sham-operated rats underwent the same procedure as
that of t-MCAO rats but without the insertion of a nylon
suture, and the normal rats were not subjected to surgery or
anesthesia. All three groups of rats scored 21 points, the
maximum number by this analysis method. t-MCAO induced
a deﬁcit of motor functional ability, resulting in a much lower
score. On the other hand, the nobiletin-treated group showed
a higher score than that of the control (vehicle) group, thus
indicating that it improved the neurological deﬁcits at 24 h
after reperfusion in t-MCAO rats. Moreover, during 7 days
after injection, the nobiletin-treated group had a consistently
high score, compared with the control. At 7 days after
injection, the mortality rate in the vehicle-treated rats was
33%, and in the nobiletin-treated rats it was 17%.

3.

Discussion

Different kinds of mechanisms are involved in cerebral I/R
injury, resulting in fatal neuronal damage (Eltzschig and
Eckle, 2011; Amantea et al., 2009). In the present study, the
intravenous injection of nobiletin resulted in a remarkable
therapeutic effect on this injury in t-MCAO rats. We propose
that its multiple effects acted additively or synergistically to
protect cerebral cells in the I/R regions. Our results showed
that nobiletin suppressed apoptotic cell death in the t-MCAO
rats. The antioxidant properties of nobiletin could play a role
in this anti-apoptotic effect, since up-regulated formation of
reactive oxygen species after reperfusion is one of the major
factors inducing apoptosis in neuronal cells (Olmez and
Ozyurt, 2012; Li and Jackson, 2002). Nakajima et al. demonstrated that nobiletin promoted CREB phosphorylation in
mice (Nakajima et al., 2007). Also, Riccio et al. showed that
CREB phosphorylation resulted in expression of B-cell lymphoma 2 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Riccio et al.,
1999), which suppress apoptotic cell death in nerve cells

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

49

Fig. 2 – Intrabrain distribution of TokyoGreen-conjugated nobiletin (TG-nobiletin) in t-MCAO rats. t-MCAO rats (n ¼ 5) were
intravenously injected with TG-nobiletin (0.1 μmol/rat) just after the start of reperfusion. Localization of TG-nobiletin in the
brain sections was visualized with IVIS at 1 h after injection. The color bar shows the relative level of ﬂuorescence intensity,
ranging from low (blue), to medium (green), to high (yellow, red). The images represent a typical result from one rat, although
similar results were obtained from another 4 rats.

(Han and Holtzman, 2000; Linnik et al., 1995). Therefore it is
probable that the nobiletin suppressed I/R injury following
the elevation of CREB phosphorylation and expression of
these proteins. The present study also indicated that nobiletin treatment inhibited the inﬁltration of neutrophils into the
brain parenchyma by its anti-inﬂammatory effect. Neutrophils invade into the cerebral parenchyma through brain
endothelium after a cerebral ischemic event, and subsequently induce progressive inﬂammation by the generation
of cytotoxic substances such as hypochlorous acid in inﬂammation sites (Tuttolomondo et al., 2009). This inﬁltration is
closely related to the inﬂammatory cytokine production from
glial and neuronal cells at an early stage after an I/R event.
Nobiletin was found to suppress the production of proinﬂammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α)
and interleukin-1β in cultures of LPS-stimulated microglial
cells (Cui et al., 2011). However, the anti-inﬂammatory effect
of nobiletin in a cerebral stroke animal model has never been
documented. The present study demonstrates this effect in
terms of morphology, motor function and survival, and
suggests that nobiletin exerted its protective effect on the
cerebral cells at an early stage after injection.

The intravenously injected TG-nobiletin accumulated in
I/R regions, which corresponded to the protected region as
judged from TTC staining. This accumulation appears to have
been due to disruption of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) after
the I/R event, for cerebral vascular permeability in t-MCAO
rats is known to be increased at an early stage after I/R (Yang
et al., 2007). In fact, intravenously injected macromolecules
leak into the brain parenchyma immediately after the start of
reperfusion (Ishii et al., 2010). Therefore, our data suggest that
the intravenously injected nobiletin passed through the
disrupted BBB and exerted a pharmacological effect on
cerebral cells. The mechanism and receptor(s) of nobiletin,
if present, remain to be elucidated.
Ischemic cerebral damage often leads to a negative outcome
for the stroke patient, especially by causing language and motor
function disorders. Therefore, the extent of these disorders is
regarded as the major indicator of therapeutic efﬁciency in
stroke experiments. Our present results indicate that nobiletin
treatment improved the motor function deﬁcit caused by cerebral I/R in comparison with the control group during 7 days after
reperfusion. In addition, the mortality ratio of the nobiletintreated group was reduced in comparison with the control group.

50

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

Fig. 3 – Histological analysis of anti-inﬂammatory effect of nobiletin. The t-MCAO rats were injected with vehicle (n ¼4) or
nobiletin (15 mg/kg, n ¼5) at 0 and 1 h after the start of reperfusion. Frozen sections of the brain were prepared at 24 h after the
injection of vehicle or nobiletin, or at 25 h after sham-operation. (A) MPO immunostaining was performed to visualize
neutrophils. Cells indicated by black arrows are MPO-positive cells (brown). Hematoxylin staining was performed for
counterstaining. (B) Quantitative data on neutrophil invasion in the striatum and cortex were also obtained. Five or 4 animals
and 4 sections/rat were used to obtain the data. Scale bar, 20 μm. Data are presented as the mean7S.D. Signiﬁcant differences
are indicated as follows: npo0.05, nnpo0.01 vs. vehicle.

These results suggest that nobiletin may be useful as a neuroprotectant for the treatment of cerebral I/R injury. Functional
outcome and mortality may be much improved if the appropriate timing, frequency, and dosage of nobiletin injections can
be established by further studies.
Notably, the t-MCAO rats treated with nobiletin showed
alleviated hemiparesis in their hind legs. This recovery
probably contributed to the high scores of the nobiletintreated animals. A traumatic insult to the cerebral cortex
can lead to disruption of the corticospinal tract, resulting in a
neuropathological disorder such as hemiparesis of the contralateral hand and leg (Ueno et al., 2012). Moreover, the
striatum is the principal input nucleus of the basal ganglia
receiving motor information from the cerebral motor cortex.
Hence, the observed decrease in neuronal cell death in the
striatum and cortex of the ischemic brain resulting from the
treatment with nobiletin led to amelioration of the motor
function deﬁcits in the t-MCAO rats.
In conclusion, intravenously injected nobiletin decreased
the apoptotic cell death and neutrophil inﬁltration in the

cerebral I/R region of t-MCAO rats. Moreover, nobiletin treatment suppressed the cerebral cell death judged from the
results of TTC staining, and ameliorated the motor function
deﬁcit induced by cerebral I/R. Therefore, nobiletin has the
potential to be a novel agent for the treatment of cerebral I/R
injury. Further study will hopefully reinforce the utility of
nobiletin as an adjunctive drug for use after thrombolysis
treatment of ischemic stroke patients.

4.

Experimental procedures

4.1.

Animals

Eight-week-old male Wistar rats (180–220 g) were used and
purchased from Japan SLC, Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan). The animals were cared for according to the Animal Facility Guidelines of the University of Shizuoka. All animal procedures
were approved by the Animal and Ethics Review Committee
of the University of Shizuoka. All surgeries were performed

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

51

Fig. 4 – Histological evaluation of anti-apoptotic effect of nobiletin. t-MCAO rats were injected with vehicle (n ¼4) or nobiletin
(15 mg/kg, n ¼5) at 0 and 1 h after the start of reperfusion. Frozen sections of the brain were prepared at 24 h after the injection
of vehicle or nobiletin and stained with TUNEL reagent and DAPI. The ﬂuorescence images in (A) the striatum and (B) the
cortex were observed by confocal laser scan microscopy. Quantitative data on TUNEL-positive cells in (C) the striatum and (D)
the cortex were obtained. Five or 4 animals and 4 sections/rat were used to obtain the data. Isc side indicates the ischemic
hemisphere; and Non-isc side, the non-ischemic hemisphere. Scale bar, 20 μm. Data are presented as the mean7S.D.
Signiﬁcant differences are indicated as follows: npo0.05, nnpo0.01 vs. vehicle.

under isoﬂurane anesthesia, and all efforts were made to
minimize suffering.

4.2.

Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion of rats

t-MCAO rats were prepared as described previously (Kuller,
1989). In brief, animals were anesthetized with 3% isoﬂurane,
and the isoﬂurane content was then decreased to 1.5% during
the operation. A heating pad was used to maintain a rectal
temperature of 37 1C. After a median incision of the neck
skin, the right carotid artery, external carotid artery, and
internal carotid artery (ICA) were carefully isolated. A 4-0

monoﬁlament nylon ﬁlament coated with silicon was
inserted into the right ICA and advanced to the origin of the
MCA to occlude it. Silk thread was used to ﬁx the ﬁlament in
place. After the operation, the neck wound was closed; and
the animal was allowed to recover from anesthesia. Reperfusion was performed by withdrawing the ﬁlament by about
10 mm at 1 h after the occlusion under isoﬂurane anesthesia.
The success of occlusion was judged by the appearance of
hemiparesis and an increase in body temperature to (37.8–
38.8 1C) immediately before reperfusion. Animals with no
observable deﬁcits (hemiparesis or increase in body temperature) at 60 min after ischemia, and those that died within 1 h

52

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

Kikai, Tokyo, Japan) and then stained with TTC (Wako Pure
Chemical Ind. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) to determine the amount of
brain cell death, as TTC is converted into a red dye when
taken up into living cells. The volume of damaged area was
calculated by using an image-analysis system (NIH Image J).
The damage regions appeared as completely white areas.
Brain swelling was calculated as the ratio of volumes of right
(ischemic side) to left (non-ischemic side) brain hemisphere
sections.

4.5.

Cerebral distribution of nobiletin

Fig. 5 – Motor activity score of t-MCAO rats treated with
nobiletin. t-MCAO rats were treated with vehicle (n ¼5) or
nobiletin (15 mg/kg, n¼ 7) as described in the legend of Fig. 3,
and these rats were then assessed for motor function by
conducting a neuropathological test using a 21-point scoring
system. Data are presented as the mean7S.D. Signiﬁcant
differences are indicated as follows: npo0.05 vs. vehicle.

Fluorescence-labeled TG-nobiletin was synthesized as
described in Supplemental Fig. 1. TG-nobiletin (0.1 μmol/rat)
was intravenously injected into the t-MCAO rats (n¼ 5) just
after the start of reperfusion. Their brains were dissected at
1 h after the injection and sliced into 2-mm-thick coronal
sections. All sections were placed on glass slides, and the
ﬂuorescence of TG was measured with an in vivo imaging
system (IVIS, Xenogen Corp., Alameda, CA).

after reperfusion, were excluded from the quantitative analysis. In this study, 49% of rats subjected to surgery had a
successful surgical outcome, and thus were used experimentally. In addition, 7 rats that were used to evaluate motor
function were not subjected to surgery. At 1 day after
injection, the mortality rate among the vehicle-treated rats
was 25%, and among the nobiletin-treated rats was 9%.
At 7days after injection, the rate among vehicle-treated rats
was 33%, and among nobiletin-treated rats was 17%. Subarachnoid hemorrhage was observed in these deceased rats. Shamoperated rats underwent the same procedure without the
insertion of a nylon suture. Normal rats were not subjected
surgery or anesthesia. All animals were randomly assigned to
control and experimental groups, and all quantitative data were
assessed by several evaluators (double-blinded test).

4.6.

4.3.

Drug administration

Nobiletin was synthesized as described previously (Asakawa
et al., 2011). Nobiletin was dissolved in 200 mg/mL HCO-60
(Nikko Chemicals Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and ethanol was
diluted 10 fold with PBS to give a ﬁnal nobiletin concentration
of 6 mg/mL. This solution was sonicated with a Branson
soniﬁer 250 (Branson Ultrasonic Corp., Danbury, CT) for
2 min at output setting 3 with a 50% duty cycle. Nobiletin
was administered intravenously at a dose of 15 mg/kg at
the start of reperfusion and 1 h thereafter (total dose was
30 mg/kg). In the vehicle group (control group), the solvent for
dissolving nobiletin was administered to these rats at the
same volume and with the same schedule.

4.4.

Immunohistochemistry

t-MCAO rats were injected with nobiletin (n ¼5) or vehicle
(n ¼4) and sacriﬁced at 24 h after the reperfusion. Before
sacriﬁce, the rats and sham-operated rats were perfused
intracardially with PBS under chloral hydrate anesthesia.
The brain slices were embedded in OCT compound (Sakura
Finetek, Torrance, USA) and then rapidly frozen in dry ice/
ethanol. The frozen brains were cut into 10 μm-thick slices by
using a cryostatic microtome (HM 505E, Microm, Walldorf,
Germany) and thereafter thaw-mounted onto glass slides.
Immunostaining for myeloperoxidase (MPO), a neutrophil
marker, was performed with a VECTASTAIN ABC rabbit IgG
kit (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) using diaminobenzidine (DAB) as the chromogen. Brain sections were incubated in acetone for 1 min at 4 1C, washed under running tap
water for 5 min, and incubated with 0.3% H2O2 for 30 min at
room temperature. After 20 min of preincubation with normal goat serum, the sections were incubated with rabbit
polyclonal anti-MPO antibody for 30 min, followed by biotinylated anti-rabbit IgG goat antibody for another 30 min.
Next, the sections were incubated with avidin–biotin-peroxidase complex for 30 min. Subsequently, they were treated
with the components of a DAB peroxidase Substrate Kit,
ImmPACT (Vector Laboratories) and counterstained with
Mayer's hematoxylin solution (Wako Pure Chemical Ind.
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 4 1C. Finally, the sections were mounted
with VectaMount Permanent Mounting Medium (Vector
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and observed by microscopy.
Quantitative data were obtained from sets of 4 or 5 animals,
with 4 brain sections taken per animal.

Therapeutic experiment
4.7.

Nobiletin or vehicle was intravenously injected into t-MCAO
rats (n ¼5 in each group) at 0 and 1 h post-reperfusion. The
volume of damaged area and the degree of brain swelling
were assessed at 24 h after the start of reperfusion. For this
assessment the brains were dissected and sliced into 2-mmthick coronal sections by using a rat brain slicer (Muromachi

TUNEL staining

Brain sections of 10 μm thickness were prepared as described
above and stained with TUNEL reagents supplied in an
ApopTags Plus Fluorescein in situ Apoptosis Detection Kit
(Chemicon International, Inc., USA). The sections were
ﬁrst ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

temperature and then with ethanol/acetic acid (2:1) solution
for 5 min at 20 1C. DNA strand breaks were labeled with the
digoxigenin-conjugated terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase enzyme by incubation for 1 h at 37 1C. Then, the sections
were incubated in anti-digoxigenin–ﬂuorescein solution for
30 min at room temperature. Finally, the sections were
mounted with Perma Fluor Aqueous Mounting Medium
(Thermo Shandon, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) that included DAPI
(1.0 μg/mL) for nuclear staining and observed for ﬂuorescence
with a microscopic LSM system (Carl Zeiss, Co., Ltd., Germany). Quantitative data were obtained from sets of 4 or 5
animals, with 4 brain sections taken per animal.

4.8.

Monitoring motor function

t-MCAO rats were treated similarly as described under “Therapeutic experiment.” The functional outcome of the rats was
assessed during 7 days post-reperfusion. The rats underwent
a 21-point neurological score analysis as described previously
(Hunter et al., 2000). The analysis was used to evaluate
the motor function of the normal, sham-operated, and
t-MCAO rats.

4.9.

Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired Student's
t-test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed
by Dunnett's multiple comparison tests after checking normality with the Shapiro–Wilk test. Data were presented as
the mean7S.D.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (Nos. 22659010 and 23249005) from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science, and by grants for the
research projects “Application in Promoting New Policy of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries” and “Development of Fundamental Technology for Analysis and Evaluation of Functional
Agricultural Products and Functional Foods” from the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries, Japan.

Appendix A.

Supplementary material

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found
in the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.
2014.02.007.

r e f e r e n c e s

Ali, S.M., Ahmad, A., Sheikh, S., Ahmad, M.U., Rane, R.C., Kale, P.,
Paithankar, M., Saptarishi, D., Sehgal, A., 2010. Polyoxyl 60
hydrogenated castor oil free nanosomal formulation of
immunosuppressant Tacrolimus: pharmacokinetics, safety,
and tolerability in rodents and humans. Int.
Immunopharmacol. 10, 325–330.

53

Amantea, D., Nappi, G., Bernardi, G., Bagetta, G., Corasaniti, M.T.,
2009. Post-ischemic brain damage: pathophysiology and role
of inflammatory mediators. FEBS J. 276, 13–26.
Asakawa, T., Hiza, A., Nakayama, M., Inai, M., Oyama, D., Koide,
H., Shimizu, K., Wakimoto, T., Harada, N., Tsukada, H., Oku,
N., Kan, T., 2011. PET imaging of nobiletin based on a practical
total synthesis. Chem. Commun. (Camb) 47, 2868–2870.
Cui, Y., Wu, J., Jung, S.C., Park, D.B., Maeng, Y.H., Hong, J.Y., Kim, S.
J., Lee, S.R., Kim, S.J., Eun, S.Y., 2011. Anti-neuroinflammatory
activity of nobiletin on suppression of microglial activation.
Biol. Pharm. Bull. 33, 1814–1821.
Eltzschig, H.K., Eckle, T., 2011. Ischemia and reperfusion—from
mechanism to translation. Nat. Med. 17, 1391–1401.
Ginsberg, M.D., 2009. Current status of neuroprotection for
cerebral ischemia: synoptic overview. Stroke 40, S111–S114.
Gursoy-Ozdemir, Y., Can, A., Dalkara, T., 2004. Reperfusioninduced oxidative/nitrative injury to neurovascular unit after
focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 35, 1449–1453.
Han, B.H., Holtzman, D.M., 2000. BDNF protects the neonatal
brain from hypoxic-ischemic injury in vivo via the ERK
pathway. J. Neurosci. 20, 5775–5781.
Hanawa, T., Endoh, N., Kazuno, F., Suzuki, M., Kobayashi, D.,
Tanaka, M., Kawano, K., Morimoto, Y., Nakajima, S., Oguchi, T.,
2003. Investigation of the release behavior of diethylhexyl
phthalate from polyvinyl chloride tubing for intravenous
administration based on HCO60. Int. J. Pharm. 267, 141–149.
Hishida, A., 2007. Clinical analysis of 207 patients who developed
renal disorders during or after treatment with edaravone
reported during post-marketing surveillance. Clin. Exp.
Nephrol. 11, 292–296.
Huang, J., Upadhyay, U.M., Tamargo, R.J., 2006. Inflammation in
stroke and focal cerebral ischemia. Surg. Neurol. 66, 232–245.
Hunter, A.J., Hatcher, J., Virley, D., Nelson, P., Irving, E.,
Hadingham, S.J., Parsons, A.A., 2000. Functional assessments
in mice and rats after focal stroke. Neuropharmacology 39,
806–816.
Ishii, T., Asai, T., Urakami, T., Oku, N., 2010. Accumulation of
macromolecules in brain parenchyma in acute phase of
cerebral infarction/reperfusion. Brain Res. 1321, 164–168.
Ishiwa, J., Sato, T., Mimaki, Y., Sashida, Y., Yano, M., Ito, A., 2000. A
citrus flavonoid, nobiletin, suppresses production and gene
expression of matrix metalloproteinase 9/gelatinase B in
rabbit synovial fibroblasts. J. Rheumatol. 27, 20–25.
Kandaswami, C., Perkins, E., Soloniuk, D.S., Drzewiecki, G.,
Middleton Jr., E., 1991. Antiproliferative effects of citrus
flavonoids on a human squamous cell carcinoma in vitro.
Cancer Lett. 56, 147–152.
Kuller, L.H., 1989. Incidence rates of stroke in the eighties: the end
of the decline in stroke. Stroke 20, 841–843.
Li, C., Jackson, R.M., 2002. Reactive species mechanisms of
cellular hypoxia–reoxygenation injury. Am. J. Physiol. Cell
Physiol. 282, C227–C241.
Linnik, M.D., Zahos, P., Geschwind, M.D., Federoff, H.J., 1995.
Expression of bcl-2 from a defective herpes simplex virus-1
vector limits neuronal death in focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke
26, 1670–1674 (discussion 1675).
Lu, Y.H., Su, M.Y., Huang, H.Y., Lin, L., Yuan, C.G., 2010. Protective
effects of the citrus flavanones to PC12 cells against cytotoxicity
induced by hydrogen peroxide. Neurosci. Lett. 484, 6–11.
Matsuzaki, K., Miyazaki, K., Sakai, S., Yawo, H., Nakata, N.,
Moriguchi, S., Fukunaga, K., Yokosuka, A., Sashida, Y., Mimaki,
Y., Yamakuni, T., Ohizumi, Y., 2008. Nobiletin, a citrus
flavonoid with neurotrophic action, augments protein kinase
A-mediated phosphorylation of the AMPA receptor subunit,
GluR1, and the postsynaptic receptor response to glutamate in
murine hippocampus. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 578, 194–200.
Nakajima, A., Yamakuni, T., Haraguchi, M., Omae, N., Song, S.Y.,
Kato, C., Nakagawasai, O., Tadano, T., Yokosuka, A., Mimaki,

54

brain research 1559 (2014) 46–54

Y., Ohizumi, Y., 2007. Nobiletin, a citrus flavonoid that
improves memory impairment, rescues bulbectomy-induced
cholinergic neurodegeneration in mice. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 105,
122–126.
Olmez, I., Ozyurt, H., 2012. Reactive oxygen species and ischemic
cerebrovascular disease. Neurochem. Int. 60, 208–212.
Onozuka, H., Nakajima, A., Matsuzaki, K., Shin, R.W., Ogino, K.,
Saigusa, D., Tetsu, N., Yokosuka, A., Sashida, Y., Mimaki, Y.,
Yamakuni, T., Ohizumi, Y., 2008. Nobiletin, a citrus flavonoid,
improves memory impairment and Abeta pathology in a
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 326, 739–744.
Riccio, A., Ahn, S., Davenport, C.M., Blendy, J.A., Ginty, D.D., 1999.
Mediation by a CREB family transcription factor of NGFdependent survival of sympathetic neurons. Science 286,
2358–2361.
Sharkey, J., Butcher, S.P., 1994. Immunophilins mediate the
neuroprotective effects of FK506 in focal cerebral ischaemia.
Nature 371, 336–339.
Tuma, R.F., Steffens, S., 2012. Targeting the endocannabinod
system to limit myocardial and cerebral ischemic and
reperfusion injury. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 13, 46–58.
Tuttolomondo, A., Di Sciacca, R., Di Raimondo, D., Renda, C., Pinto, A.,
Licata, G., 2009. Inflammation as a therapeutic target in acute
ischemic stroke treatment. Curr. Top Med. Chem. 9, 1240–1260.

Ueno, M., Hayano, Y., Nakagawa, H., Yamashita, T., 2012.
Intraspinal rewiring of the corticospinal tract requires targetderived brain-derived neurotrophic factor and compensates
lost function after brain injury. Brain 135, 1253–1267.
Wong, C.H., Crack, P.J., 2008. Modulation of neuro-inflammation
and vascular response by oxidative stress following cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion injury. Curr. Med. Chem. 15, 1–14.
Yamamoto, Y., Shioda, N., Han, F., Moriguchi, S., Nakajima, A.,
Yokosuka, A., Mimaki, Y., Sashida, Y., Yamakuni, T., Ohizumi,
Y., Fukunaga, K., 2009. Nobiletin improves brain ischemiainduced learning and memory deficits through stimulation of
CaMKII and CREB phosphorylation. Brain Res. 1295, 218–229.
Yang, Y., Estrada, E.Y., Thompson, J.F., Liu, W., Rosenberg, G.A.,
2007. Matrix metalloproteinase-mediated disruption of tight
junction proteins in cerebral vessels is reversed by synthetic
matrix metalloproteinase inhibitor in focal ischemia in rat. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 27, 697–709.
Young, A.R., Ali, C., Duretete, A., Vivien, D., 2007. Neuroprotection
and stroke: time for a compromise. J. Neurochem. 103,
1302–1309.
Zhang, N., Komine-Kobayashi, M., Tanaka, R., Liu, M., Mizuno, Y.,
Urabe, T., 2005. Edaravone reduces early accumulation of
oxidative products and sequential inflammatory responses
after transient focal ischemia in mice brain. Stroke 36,
2220–2225.

