Ischemic Postconditioning Relieves Cerebral Ischemia
and Reperfusion Injury Through Activating T-LAK
Cell–Originated Protein Kinase/Protein Kinase B
Pathway in Rats
Haiping Zhao, PhD; Rongliang Wang, MS; Zhen Tao, MS; Li Gao, MD; Feng Yan, MS;
Zhi Gao, MS; Xiangrong Liu, PhD; Xunming Ji, MD; Yumin Luo, MD, PhD

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Background and Purpose—Ischemic postconditioning (IPostC) protects against ischemic brain injury. To date, no study has
examined the role of T-LAK-cell–originated protein kinase (TOPK) in IPostC-afforded neuroprotection. We explored the
molecular mechanism related with TOPK in antioxidant effect of IPostC against ischemia/reperfusion.
Methods—Focal ischemia was induced in rats by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion. Reactive oxygen species
production in the peri-infarct cortex was detected using dihydroethidium. Malondialdehyde, as a marker of lipid
peroxidation, and 3-nitrotyrosine, as a marker of protein oxidation, were detected by ELISA. The expression or location
of antioxidant proteins and signal molecules TOPK, phosphatase, and tensin homolog, and Akt was analyzed by Western
blotting and immunofluorescence.
Results—Our results revealed that IPostC relieved transient middle cerebral artery occlusion–induced oxidative damage
by reducing reactive oxygen species, malondialdehyde, and 3-nitrotyrosine accumulation in the peri-infarct cortex and
raised levels of antioxidants perioxiredoxin-1, peroxiredoxin-2, and thioredoxin-1. In addition, IPostC increased p-AKT
and p-TOPK levels, which colocalized in neural cells. In vitro TOPK knockdown by small interfering RNA decreased the
levels of antioxidants peroxiredoxin-1, thioredoxin, and manganese superoxide dismutase activity in PC12 cells. In vivo
intracerebroventricular injection of TOPK small interfering RNA reversed IPostC-induced neuroprotection by increasing
infarct volume and nitric oxide content and reducing manganese superoxide dismutase activity. Moreover, IPostC-evoked
Akt activation was blocked by TOPK small interfering RNA in vivo, but the decreased phosphorylated phosphatase and
tensin homolog level in ischemia/reperfusion was not influenced by IPostC or by TOPK small interfering RNA treatment.
Conclusions—Our results suggest that the antioxidative effects of TOPK/Akt might contribute to the neuroprotection of
IPostC treatment against transient middle cerebral artery occlusion.   (Stroke. 2014;45:2417-2424.)
Key Words: brain ischemia ◼ ischemic postconditioning ◼ oxidative stress ◼ T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase

I

schemic postconditioning (IPostC), a procedure of modified reperfusion consisting of repeated brief episodes of
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) before normoxic reperfusion, protects the brain against I/R injury.1 A remarkably neuroprotective role for both remote IPostC and brain IPostC have been
demonstrated by us and other groups.2–5 Oxidative stress from
reactive oxygen species has long been considered as a key
deleterious factor in cerebral I/R injury,6 and one of the mechanisms of IPostC against I/R injury is its antioxidative function.7 The phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway is
a classical neuroprotective pathway against I/R injury and is
involved in the antioxidative effect of limb remote IPostC.8 In
the present study, we aimed to identify another protective early
response signal to IPostC, which might activate antioxidative

pathways and downstream functional molecules to remove the
oxidation products.
T-LAK-cell–originated protein kinase (TOPK) is a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase–like serine-threonine
kinase, which promotes tumor cell proliferation and prevents
apoptosis.9 The prevention on ultraviolet radiation-B-induced
apoptosis in RPMI7951 melanoma cells by TOPK was
through regulation of peroxidase activity to block intracellular H2O2 accumulation.10 Furthermore, inhibition of TOPK
disrupts the proliferation and self-renewal of neural progenitor cells, indicating its significance in nerve regeneration.11 In
addition, previous studies have reported that the phosphatase
and tensin homolog (PTEN)/Akt pathway is a downstream
signal of TOPK in the proliferation and migration of tumor

Received May 15, 2014; final revision received June 9, 2014; accepted June 12, 2014.
From the Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute (H.Z., R.W., Z.T., F.Y., Z.G., X.L., X.J., Y.L.) and Department of Neurology (L.G.), Xuanwu
Hospital of Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; Cerebralvascular Diseases Research Laboratory, Beijing Geriatric Medical Research Center,
Beijing, China (H.Z., R.W., Z.T., F.Y., Z.G., X.L., X.J., Y.L.); and Key Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases of Ministry of Education and Beijing Key
Laboratory of Translational Medicine for Cerebrovascular Diseases, Beijing, China (H.Z., R.W., Z.T., F.Y., Z.G., X.L., X.J., Y.L.).
Correspondence to Yumin Luo, MD, PhD, or Xunming Ji, MD, Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical
University, 45 Changchun St, Xuanwu District, Beijing, China 100053. E-mail yumin111@ccmu.edu.cn or jixm@ccmu.edu.cn
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org	

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.006135

2417

2418  Stroke  August 2014
cells,12–14 and we found that TOPK was significantly activated by IPostC after 2-hour ischemia/1-hour reperfusion.
We, therefore, hypothesized that (1) IPostC probably reverse
the increases of oxidative stress within ischemic neural cells;
(2) IPostC might activate TOPK that induce neural cells to
express antioxidative molecules that would contribute to the
neuroprotection of IPostC; and (3) the PTEN/Akt pathway is
the downstream target of TOPK, all contributing to the neuroprotection of IPostC in vivo.

Materials and Methods
Transient Focal Ischemia and Postconditioning
in Rats

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee of Capital Medical University. Temporary focal ischemia was induced in male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 280
to 300 g by intraluminal suture occlusion of the right middle cerebral
artery (MCAO).15 To ensure the occurrence of ischemia by MCAO,
regional cerebral blood flow was monitored using laser Doppler flowmetry (PeriFlux System 5000; Perimed, Stockholm, Sweden) at the
following coordinates: 0.5 mm anterior and 5.0 mm lateral from bregma. The ipsilateral cerebral blood flow decreased to 15% to ≈25% of
baseline. A total of 46 rats were used for experiments with 4 excluded, 2 in MCAO plus control small interfering RNA (siRNA) group
because of early attrition, 1 in MCAO plus control siRNA plus IPostC
group, and 1 in MCAO plus TOPK siRNA plus IPostC group because
of failure to maintain cerebral blood flow reduction of <25% of baseline during study. Forty-two rats were assigned into 4 groups (n=12
per group, except for the sham group; n=6): sham operation; MCAO
plus control siRNA (MCAO 2 hours followed by 24 hours of reperfusion); MCAO plus control siRNA plus IPostC (MCAO 2 hours followed by 5 episodes of reperfusion of the ipsilateral carotid artery for
10 seconds and reocclusion for 10 seconds and then reperfusion for
24 hours), MCAO plus TOPK siRNA plus IPostC (MACO 2 hours
followed by 5 episodes of reperfusion of the ipsilateral carotid artery for 10 seconds and reocclusion for 10 seconds and then reperfusion for 24 hours). TOPK siRNA (20 μmol/L; GenePharma, China;
10 μL) or control siRNA with a scrambled sequence (20 μmol/L;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, CA) was injected into the ipsilateral lateral ventricle after MCAO. The sequence of the siRNA-Topk-rat-745
was sense 5′-GGAGACAUAAA GUCUUCAATT-3′ and antisense
5′-UUGAAGACUUUAUGUCUCCTT-3′. Rectal temperature was
maintained at 37°C with a temperature-controlled heating pad (CMA
150 Carnegie Medicin, Sweden) during and after surgery. All animals
were housed in an air-conditioned room at 25±1°C after recovering
from anesthesia.

2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium Chloride Staining
The rats were euthanized at 24 hours after reperfusion, and brains were
quickly removed. Six 2-mm-thick coronal sections were cut at 3, 5,
7, 9, 11, and 13 mm posterior of the olfactory bulb. Slices were incubated in 2% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) solution for
30 minutes at 37°C, then fixed in 10% formalin. The border zone of
infarction was outlined with Image-Pro Plus Analysis Software (Media
Cybernetics). Volume calculation with edema correction was performed blindly using the following formula: 100×(contralateral hemisphere volume−noninfarct ipsilateral hemisphere volume)/contralateral
hemisphere volume. The analysis was done by investigators who were
blinded to the experimental groups. Six rats from each group (except
for sham group) were used to perform TTC staining. The remaining 6
rats in each group were used for ELISA (brain slices 1 and 2), Western
blot (brain slice 3), and immunofluorescence (brain slices 4–6).

Detection of Superoxide Generation
Superoxide generation was determined by fluorescent-labeled dihydroethidium (Vigorous Biotechnology Beijing Co, Ltd.) staining.

Dihydroethidium is cell-permeable and reacts with superoxide to
form ethidium, which in turn intercalates with DNA and produces
nuclear fluorescence. Frozen brain sections were stained with 100
μmol/L dihydroethidium in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) for 90
minutes at room temperature. To determine the fluorescence intensity
of oxidized dihydroethidium, 6 microscopic fields in the peri-infarct
cortex16 were captured randomly by a ﬂuorescence microscope (Carl
Zeiss, Jena, Germany), with a setting of 20× magnification. The total number of cells in all images was counted and the percentage of
nuclear dihydroethidium-positive cells was calculated.

Detection of Malondialdehyde and
3-Nitrotyrosine Levels and Manganese
Superoxide Dismutase Activity
The peri-infarct cortex was defined as that used by Nagayama et
al,17 as shown in Figure 1B. The ischemic core was detectable as
an area of pallor, which was demarcated from the adjacent tissue.
The peri-infarct cortex was dissected by an experienced technician
mainly through the color and consistence of the parenchyma, which
was handled carefully to minimize contamination by the infarct core
to avoid an influence on the test results. Brain homogenates (10%;
wt/vol) were prepared with cold PBS. Malondialdehyde (Uscn Life
Science Inc) and 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT; Cusabio Biotech Co, Ltd)
levels in brain homogenate supernatants were detected by ELISA.
Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) activity was determined
by Kit-WST (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, China) according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. Absorbance was measured at 450
or 575 nm using a microplate reader. Malondialdehyde levels, 3-NT
levels, and MnSOD activity were normalized to the total protein.

Western Blotting
Brain tissue from the peri-infarct cortex17 or PC12 cells were homogenized in a lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 50 mmol/L Tris-HCl, pH
7.5, 100 mmol/L NaCl) containing protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma cocktail). Total protein (100 μg per sample) was
resolved by 10% or 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate gel electrophoresis
and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Blots were
incubated with the following primary antibodies (1:1000) overnight
at 4°C: p-TOPK Thr9, TOPK, p-PTEN (Ser380/Thr382/Thr383),
PTEN, p-AKT S473, AKT, peroxiredoxin-1 (Prx-1), MnSOD (Cell
Signaling Technology), Prx-2 (Epitomics), Prx-SO3 (Abcam), thioredoxin (Proteintech), and β-actin antibodies (Epitomics). Primary
antibody was detected using horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 60 minutes at room
temperature and an enhanced luminescence kit (Millipore, Germany).

Immunofluorescence
Rats were euthanized at 24 hours after reperfusion with intraperitoneal injections of chloral hydrate (300 mg/kg) and perfused transcardially with 4% wt/vol paraformaldehyde in PBS. After incubation for
2 hours in a blocking solution (0.3% Triton X-100, 2% normal goat
serum, 1% bovine serum albumin, and 5% nonfat dry milk in PBS),
frozen coronal sections were incubated with the primary antibodies
p-AKT S473 and p-TOPK Thr9 (1:50). After washing with PBS, sections were incubated in a mixture of fluorescent secondary antibodies
(Alexa 488/Alexa 594–conjugated antimouse/antirabbit immunoglobulin G). Images were captured with a ﬂuorescence microscope.

PC12 Cell Culture and Treatment With
TOPK siRNA
Rat pheochromocytoma PC12 cells purchased from the Institute
of Biochemistry and Cell Biology (Chinese Academy of Science,
Shanghai) were plated in 6-well culture dishes (Corning Inc, Corning,
NY) in Dulbecco Modified Eagle Medium containing 10% (v/v) heatinactivated FBS, 5% horse serum, 1% penicillin, and 1% streptomycin.
The cells were grown at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 environment.
TOPK siRNA oligos (20 μmol/L) were transfected into PC12 cells

Zhao et al   IPostC Activated TOPK After Ischemia    2419

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 1. Ischemic postconditioning (IPostC) treatment decreased oxidant product accumulation in the peri-infarct cortex of rats after
ischemia-reperfusion (I/R). A, Representative photographs of dihydroethidium (DHE) staining and 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) detected by
immunofluorescence and the quantitative analysis of DHE fluorescence intensity. Scale bar, 80 μm. B, Schematic diagram of peri-infarct
cortex in rat brain. C, Detection of 3-NT and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels in the peri-infarct cortex by ELISA and determination of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) activity in the peri-infarct cortex using Kit-WST. D, Cerebral blood flow at different time points:
before ischemia (a), after ischemia (b), 10 min after ischemia (c), 2 h after ischemia (d), 0 min after reperfusion (e), first of common carotid
artery (CCA) occlusion and reperfusion (f and g), second of CCA occlusion and reperfusion (h and i), third of CCA occlusion and reperfusion (j and k), fourth of CCA occlusion and reperfusion (l and m), fifth of CCA occlusion and reperfusion (n and o), and 30 min after reperfusion (p). n=6. *P<0.05 vs sham, #P<0.05 vs I/R 24 h (1-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test).

for 48 hours using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

Statistical Analysis
All data were reported as mean±SEM. Statistical analysis was
performed using SPSS version 11.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). The significance of difference was assessed by Student t test (single comparisons) or by 1-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc tests (multiple
comparisons). The level of significance was set at P<0.05.

Results
IPostC Alleviated I/R-Induced Reactive Oxygen
Species Accumulation, Lipid and Protein
Peroxidation Production
To investigate the preventive effect of brain IPostC on oxidative
stress in the peri-infarct cortex, intracellular O2−· accumulation
at 2 -hour ischemia/24-hour reperfusion was detected with the
fluorescent probe dihydroethidium; protein oxidation marker

3-NT was detected by immunofluorescence and ELISA; lipid
oxidation marker malondialdehyde was detected by ELISA;
and total SOD activity was determined with a kit. The immunofluorescence images showed that no dihydroethidium or
3-NT was detected in the sham-operated rats, but both were
notably present in the peri-infarct cortex of transient MCAO
(tMCAO) rats, which was decreased by IPostC, indicating
that O2−· accumulation after I/R was reduced significantly
by IPostC treatment (Figures 1A; dihydroethidium, 1-way
ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc test P<0.05). In brain homogenates from the peri-infarct cortex, 3-NT and malondialdehyde
levels in the tMCAO rats were higher than that in the sham rats,
which were remarkably decreased in the IPostC plus tMCAO
rats (Figure 1C; 3-NT, 1-way ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc t
test P<0.05; malondialdehyde, 1-way ANOVA P=0.012; post
hoc test P<0.05). By contrast, total SOD activity in tMCAO
rats was higher than in sham rats, but was not decreased by
IPostC treatment (Figure 1C; 1-way ANOVA P=0.014; post

2420  Stroke  August 2014
hoc test P<0.05). Reperfusion can cause overproduction of
reactive oxygen species. The change of cerebral blood flow
during I/R was determined in rats from the I/R group and I/R
plus IPostC group. The results showed that there were no significant differences in initial cerebral blood flow between the
2 groups, and the percentage of regional cerebral blood flow
reductions was 78±6% and 74±5% for the I/R and I/R plus
IPostC groups, respectively. Compared with the I/R group,
IPostC with 5 cycles of 10-second occlusion and 10-second
reperfusion prevented hyperperfusion at MCA territory, when
measured at 30 minutes after reperfusion, which was not
statistically significant (Figure 1D). Collectively, these data
reveal the potent inhibitory effect of brain IPostC on oxidative
stress induced by cerebral I/R.

IPostC Upregulated the Antioxidative Proteins
After I/R
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

To investigate the preventive mechanism of IPostC on
IR-induced oxidative stress in the peri-infarct cortex, we
detected the expression of Prx-1, Prx-2, and Prx-SO3, a
novel group of peroxidases containing high antioxidant efficiency, and thioredoxin, an electron donor for Prx-1, after
2-hour ischemia/1-, 4-, and 24-hour reperfusion. Western blot
analysis showed that the levels of Prx-1, Prx-2, and Prx-SO3
in the IPostC plus tMCAO group were increased dramatically compared with the sham or tMCAO after 2-hour ischemia/1-, 4-, and 24-hour reperfusion (Figure 2A–2C; Prx-1,
1-way ANOVA P=0.012; post hoc test P<0.05; Prx-2, 1-way
ANOVA P=0.014; post hoc test P<0.05; Prx-SO3, 1-way
ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc test P<0.05). In addition, thioredoxin expression was decreased in the tMCAO group after
2-hour ischemia/4- and 24-hour reperfusion compared with
sham group and elevated by IPostC treatment after 2-hour
ischemia/4-hour reperfusion (Figure 2D; 1-way ANOVA
P=0.029; post hoc test P<0.05). The upregulation of antioxidants by IPostC treatment is a potential mechanism underlying its inhibition of oxidative stress in the ischemic brain.

IPostC Induced Upregulation of p-AKT and
p-TOPK
To investigate the antioxidative mechanism of brain IPostC,
we detected the levels of p-AKT and p-TOPK by Western
blotting and their colocalization in the peri-infarct cortex
by immunofluorescence. Western blot analysis showed that
the p-TOPK (Thr9) level was significantly increased in the
tMCAO group compared with the sham group after 1-, 4-,
and 24-hour reperfusion (Figure 3B; 1-way ANOVA P<0.001;
post hoc test P<0.05), whereas the p-AKT (S473) level was
significantly increased in the tMCAO group compared with
the sham group only after 24-hour reperfusion (Figure 3A;
1-way ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc test P<0.05). However,
p-TOPK and p-AKT levels were further increased by IPostC
treatment after 1- and 4-hour reperfusion compared with the
tMCAO group with the same trend (Figures 3A and 3B). In
addition, p-TOPK–positive cells and p-AKT–positive cells
were colocalized in the same neural cells of the peri-infarct
cortex after IPostC treatment, and the abundance of p-TOPK
was weaker than p-AKT, as demonstrated by immunofluorescence and Western blotting (Figure 3C).

TOPK siRNA Decreased Expression of Antioxdative
Proteins in PC12 Cells
To investigate the participation of TOPK in the upregulation
of antioxidative proteins, we detected their expression after
TOPK siRNA treatment for 48 hours in PC12 cells. Western
blot analysis was conducted to verify the knockdown of TOPK
(Figure 4A; P<0.05) and quantify changes in Prx-1, Prx-2,
Prx-SO3, thioredoxin, and MnSOD levels; total SOD activity
was detected with a kit. The expression of all antioxidative
proteins and MnSOD activity, with the exception of Prx-2,
was significantly decreased after TOPK siRNA compared
with the control (Figure 4B–4D; P<0.05). These data demonstrated that TOPK activation is a potential kinase candidate
for the irritative effect of IPostC on the increased expression
of antioxidative proteins.

Figure 2. Western blot detection and quantitative analysis of antioxidative protein
levels including (A) peroxiredoxin-1 (Prx-1),
(B) Prx-2, (C) Prx-SO3, and (D) thioredoxin
(Trx) in the rat peri-infarct cortex after 2-h
ischemia/1-, 4-, and 24-h reperfusion with or
without ischemic postconditioning (IPostC)
treatment. β-Actin was used as loading control. n=3. *P<0.05 vs sham, #P<0.05 vs different time point of ischemia/reperfusion (I/R;
1-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test).

Zhao et al   IPostC Activated TOPK After Ischemia    2421

Figure 3. Ischemic postconditioning (IPostC)
treatment induced upregulation of p-TOPK
and p-AKT in the rat peri-infarct cortex after
2-h ischemia/24-h reperfusion. Western blot
detection and quantitative analysis of (A)
p-TOPK and (B) p-AKT in the rat peri-infarct
cortex. β-Actin was used as a loading control; n=3. C, Representative immunofluorescence images showing colocalization of
p-TOPK (red) and p-AKT (green) in neural
cells. DAPI indicates blue nuclear. Scale bar,
60 μm. n=3. *P<0.05 vs sham, #P<0.05 vs
different time point of ischemia/reperfusion
(I/R; 1-way ANOVA with Tukey post hoc
test). TOPK indicates T-LAK-cell–originated
protein kinase.
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Protective Effect of IPostC on Brain Injury and
Oxidative Stress After tMCAO Was Reversed by
TOPK siRNA
To investigate the role of TOPK on neuroprotection afforded
by IPostC against IR-induced brain injury and oxidative
stress, TOPK siRNA was delivered by intracerebroventricular
injection at the beginning of MCAO, and then the infarction
volume, reactive oxygen species production, and MnSOD
activity were detected after 2-hour ischemia/24-hour reperfusion. The infarction volume after tMCAO was decreased
by IPostC, which was partially blocked by TOPK siRNA
(Figure 5A; 1-way ANOVA P=0.003; post hoc test P<0.05).
In addition, nitric odixe levels were significantly increased
after tMCAO, which was attenuated by IPostC treatment,
but reversed by TOPK siRNA treatment (Figure 5B; 1-way

ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc test P<0.05). MnSOD activity
was increased after tMCAO, which was further elevated by
IPostC treatment and was reversed by TOPK siRNA treatment (Figure 5C; 1-way ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc test
P<0.05). These data suggested that the activation of TOPK
was involved in the antioxidative and neuroprotective effect
demonstrated by IPostC treatment.

Effect of IPostC on AKT Signaling After tMCAO
Was Obstructed by TOPK siRNA
To investigate the crosstalk between TOPK and the PTEN/Akt
signaling pathway in vivo, we detected the levels of p-PTEN
and p-AKT after TOPK siRNA treatment by Western blotting. Compared with the sham group, the level of p-PTEN was
significantly decreased in the tMCAO, tMCAO plus IPostC,

Figure 4. Effect of T-LAK-cell–originated
protein kinase (TOPK) small interfering RNA
(siRNA) treatment on antioxidative protein
levels and activity in PC12 cells. Western
blots for (A) TOPK and antioxidant levels
including (B) peroxiredoxin-1 (Prx-1), Prx-2,
Prx-SO3, and (C) thioredoxin-1 (Trx-1) in
PC12 cells after TOPK siRNA transfection
for 48 h. D, Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression by Western
blotting and MnSOD activity by Kit-WST in
PC12 cells after TOPK siRNA transfection
for 48 h. β-Actin was used as a loading
control; n=6. *P<0.05 vs control siRNA
(Student t test).

2422  Stroke  August 2014

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 5. Neuroprotection of ischemic postconditioning (IPostC) treatment on ischemia/reperfusion-induced oxidative stress injury in rats
was lessened by T-LAK-cell–originated protein kinase small interfering RNA (siR) treatment. A, Infarct volume evaluated by 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. B, Nitric oxide (NO) content in the rat peri-infarct cortex after 2-h ischemia/24-h reperfusion.
C, Assay of total superoxide dismutase activity in the rat peri-infarct cortex by Kit-WST after 2-h ischemia/24-h reperfusion; n=6. *P<0.05
vs sham, #P<0.05 vs middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) plus con siR, &P<0.05 vs MCAO plus control siR plus IPostC (1-way
ANOVA with Tukey post hoc test).

and tMCAO plus IPostC plus TOPK siRNA treatment groups
(Figure 6A; 1-way ANOVA P=0.018; post hoc test P<0.05).
However, there was no significant difference between the
tMCAO group and tMCAO plus IPostC treatment group or
between the tMCAO plus IPostC treatment group and tMCAO
plus IPostC plus TOPK siRNA treatment group. In contrast,
the level of p-AKT was substantially increased after tMCAO
compared with that of the sham group and was further elevated by IPostC treatment, but decreased by TOPK siRNA
treatment (Figure 6B; 1-way ANOVA P<0.001; post hoc test
P<0.05). These results demonstrated that activated TOPK/Akt
pathway but not TOPK/PTEN/Akt is the downstream target of
the irritative effect of IPostC treatment.

Discussion
The present study showed that 5 cycles of 10-second reperfusion and 10-second ischemia was an effective IPostC procedure to suppress I/R-induced oxidative stress and brain injury
in a rat MCAO model. Consistent with this, the expression and
activity of major antioxidative enzymes in the peri-infarct cortex of rats were increased significantly by IPostC treatment.

Further investigation showed that the phosphorylation of Akt
and TOPK were also upregulated by IPostC treatment compared with MCAO, and they were colocalized in neural cells.
Meanwhile, TOPK siRNA downregulated the expression of
antioxidative proteins in PC12 cells, and TOPK siRNA treatment obviously inhibited the antioxidative and neuroprotective effect of IPostC in vivo. Interestingly, TOPK siRNA
treatment also obstructed the IPostC-activated Akt pathway,
showing greater crosstalk between TOPK and Akt pathways
on IPostC treatment. Collectively, we demonstrated that the
activated TOPK/Akt pathway–mediated antioxidative effect
might contribute to neuroprotection of IPostC treatment
against I/R injury.
To date, the neuroprotective mechanism underlying IPostC
has been investigated widely and has been found to be
related to the suppression of oxidative stress,18 endoplasmic
stress,19 cell apoptosis and autophagy,20 and the inflammatory
response.21 Among them, oxidative stress is a major cause of
necrotic and apoptotic cell death after I/R,22 and IPostC was
reported to reduce protein oxidization by increasing the levels
of antioxidants including SOD and catalase.23 We observed

Figure 6. T-LAK-cell–originated protein kinase
small interfering RNA (siR) blocked Akt activation
induced by ischemic postconditioning (IPostC)
treatment in transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rats. Western blot detection and
quantitative analysis of (A) p-PTEN/PTEN and (B)
p-AKT/Akt in the rat peri-infarct cortex after 2-h
ishchema/24-h reperfusion. PTEN indicates phosphatase and tensin homolog. β-Actin was used as
a loading control; n=6. *P<0.05 vs sham, #P<0.05
vs MCAO plus control siR, &P<0.05 vs MCAO plus
control siR plus IPostC (1-way ANOVA with Tukey
post hoc test).

Zhao et al   IPostC Activated TOPK After Ischemia    2423

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

that brain IPostC treatment could reduce peroxidation accumulation including reactive oxygen species, lipid and protein
oxidation after experimental tMCAO in rats. In addition, we
found that IPostC increased the levels of the antioxidative
proteins Prx-1, Prx-2, and thioredoxin in the peri-infarct cortex of a tMCAO rat model. These data support the notion that
IPostC has a potent inhibitory effect on neural cell oxidative
stress in the peri-infarct cortex after cerebral I/R. However,
the mechanism for its interference with oxidative stress was
so far unclear.
In the present study, we tried to indentify the early responsive kinases for IPostC treatment that might activate the antioxidative pathway and the downstream functional molecules
that mop up the oxidation product. We found that TOPK was
activated by cerebral I/R and further increased by IPostC treatment; hence we speculated that the rise of p-TOPK signaling
may be a potential mechanism responsible for IPostC treatment to increase the expression and activity of antioxidants.
Further in vitro study showed that TOPK siRNA treatment
reduced the antioxidative enzymes levels including Prx-1,
thioredoxin, MnSOD, and the activity of MnSOD in PC12
cells. In addition, an in vivo study demonstrated that TOPK
siRNA treatment prevented the antioxidative and neuroprotective effects of IPostC treatment. Previous studies showed that
TOPK is a key regulator for the neural progenitor,11 but its
role in brain ischemia or I/R remains unclear. Here, we have
proven that TOPK is a potential antioxidative stress regulator after cerebral I/R and is one of the molecular mechanisms
involved in the neuroprotection of IPostC treatment.
The crosstalk between TOPK and the PTEN/Akt pathway
on IPostC treatment was further investigated. Evidence supports that the PTEN/Akt pathway is an important downstream
target of TOPK in promoting the proliferation and migration
of tumor cells.12–14 One notion is that overexpression of TOPK
decreases the expression of PTEN and increases the activation
of Akt in lung cancer cell lines.12 Another idea is that TOPK
phosphorylates PTEN at the S380 residue and inactivates
PTEN, which in turn activates Akt that leads to proper G2/M
progression.13 Although the modulation of PTEN by TOPK
was different in these studies, both showed that TOPK could
activate Akt. In the present study, the increase of both p-TOPK
and p-AKT after I/R was enhanced by IPostC treatment, and
p-TOPK was colocalized with p-AKT in same neural cells
in the peri-infarct cortex, indicating the potential crosstalk between p-TOPK and p-AKT. Further studies showed
that knocking down TOPK during tMCAO plus IPostC
blocked the activation of Akt by IPostC treatment, suggesting greater crosstalk between TOPK and Akt on IPostC treatment. However, p-PTEN levels were decreased after 2-hour
ischemia/24-hour reperfusion but not influenced by IPostC
with or without TOPK siRNA treatment. Therefore, our study
reveals that TOPK might be a potential mechanism by which
IPostC treatment upregulates antioxidants to protect against
I/R-induced oxidative stress, and that the Akt pathway might
be a direct or indirect downstream target of TOPK involved in
the antioxidative and neuroprotective functions of IPostC. In
addition, TOPK functions upstream of some other important
pathways, partly as a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
by phosphorylation of p38 MAPK,24–26 JNK1, and ERK2.27,28

Whether these pathways interacted with TOPK on IPostC
treatment needs further investigation.
In addition, IPostC with 5 cycles of 10-second occlusion
and 10-second reperfusion decreased the level of hyperperfusion at MCA territory at 30 minutes after reperfusion; still
there was no statistical significance compared with the MCAO
group. It could prevent overproduction of reactive oxygen species and further reperfusion injury with hyperperfusion. Our
results and others reports29,30 suggest that IPostC might be
a feasible preventive method for reperfusion injury secondary to revascularization. IPostC may eventually be clinically
applicable to certain clinical settings for patients with stroke
or patients subjected to endovascular therapy associated with
carotid artery or other cerebral vessel occlusion and revascularization. Challenges in the application of IPostC to pressing
clinical cerebrovascular disease should be overcome through
careful, well-designed, translational investigations.

Conclusions
Brain IPostC treatment increased TOPK activation, accompanied with the increased levels of antioxidatants Prx-1, thioredoxin, as well as the activation of SOD. The relationship
between TOPK activation and the increased levels of antioxidants was further established in vitro. This investigation
is the first demonstration of the involvement of TOPK in the
antioxidative and neuroprotective effects afforded by IPostC
treatment against brain I/R injury. Furthermore, Akt pathway
activation might initiate the irritative response of TOPK activation on IPostC treatment.

Acknowledgments
We thank Chencheng Zhang for her excellent technical assistance.

Sources of Funding
This project was supported by Natural Science Foundation in China
81271461, 81201028, and 30770743.

Disclosures
None.

References
	 1.	 Zhao H, Ren C, Chen X, Shen J. From rapid to delayed and remote postconditioning: the evolving concept of ischemic postconditioning in brain
ischemia. Curr Drug Targets. 2012;13:173–187.
	 2.	 Wang H, Luo M, Li C, Wang G. Propofol post-conditioning induced
long-term neuroprotection and reduced internalization of AMPAR
GluR2 subunit in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion.
J Neurochem. 2011;119:210–219.
	 3.	 Zhang W, Miao Y, Zhou S, Jiang J, Luo Q, Qiu Y. Neuroprotective effects of
ischemic postconditioning on global brain ischemia in rats through upregulation of hippocampal glutamine synthetase. J Clin Neurosci. 2011;18:685–689.
	 4.	 Peng B, Guo QL, He ZJ, Ye Z, Yuan YJ, Wang N, et al. Remote ischemic
postconditioning protects the brain from global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury by up-regulating endothelial nitric oxide synthase through
the PI3K/Akt pathway. Brain Res. 2012;1445:92–102.
	 5.	 Sun J, Tong L, Luan Q, Deng J, Li Y, Li Z, et al. Protective effect of
delayed remote limb ischemic postconditioning: role of mitochondrial
K(ATP) channels in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemic reperfusion
injury. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32:851–859.
	 6.	 Kahles T, Brandes RP. NADPH oxidases as therapeutic targets in ischemic stroke. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012;69:2345–2363.
	 7.	 Wang Q, Zhang X, Ding Q, Hu B, Xie Y, Li X, et al. Limb remote postconditioning alleviates cerebral reperfusion injury through reactive

2424  Stroke  August 2014

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

oxygen species-mediated inhibition of delta protein kinase C in rats.
Anesth Analg. 2011;113:1180–1187.
	 8.	 Maslov LN, Lishmanov IuB. [Neuroprotective effect of ischemic postconditioning and remote preconditioning. Prospective of clinical use].
Angiol Sosud Khir. 2012;18:27–34.
	 9.	 Zykova TA, Zhu F, Lu C, Higgins L, Tatsumi Y, Abe Y, et al. Lymphokineactivated killer T-cell-originated protein kinase phosphorylation of
histone H2AX prevents arsenite-induced apoptosis in RPMI7951 melanoma cells. Clin Cancer Res. 2006;12:6884–6893.
	 10.	 Zykova TA, Zhu F, Vakorina TI, Zhang J, Higgins LA, Urusova DV, et al.
T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase (TOPK) phosphorylation of Prx1
at Ser-32 prevents UVB-induced apoptosis in RPMI7951 melanoma
cells through the regulation of Prx1 peroxidase activity. J Biol Chem.
2010;285:29138–29146.
	 11.	 Dougherty JD, Garcia AD, Nakano I, Livingstone M, Norris B, Polakiewicz
R, et al. PBK/TOPK, a proliferating neural progenitor-specific mitogenactivated protein kinase kinase. J Neurosci. 2005;25:10773–10785.
	12.	 Shih MC, Chen JY, Wu YC, Jan YH, Yang BM, Lu PJ, et al. TOPK/
PBK promotes cell migration via modulation of the PI3K/PTEN/AKT
pathway and is associated with poor prognosis in lung cancer. Oncogene.
2012;31:2389–2400.
	 13.	 Shinde SR, Gangula NR, Kavela S, Pandey V, Maddika S. TOPK and
PTEN participate in CHFR mediated mitotic checkpoint. Cell Signal.
2013;25:2511–2517.
	 14.	 Chen F, Li R, Wang C, Cao L, Wang Y, Yu L. T-LAK cell-originated protein kinase is essential for the proliferation of hepatocellular carcinoma
SMMC-7721 cells. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013;31:736–742.
	 15.	 Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke. 1989;20:84–91.
	 16.	 Ueno Y, Chopp M, Zhang L, Buller B, Liu Z, Lehman NL, et al. Axonal
outgrowth and dendritic plasticity in the cortical peri-infarct area after
experimental stroke. Stroke. 2012;43:2221–2228.
	17.	 Nagayama T, Lan J, Henshall DC, Chen D, O’Horo C, Simon RP, et
al. Induction of oxidative DNA damage in the peri-infarct region after
permanent focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurochem. 2000;75:1716–1728.
	18.	 Li ZY, Liu B, Yu J, Yang FW, Luo YN, Ge PF. Ischaemic postconditioning rescues brain injury caused by focal ischaemia/reperfusion via
attenuation of protein oxidization. J Int Med Res. 2012;40:954–966.
	 19.	 Yuan Y, Guo Q, Ye Z, Pingping X, Wang N, Song Z. Ischemic postconditioning protects brain from ischemia/reperfusion injury by attenuating

endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis through PI3K-Akt pathway. Brain Res. 2011;1367:85–93.
	 20.	 Gao L, Jiang T, Guo J, Liu Y, Cui G, Gu L, et al. Inhibition of autophagy contributes to ischemic postconditioning-induced neuroprotection
against focal cerebral ischemia in rats. PLoS One. 2012;7:e46092.
	21.	 Joo SP, Xie W, Xiong X, Xu B, Zhao H. Ischemic postconditioning
protects against focal cerebral ischemia by inhibiting brain inflammation while attenuating peripheral lymphopenia in mice. Neuroscience.
2013;243:149–157.
	 22.	 Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C. The science of stroke: mechanisms
in search of treatments. Neuron. 2010;67:181–198.
	23.	 Li ZY, Liu B, Yu J, Yang FW, Luo YN, Ge PF. Ischaemic postconditioning rescues brain injury caused by focal ischaemia/reperfusion via
attenuation of protein oxidization. J Int Med Res. 2012;40:954–966.
	24.	 Abe Y, Matsumoto S, Kito K, Ueda N. Cloning and expression of a
novel MAPKK-like protein kinase, lymphokine-activated killer T-celloriginated protein kinase, specifically expressed in the testis and activated lymphoid cells. J Biol Chem. 2000;275:21525–21531.
	 25.	 Nandi A, Tidwell M, Karp J, Rapoport AP. Protein expression of PDZbinding kinase is up-regulated in hematologic malignancies and strongly
down-regulated during terminal differentiation of HL-60 leukemic cells.
Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2004;32:240–245.
	26.	 Ayllón V, O’connor R. PBK/TOPK promotes tumour cell proliferation through p38 MAPK activity and regulation of the DNA damage
response. Oncogene. 2007;26:3451–3461.
	 27.	 Oh SM, Zhu F, Cho YY, Lee KW, Kang BS, Kim HG, et al. T-lymphokineactivated killer cell-originated protein kinase functions as a positive
regulator of c-Jun-NH2-kinase 1 signaling and H-Ras-induced cell transformation. Cancer Res. 2007;67:5186–5194.
	28.	 Zhu F, Zykova TA, Kang BS, Wang Z, Ebeling MC, Abe Y, et al.
Bidirectional signals transduced by TOPK-ERK interaction increase
tumorigenesis of HCT116 colorectal cancer cells. Gastroenterology.
2007;133:219–231.
	 29.	 Wang JY, Shen J, Gao Q, Ye ZG, Yang SY, Liang HW, et al. Ischemic
postconditioning protects against global cerebral ischemia/reperfusioninduced injury in rats. Stroke. 2008;39:983–990.
	 30.	 Ge P, Zhang P, Wang H, Zhong Y, Luo Y. Ischemic post-conditioning: a
feasible preventive method for cerebral hyperperfusion syndrome secondary to revascularization. Med Sci Monit. 2010;16:SC9–SC11.

Ischemic Postconditioning Relieves Cerebral Ischemia and Reperfusion Injury Through
Activating T-LAK Cell−Originated Protein Kinase/Protein Kinase B Pathway in Rats
Haiping Zhao, Rongliang Wang, Zhen Tao, Li Gao, Feng Yan, Zhi Gao, Xiangrong Liu,
Xunming Ji and Yumin Luo
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Stroke. 2014;45:2417-2424; originally published online July 10, 2014;
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.006135
Stroke is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2014 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
World Wide Web at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/45/8/2417

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published
in Stroke can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office.
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.
Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

