Acta Pharmacologica Sinica (2015) 36: 1416–1425
© 2015 CPS and SIMM All rights reserved 1671-4083/15
www.nature.com/aps

npg

Original Article

Brain protection against ischemic stroke using
choline as a new molecular bypass treatment
Xin JIN1, Ru-huan WANG2, Hui WANG3, Chao-liang LONG1, Hai WANG1, 2, *
1

Cardiovascular Drug Research Center, Institute of Health and Environmental Medicine, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China; 2Cardiovascular Drug Research Center, Thadweik Academy of Medicine, Beijing 100039, China; 3Department of
Neurosurgery, the 307 Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100071, China
Aim: To determine whether administration of choline could attenuate brain injury in a rat model of ischemic stroke and the underlying
mechanisms.
Methods: A rat model of ischemic stroke was established through permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). After the
surgery, the rats were treated with choline or choline plus the specific α7 nAChR antagonist methyllycaconitine (MLA), or with the
control drug nimodipine for 10 days. The neurological deficits, brain-infarct volume, pial vessel density and the number of microvessels
in the cortex were assessed. Rat brain microvascular endothelial cells (rBMECs) cultured under hypoxic conditions were used in in
vitro experiments.
Results: Oral administration of choline (100 or 200 mg·kg-1·d-1) or nimodipine (20 mg·kg-1·d-1) significantly improved neurological
deficits, and reduced infarct volume and nerve cell loss in the ischemic cerebral cortices in pMCAO rats. Furthermore, oral
administration of choline, but not nimodipine, promoted the pial arteriogenesis and cerebral-cortical capillary angiogenesis in the
ischemic regions. Moreover, oral administration of choline significantly augmented pMCAO-induced increases in the expression levels
of α7 nAChR, HIF-1α and VEGF in the ischemic cerebral cortices as well as in the serum levels of VEGF. Choline-induced protective
effects were prevented by co-treatment with MLA (1 mg·kg-1·d-1, ip). Treatment of rBMECs cultured under hypoxic conditions in vitro
with choline (1, 10 and 100 μmol/L) dose-dependently promoted the endothelial-cell proliferation, migration and tube formation, as
well as VEGF secretion, which were prevented by co-treatment with MLA (1 μmol/L) or by transfection with HIF-1α siRNA.
Conclusion: Choline effectively attenuates brain ischemic injury in pMCAO rats, possibly by facilitating pial arteriogenesis and cerebralcortical capillary angiogenesis via upregulating α7 nAChR levels and inducing the expression of HIF-1α and VEGF.
Keywords: ischemic stroke; pMCAO rats; choline; methyllycaconitine; neovascularization; α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor; HIF-1α;
VEGF; angiogenesis; brain microvascular endothelial cells
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica (2015) 36: 1416–1425; doi: 10.1038/aps.2015.104; published online 16 Nov 2015

Introduction

Ischemic stroke is characterized by a high incidence and
high rates of mortality and disability and is severely detrimental to public health. The pathogenesis of ischemic stroke
is extremely complicated, and neuroprotective drugs that
counteract calcium overload, oxidation and apoptosis have
not been clinically efficacious therapies for ischemic stroke[1].
However, producing collateral circulation in the ischemic
region through the anastomosis of blood vessels or molecular
bypass using the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
preparations has been successfully used to treat cerebral or
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail	wh9588@sina.com (Hai WANG)
Received 2015-07-30 Accepted 2015-09-29

myocardial infarctions[2-4]. Follow-up investigations have been
conducted to develop a new molecular bypass therapy using
an oral drug.
Because compensatory angiogenesis occurs in the ischemic
brains of stroke patients[5], it would be interesting to evaluate
a new brain-protective therapy that acts through an angiogenesis pathway. A series of experiments have revealed that the
α7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (α7 nAChR) is involved in
ischemia-induced angiogenesis[6-8]. Choline, a highly specific
agonist of the α7 receptor[9, 10], has been found to promote the
proliferation and tube formation of endothelial cells in vitro,
and we have also observed that choline treatment increases
the capillary density in the ischemic hearts of rats that suffered
a myocardial infarction[11]. These results suggest that choline
could be an important molecular bypass treatment for myo-

www.chinaphar.com
Jin X et al

npg
1417

cardial infarction, and therefore, we hypothesized that choline
might be effective against ischemic stroke. In this study, the
brain-protective efficacy of choline against ischemic stroke
was evaluated, and the possible molecular pathway through
which it facilitates angiogenesis in ischemic brains was also
investigated.

Materials and methods

Animals and drugs
Male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (8 weeks old, 280±20 g and
3 weeks old, 50±10 g) were provided by the Experimental
Animal Center of the Academy of Military Medical Sciences
(Beijing, China). All of the animal procedures were conducted
in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publications No
80-23, revised in 1996) and were approved by the local animal
care and use committee. Choline chloride (catalog number
C7527), nimodipine and methyllycaconitine (MLA) citrate
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO, USA).
The other reagents used were obtained from local commercial
sources.
Animal groups and the permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion
(pMCAO) operation
The rats were divided into the following 8 groups with 18 rats
in each group: sham-operated control rats (sham); pMCAO
rats (model); pMCAO rats treated with 50 mg/kg, 100 mg/kg
and 200 mg/kg choline (Cho50, Cho100, and Cho200, respectively); pMCAO rats treated with 20 mg/kg nimodipine
(Nim), which was used as the control drug to determine the
reliability of the experimental conditions; pMCAO rats treated
with 100 mg/kg choline plus 1 mg/kg MLA, a selective α7
nAChR antagonist (Cho100+MLA); and pMCAO rats treated
with 1 mg/kg MLA (MLA). pMCAO was performed using a
modified filament technique[12]. Briefly, the rats were anesthetized using chloral hydrate (300 mg/kg, intraperitoneal injection). The right common carotid artery (CCA) and external
carotid artery were exposed and ligated. A 19-mm, 4-0 monofilament nylon suture (Sunbio Biotech, Beijing, China) was
introduced through the right CCA into the internal carotid
artery until resistance was encountered, and then the suture
was tied to the right CCA. The body temperature was maintained at 37 °C using a heating pad. Choline and nimodipine
were administered via gavage, whereas MLA was administered subcutaneously. The rats were treated with drugs at 4 h
after surgery and then once daily at a dose of 2 mL/kg for 10
days. The sham and model groups were treated with sterile
water for injection. A total of 42 rats were excluded from further assessment because 35 rats died before d 10, and 7 rats
did not succeed because of the surgical operation. The possible causes of death included a subarachnoid hemorrhage or
a large hemispheric infarction.
Neurological function test
The neurological functions of the rats were tested within 10
days after the pMCAO operation. The rats were evaluated

daily for neurological deficits using the Bederson scoring
system[13]. Their bilateral grasp and beam-walking behaviors were assessed as described previously[14, 15]. Their body
weights were also measured.
Infarction volume analysis
The rats were sacrificed, and their brains were quickly removed
and divided into coronal sections (2-mm thickness) starting from the frontal pole. The slices were immersed in a 2%
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) saline solution in a
Petri dish and were incubated at 37 ˚C for 30 min before fixation
for 4 h using 4% paraformaldehyde. The infarct area was measured by a blinded observer using Image-Pro Plus software version 6.0 (IPP 6.0, Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD, USA),
and the area was multiplied by the section thickness to obtain the
infarct volume. The infarct volume was calculated as a percentage of the contralateral hemisphere using the following formula:
100(contralateral hemisphere volume−non-infarct ipsilateral
hemisphere volume)/contralateral hemisphere volume[16].
Determination of the pial vessel density
The pial vessel density was determined using a modified
method[17]. Briefly, the brains were removed and rinsed using
saline to remove the blood. Stereomicroscopic images of the
right ischemic hemispheres were captured. Each hemisphere was
divided into 6 grids of equal areas, and the total lengths of the
cortical collateral vessels of the middle cerebral arteries (MCAs)
and their control regions were measured using IPP 6.0 software.
The vessel density was defined as the total length of the MCA
collateral vessels within the control regions (µm/mm2).
Determination of the capillary density
We applied immunohistochemistry using an antibody
directed against the cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34) protein to evaluate angiogenesis in the ischemic cortical areas[7].
Briefly, a series of coronal sections (3 μm) of the ischemic brain
regions (bregma 5.2 to 5.8 mm) were cut at 200-μm intervals.
The capillary density was examined using a primary rabbit
anti-rat CD34 antibody (Bioss, Beijing, China). The number of
microvessels/mm2 was used to determine the capillary densities in 6 randomly selected fields within each section, which
were analyzed using IPP 6.0 software.
Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining
Rats were anesthetized and intracardially perfused using
phosphate-buffered saline followed by 4% paraformaldehyde.
Their brains were then embedded in paraffin and cut into
3-µm sections. HE staining was performed to evaluate morphological changes in the nerve cells of the ischemic cerebral
cortices using light microscopy.
Determination of the VEGF level
Blood was collected from the abdominal aorta and then
centrifuged to obtain serum; the rat brain microvascular
endothelial cells (rBMECs) were seeded in 96-well plates and
treated as described in the section “Cell proliferation assay”
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Jin X et al

npg
1418

below followed by the centrifugation of the collected medium
24 h later to obtain supernatants. The levels of VEGF in
abovemention serum or supernatants were measured using a
VEGF ELISA Kit (Boster Biotechnology Inc, Wuhan, China)
Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis
Total RNA was extracted from the ischemic region of the brain
cortex using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, CA, USA). cDNA
was synthesized using qPCR RT Master Mix (TOYOBO,
Osaka, Japan). Real-time PCR was performed using SYBR
Green Real-time PCR Master Mix Plus (TOYOBO) and an
iCycler iQ5 system (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). The primer
sequences were as follows: α7 nAChR, sense 5’-TCCCTCCAGGCATATTCAAGAGC-3’ and antisense 5’-ATTTGCAGGTCCAGTGACCACC-3’; HIF-1α, sense 5’-TGCTGGCT
CCCTATATCCCAA-3’ and antisense 5’-TGGCAGTGACAGTGATGGTAG-3’; VEGF, sense 5’-TGGACCCTGGCTTTACTGCT-3’ and antisense 5’-TGAACTTCACCACTTC
ATGGGC-3’; GAPDH, sense 5’-AGGGCTCATGACCACAGTCCAT-3’ and antisense 5’-ATGCCAGTGAGCTTCCCGTT-3’. The PCR amplification conditions were as follows:
95 °C for 60 s, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 60 °C for
15 s and 72 °C for 30 s. The data were quantified using the
2-∆∆Ct method, and the relative fold changes were corrected
according to the level of GAPDH expression and were normalized according to the sham group values.
Western blotting analysis
The ischemic brain cortex was homogenized, and the protein
concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid (BCA)
reagent (Applygen, Beijing, China). Fifty micrograms of protein was separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), transferred from the gel to
a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane, and stained
using the following primary antibodies prior to incubation
with a secondary antibody: anti-α7 nAChR, (1:1000; Abcam,
Boston, MA, USA), anti-HIF-1α (1:500, Novus, Cambridge,
UK), and anti-VEGF (1:500; Santa Cruz, Dallas, TX, USA). The
labeled protein bands were visualized using chemiluminescence detection reagents (Applygen, Beijing, China) and were
analyzed using a chemiluminescence imaging system (Sage
Creation Science, Beijing, China). All of the blots were probed
with an anti-GAPDH antibody to correct for loading.
Cultivation of rBMECs
rBMECs were isolated from the brains of 3-week-old SD rats
using a modified collagenase/dispase-based digestion protocol[18]. Briefly, the cerebral cortex was minced, homogenized
and passed through 200-μm and 77-μm strainers. The tissue
remaining on the strainer was digested using a 0.1% collagenase/dispase solution for 25 min at 37 °C. The pellet was separated by centrifugation at 1000×g for 20 min in 25% bovine
serum albumin-Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM).
The precipitate was cultured at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere of 95% air and 5% CO 2 in complete DMEM culture
medium. The cells used in the present study were passaged
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

three times and were positive for CD34, as determined using
immunocytochemistry.
HIF-1α siRNA transfer
rBMECs were seeded at a density of 2×105 cells per well in a
six-well plate and were grown in antibiotic-free medium until
they reached 60%–80% confluence. They were then subjected
to gene silencing using small-interfering-RNA (siRNA) targeting HIF-1α or an HIF-1α scrambled control and a transfection
reagent (sc-45919, sc-37007 and sc-29528, Santa Cruz) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The transfection efficiency was evaluated using Western blot analysis of HIF-1α.
Cell proliferation assay
rBMECs were seeded at a density of 5000 cells per well in
96-well plates and were cultured in a humidified atmosphere
of 95% air and 5% CO2 for 24 h. Next, the cells were cultured
in a humidified hypoxic incubator (CB150, Binder, Tuttlingen,
Germany) containing 1% O2, 5% CO 2 and 95% air for 24 h
and were then exposed to the following treatments: special
DMEM without choline (Merck Millipore Beijing Skywing,
Beijing, China); 1, 10 or 100 µmol/L choline; 10 µmol/L choline plus 1 µmol/L MLA or 100 nmol/L HIF-1α siRNA; or
1 µmol/L MLA. After 24 h, the number of viable cells was
quantified using a cell proliferation assay kit (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), which is based on a tetrazolium compound
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt; MTS]. Briefly, 20 µL of
the assay reagent was added to 100 µL of medium and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 2 h, after which the absorbance
was measured at 490 nm using a multifunction microplate
reader (Flexstation 3, Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).
Wound healing assay
A wound-healing assay was performed as previously described
with minor modifications [19]. Briefly, a confluent rBMEC
monolayer in a 12-well plate was wounded by scraping with
a pipette tip. The cell treatments were the same as described
above. The cell migration distance from the wound edge to
the end point was calculated at 24 h using IPP 6.0 software.
Tube formation assay
A tube formation assay was performed as previously
described[20]. rBMECs were seeded in 96-well plates that had
been pre-coated with a thin layer of Matrigel (BD Biosciences,
Shanghai, China) and were allowed to form tube-like structures. The cell treatments were the same as described above.
Tube formation was analyzed using the online WimTube
image analysis tool and was quantified according to the total
tube lengths at 10 h.
Statistical analysis
All of the data were presented as the mean values±standard
error of the mean (SEM). Statistical analysis of the data was
performed using the SPSS version 13.0 software package (SPSS
Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). The differences were assessed using a

www.chinaphar.com
Jin X et al

npg
1419

one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a post hoc
Bonferroni’s test. Differences were considered significant at a
P value of less than 0.05.

Results

Molecular mechanisms by which choline facilitated angiogenesis
in stroke-damaged brains
To understand the molecular pathway through which choline
facilitated angiogenesis in the stroke-damaged brains, we
investigated possible changes in the levels of molecular targets

Choline treatment facilitated ischemia-induced angiogenesis in
the stroke-damaged brains
As shown in Figure 3, 10 days after the pMCAO operation, we
observed ischemia-induced angiogenesis at the surface of the
ischemic cortex, which was characterized by findings including
increases in the blood vessel density at the cortical surface and
the number of microvessels in the cortex. The choline treatments clearly facilitated ischemia-induced angiogenesis, which
was prevented by treatment with MLA at a dose of 1 mg/kg.
Moreover, similar facilitative effects were not observed in
pMCAO-rats treated with nimodipine at a dose of 20 mg/kg.

Figure 1. Effects of oral choline treatment on the neurologic functions and
body weight of rats 10 days after the surgical permanent middle cerebral
artery occlusion (pMCAO). (A) Bederson score (n=10). (B) Muscle strength
score (n=10). (C) Beam walking score (n=9). (D) Body weight (n=12).
Mean±SEM. bP<0.05, cP<0.01 vs sham; eP<0.05, fP<0.01 vs pMCAO.

Choline provides brain protection against ischemic stroke
The neurological deficits, infarct volumes and necrotic neurocyte populations were determined to evaluate the extent of
brain damage due to an ischemic stroke, which was imitated
through surgical pMCAO in rats. The rats were randomly
divided into eight groups, which are described in detail in the
experimental procedures section. The extent of brain damage
due to an ischemic stroke was evaluated by determining the
differences between the sham-operated and pMCAO-operated
rats, and the pharmacological effects of choline against ischemic stroke were evaluated by determining the differences
between the pMCAO-operated rats treated with choline or its
solvent. Treatment using nimodipine was designed to ensure
the reliability of the methods used to evaluate the brain-protective efficacy of the tested drugs against the effects of stroke.
In this experiment, brain damage due to stroke was characterized by an increase in the Bederson score (Figure 1A) and
beam-walking score (Figure 1C) and a decrease in the musclestrength score (Figure 1B) and body weight (Figure 1D), all of
which were attenuated by treatment with nimodipine, except
the decrease in the beam-walking score. Under the same
experimental conditions, after treatment with choline at doses
of 100 or 200 mg·kg-1·d-1 (po) for 10 days, the body weight and
muscle-strength score of the pMCAO rats increased and the
Bederson score decreased, whereas the beam-walking score
decreased to some extent but not significantly (P>0.05); these
improvements, except that of the beam-walking score, were
attenuated by treatment with MLA, a specific antagonist of the
α7 nAChR, at a dose of 1 mg·kg-1·d-1 for 10 days before the oral
administration of choline at 100 mg/kg.
Assays were conducted to observe the pathological damage
due to ischemic stroke. As shown in Figure 2, the infarct volume and the number of necrotic neurocytes in the brains of the
pMCAO rats were reduced by treatment with choline at doses of
50, 100 or 200 mg·kg-1·d-1 (po) for 10 days, which were also prevented by treatment with MLA at a dose of 1 mg/kg. The above
findings indicated that oral treatment with choline ameliorated
the neurological deficits and alleviated the pathological damage
due to ischemic stroke through the α7 receptor pathway.

Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Jin X et al

npg
1420

Figure 2. Effects of oral choline treatment on the infarct volume and pathological changes in the ischemic brains. (A) Macroscopic images of TTC-stained brain slices. (B)
Infarct volumes (n=6). (C) Microscopic images of HE-stained ischemic cerebral cortex sections. (D) Number of neurons (n=3). Mean±SEM. bP<0.05, cP<0.01 vs sham;
e
P<0.05, fP<0.01 vs pMCAO. The arrows indicate neurons with different pathological changes. Scale bar=50 µm.

Figure 3. Effects of oral choline treatment on angiogenesis in the ischemic brains. (A) Macroscopic images of the pial vasculature. (B) Microscopic
images of ischemic cerebral cortex sections immunohistochemically stained using an anti-CD34 antibody to analyze vessel density, scale bar=20 µm. (C)
Vessel density (n=6). (D) Number of microvessels in the cortex (n=3). Mean±SEM. bP<0.05, cP<0.01 vs sham; eP<0.05, fP<0.01 vs pMCAO.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.chinaphar.com
Jin X et al

npg
1421

involved in this process. Increases in the expression of the
α7 receptor, HIF-1α and VEGF at both the gene (Figure 4A)
and protein (Figure 4B) levels were observed in the pMCAOoperated rats when ischemia-induced angiogenesis occurred,
and the facilitative effects of choline treatment were characterized by a further increase in the expression of the α7 receptor,

HIF-1α and VEGF at both the gene and protein levels, which
could be prevented by MLA treatment. At the same time, the
serum level of VEGF was further increased by treatment with
choline at doses of 50, 100 or 200 mg·kg-1·d-1 for 10 days (Figure 5A). Based on these results, it was reasonable to suggest
that choline might facilitate ischemia-induced angiogenesis in

Figure 4. Effects of oral choline treatment on the gene and protein expression levels, respectively, of α7 nAChR (A and B), HIF-1α (C and D), and VEGF (E
and F) in the ischemic cerebral cortex. Mean±SEM. n=3. bP<0.05, cP<0.01 vs sham; eP<0.05, fP<0.01 vs pMCAO.

Figure 5. Effects of choline treatment on the levels of VEGF in the sera of rats and the supernatants derived from rBMEC cultures. (A) The levels of
VEGF in the sera of the pMCAO-operated rats (n=8). (B) The levels of VEGF in the supernatants derived from rBMEC cultures (n=6). Mean±SEM. In A:
b
P<0.05, cP<0.01 vs pMCAO. In B: bP<0.05, cP<0.01 vs control.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Jin X et al

npg
1422

stroke-damaged brains through upregulation of α7 receptor
level, which might induce the expression of HIF-1α and VEGF.
In rBMECs cultured under hypoxic conditions, the release
of VEGF into the medium was stimulated by the presence of
choline at concentrations of 1, 10, and 100 µmol/L in a concentration-dependent manner and prevented by the presence
of MLA at 1 µmol/L or by decreasing the amount of HIF-1α
with siRNA (Figure 5B; the interfering effect of siRNA was
determined with Western blotting, Supplementary Figure S1).
Moreover, the proliferation (Figure 6A) and migration (Figures
6B and 6E) of rBMECs, as well as their tube formation (Figures
6C and 6D), were also facilitated by the presence of choline in
a concentration-dependent manner, which was also prevented
by the presence of MLA at 1 µmol/L or by HIF-1α siRNA.
Therefore, it was reasonable to suggest that hypoxia-induced

endothelial-cell proliferation, migration and tube formation,
which contribute to ischemia-induced angiogenesis, might be
facilitated by choline stimulating the release of HIF-1α and
VEGF from endothelial cells through the α7 receptor.

Discussion

Promoting the development of collateral circulation in ischemic regions has been shown to be effective in treating vascular ischemic diseases. Blood-vessel anastomosis has been
successfully used to develop collateral circulation after myocardial infarction and in patients with Moyamoya disease[21].
Molecular bypass using VEGF preparations has also been
used to promote the development of collateral circulation after
myocardial infarction and in patients with peripheral vascular
ischemic diseases[2-4]. Follow-up investigations have been con-

Figure 6. Effects of choline treatment on the proliferation (A, n=4), migration (B, n=3) and tube formation (C, n=4) of rBMECs cultured under hypoxic
conditions. (D) Microscopic images for the tube formation assay. (E) Microscopic images for the wound healing assay. Mean±SEM. Scale bar=200 μm.
b
P<0.05, cP<0.01 vs control.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.chinaphar.com
Jin X et al

npg
1423

ducted to develop new molecular bypass therapies using oral
drugs. Choline, a specific α7 receptor agonist[9, 10], can stimulate angiogenesis and can protect the heart from ischemic injuries by promoting angiogenesis in ischemic regions[11]. Thus,
in this study, we tested the effects of choline treatment on
brains subjected to ischemia and analyzed the molecular pathway underlying its stimulation of angiogenesis.
The results of this study indicated that choline-based brain
protection against stroke is characterized by the improvement
of neurologic deficits, decreases in brain-infarct volume and
the number of necrotic neurocytes, and the reversal of neuronal swelling and cytoplasmic vacuole formation, which could
be prevented by MLA treatment, suggesting that choline protected the brain against stroke through the α7 receptor.
This study showed that the vascular density at the brain surface and the number of microvessels in the ischemic cerebral
cortex were increased at 10 d after surgical pMCAO. These
findings are consistent with the ischemia-induced angiogenesis
observed in the brains of stroke patients. The more extensive
the ischemia-induced angiogenesis, the longer the survival
of these stroke patients[5]. Promoting the compensatory process of ischemia-induced angiogenesis may be a therapeutic
strategy for the treatment of stroke. A series of studies have
demonstrated that the α7 receptor is involved in the regulation
of ischemia-induced angiogenesis[6-8]. In our previous studies,
choline, a selective agonist of the α7 receptor[9, 10], was shown
to enhance angiogenesis in the chick-embryo chorioallantoic
membrane[22] and to promote the proliferation and tube formation of endothelial cells and increase the capillary density in the
hearts of rats that suffered a myocardial infarction[11]. These
observations suggest that ischemia-induced angiogenesis may
be a target for the treatment of myocardial infarction.
This study provides additional support of the feasibility
of choline for promoting angiogenesis. Our in vitro results
showed that choline stimulated the proliferation, migration,
tube formation, and VEGF release of cultured rBMECs grown
under hypoxic conditions, which could be prevented by MLA
treatment. The proliferation and migration of endothelial cells
are critical processes during angiogenesis. VEGF is an important angiogenic factor[23, 24]. Our results indicate that choline
promotes rBMEC proliferation, migration, tube formation, and
VEGF release, which may contribute to its stimulating angiogenesis. The results of our in vivo experiments indicated that
oral choline treatment led to increases in the vascular density
and the number of microvessels in the ischemic cerebral cortex, which was blocked by MLA treatment. The above-mentioned results demonstrated that choline could be used as a
novel therapeutic approach to treat ischemic stroke via the α7
receptor pathway, resulting in the promotion of angiogenesis
and the development of collateral circulation, thereby improving the blood supply to the ischemic region.
The expression of angiogenesis-related genes is upregulated within a few minutes after a cerebral ischemic attack[25].
This study showed that α7 receptor gene and protein expression were upregulated in the ischemic cerebral cortex of the
pMCAO-operated rats, which was potentiated by choline

treatment. Data demonstrating increases in the level of α7
nAChR expression in different brain regions after dietary choline intake support our current results[26]. Nicotine increased
the levels of HIF-1α and VEGF expression through the α7
nAChR pathway in non-small cell lung cancer cells[27]. HIF-1α
upregulates the expression of hypoxia-responsive genes
and induces angiogenesis. VEGF, the expression of which
is regulated by HIF-1α, is the most powerful angiogenic factor that has been reported to date. The expression levels of
HIF-1α and of VEGF and its receptors in ischemic brains are
elevated after cerebral ischemia has occurred[28, 29]; therefore,
the HIF-1α/VEGF pathway is important in the regulation of
angiogenesis. Our in vivo results showed that the levels of
HIF-1α and VEGF gene and protein expression were upregulated in the ischemic cerebral cortices of the pMCAO-operated
rats and that these effects were potentiated by orally administered choline. Choline treatment led to an elevated serum
VEGF level in the pMCAO-operated rats, which was reversed
by MLA treatment. These results suggest that the molecular
mechanisms of the choline-induced angiogenesis in the ischemic brain include upregulation of the expression of the α7
receptor, HIF-1, and VEGF genes and proteins in the ischemic
cerebral cortex and elevation of the serum VEGF level via the
α7-receptor pathway. A previous study by YU JG et al has
suggested that increasing endogenous ACh through enhancing baroreflex sensitivity increases angiogenesis in ischemic
myocardium and promotes expression of VEGF via activating
α7 nAChR[7], which also supports our results.
A battery of tests was conducted to investigate the efficacy of choline in treating ischemic stroke and the molecular
mechanism underlying its effects. We suggest that choline is
neuroprotective against ischemic stroke through the α7 receptor pathway, resulting in upregulation of α7 receptor, HIF-1α,
and VEGF expression in the ischemic brain. Additionally,
we found that nimodipine, a calcium-channel blocker that is
recognized as a neuroprotective drug, showed neuroprotective activity against ischemic stroke, but did not promote
neovascularization in the ischemic brains. These data suggest
that the mechanism through which choline protects against
ischemic stroke is different from that of the calcium-channel
blocker. In this study, we observed that oral choline treatment
stimulated compensatory angiogenesis in the stroke-damaged
brain, although we did not eliminate other pathways through
which this treatment provided brain protection. Compensatory angiogenesis and the development of collateral circulation in ischemic regions play an important role in limiting the
pathogenesis and progression of the effects of stroke and are
closely related to the prognosis of stroke. Thus, molecular
bypass treatment using a specific α7 receptor agonist such as
choline is potentially valuable for the clinical management of
stroke, especially Moyamoya disease.
In summary, choline conferred brain protection against
ischemic stroke in the pMCAO-operated rats and, as shown in
Figure 7, the underlying molecular mechanisms of the novel
pathway through which choline facilitated arteriogenesis of
the pial vessels and angiogenesis in the cerebral cortex at the
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Jin X et al

npg
1424

capillary level include activating the α7 receptor, up-regulating HIF-1 expression, and increasing VEGF release, resulting
in endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and tube formation.

Figure 7. Schematic illustration of a new molecular bypass therapy
against ischemic stroke using choline. Choline confers brain protection
against ischemic stroke in the pMCAO-operated rats possibly via a pathway
that facilitates angiogenesis through mechanisms that include activating
the α7 receptor, up-regulating HIF-1α expression, and increasing VEGF
release, resulting in endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and tube
formation.

Acknowledgements

This study was supported by grants from the State 973
Research Project (2012CB518200) and the State Key Research
Project of China (AWS11J003).

Author contribution

Hai WANG designed the research study and wrote the manuscript; Xin JIN conducted the experiments, analyzed the data,
and wrote the manuscript; Ru-huan WANG conducted some
of the experiments; and Chao-liang LONG and Hui WANG
participated in discussions and writing the manuscript.

Abbreviations

nAChR, nicotinic acetylcholine receptor; CCA, common
carotid artery; CD34; cluster of differentiation 34; DMEM,
Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium; HE, hematoxylin and
eosin; HIF, hypoxia induced factor; MLA, methyllycaconitine;
PCR, polymerase chain reaction; pMCAO, permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion; rBMECs, rat brain microvascular
endothelial cells; SD, Sprague–Dawley; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth
factor; GAPDH, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase;
SDS-PAGE, sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; PVDF, polyvinylidene fluoride

Supplementary information

Supplementary information is available at Acta Pharmaco­
logica Sinica’s website.

References

1	 Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB,
et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics--2013 update: a report from
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

the American Heart Association. Circulation 2013; 127: e6–e245.
2	 Ribatti D, Baiguera S. Phase II angiogenesis stimulators. Expert Opin
Investig Drugs 2013; 22: 1157–66.
3	 Sun Y, Jin K, Xie L, Childs J, Mao XO, Logvinova A, et al. VEGF-induced
neuroprotection, neurogenesis, and angiogenesis after focal cerebral
ischemia. J Clin Invest 2003; 111: 1843–51.
4	 Lekas M, Lekas P, Latter DA, Kutryk MB, Stewart DJ. Growth factorinduced therapeutic neovascularization for ischaemic vascular
disease: time for a re-evaluation. Curr Opin Cardiol 2006; 21: 376–84.
5	 Krupinski J, Kaluza J, Kumar P, Kumar S, Wang JM. Role of
angiogenesis in patients with cerebral ischemic stroke. Stroke 1994;
25: 1794–8.
6	 Heeschen C, Weis M, Aicher A, Dimmeler S, Cooke JP. A novel
angiogenic pathway mediated by non-neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors. J Clin Invest 2002; 110: 527–36.
7	 Yu JG, Song SW, Shu H, Fan SJ, Liu AJ, Liu C, et al. Baroreflex
deficiency hampers angiogenesis after myocardial infarction via
acetylcholine-alpha7-nicotinic ACh receptor in rats. Eur Heart J 2013;
34: 2412–20.
8	 Jacobi J, Jang JJ, Sundram U, Dayoub H, Fajardo LF, Cooke JP.
Nicotine accelerates angiogenesis and wound healing in genetically
diabetic mice. Am J Pathol 2002; 161: 97–104.
9	 Alkondon M, Pereira EF, Cortes WS, Maelicke A, Albuquerque EX.
Choline is a selective agonist of alpha7 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors in the rat brain neurons. Eur J Neurosci 1997; 9: 2734–42.
10	 Papke RL, Bencherif M, Lippiello P. An evaluation of neuronal nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor activation by quaternary nitrogen compounds
indicates that choline is selective for the alpha 7 subtype. Neurosci
Lett 1996; 213: 201–4.
11	 Li XW, Wang H. Non-neuronal nicotinic alpha 7 receptor, a new
endothelial target for revascularization. Life Sci 2006; 78: 1863–70.
12	 Li L, Zuo Z. Glutamate transporter type 3 knockout reduces brain
tolerance to focal brain ischemia in mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2011; 31: 1283–92.
13	 Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski
H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model and
development of a neurologic examination. Stroke 1986; 17: 472–6.
14	 Hattori K, Lee H, Hurn PD, Crain BJ, Traystman RJ, DeVries AC.
Cognitive Deficits After Focal Cerebral Ischemia in Mice. Stroke 2000;
31: 1939–44.
15	 Altumbabic M, Peeling J, Del Bigio MR. Intracerebral hemorrhage in
the rat: effects of hematoma aspiration. Stroke 1998; 29: 1917–22.
16	 Swanson RA, Morton MT, Tsao-Wu G, Savalos RA, Davidson C, Sharp
FR. A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1990; 10: 290–3.
17	 Li W, Prakash R, Kelly-Cobbs AI, Ogbi S, Kozak A, El-Remessy AB, et al.
Adaptive cerebral neovascularization in a model of type 2 diabetes:
relevance to focal cerebral ischemia. Diabetes 2010; 59: 228–35.
18	 Tian S, Bai Y, Yang L, Wang X, Wu Y, Jia J, et al. Shear stress inhibits
apoptosis of ischemic brain microvascular endothelial cells. Int J Mol
Sci 2013; 14: 1412–27.
19	 Wang J, Wang Y, Wang Y, Ma Y, Lan Y, Yang X. Transforming growth
factor beta-regulated microRNA-29a promotes angiogenesis through
targeting the phosphatase and tensin homolog in endothelium. J Biol
Chem 2013; 288: 10418–26.
20	 Lan Y, Liu B, Yao H, Li F, Weng T, Yang G, et al. Essential role of
endothelial Smad4 in vascular remodeling and integrity. Mol Cell Biol
2007; 27: 7683–92.
21	 Starke RM, Komotar RJ, Connolly ES. Optimal surgical treatment for
moyamoya disease in adults: direct versus indirect bypass. Neurosurg
Focus 2009; 26: E8.

www.chinaphar.com
Jin X et al

npg
1425

22	 Wang H, Zeng XZ, Cui WY, Duan L. Choline promotes angiogenesis in
chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane. Chin J Appl Physiol 2013;
29: 229–31.
23	 Zhang R, Wang L, Zhang L, Chen J, Zhu Z, Zhang Z, et al. Nitric oxide
enhances angiogenesis via the synthesis of vascular endothelial
growth factor and cGMP after stroke in the rat. Circ Res 2003; 92:
308–13.
24	 Papapetropoulos A, Garcia-Cardena G, Madri JA, Sessa WC. Nitric
oxide production contributes to the angiogenic properties of vascular
endothelial growth factor in human endothelial cells. J Clin Invest
1997; 100: 3131–9.
25	 Hayashi T, Noshita N, Sugawara T, Chan PH. Temporal profile of
angiogenesis and expression of related genes in the brain after
ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2003; 23: 166–80.

26	 Morley BJ, Robinson GR, Brown GB, Kemp GE, Bradley RJ. Effects of
dietary choline on nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in brain. Nature
1977; 266: 848–50.
27	 Zhang Q, Tang X, Zhang ZF, Velikina R, Shi S, Le AD. Nicotine induces
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression in human lung cancer cells
via nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-mediated signaling pathways. Clin
Cancer Res 2007; 13: 4686–94.
28	 Chavez JC, Agani F, Pichiule P, LaManna JC. Expression of hypoxiainducible factor-1alpha in the brain of rats during chronic hypoxia. J
Appl Physiol (1985) 2000; 89: 1937–42.
29	 Marti HJ, Bernaudin M, Bellail A, Schoch H, Euler M, Petit E, et
al. Hypoxia-induced vascular endothelial growth factor expression
precedes neovascularization after cerebral ischemia. Am J Pathol
2000; 156: 965–76.

Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

