Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 103–110
© 2015 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/15 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Sodium-23 magnetic resonance imaging has potential for
improving penumbra detection but not for estimating stroke
onset time
Friedrich Wetterling1, Lindsay Gallagher2, Jim Mullin2, William M Holmes2, Chris McCabe2, I Mhairi Macrae2 and Andrew J Fagan3
Tissue sodium concentration increases in irreversibly damaged (core) tissue following ischemic stroke and can potentially help to
differentiate the core from the adjacent hypoperfused but viable penumbra. To test this, multinuclear hydrogen-1/sodium-23
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used to measure the changing sodium signal and hydrogen-apparent diffusion coefﬁcient
(ADC) in the ischemic core and penumbra after rat middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Penumbra and core were deﬁned from
perfusion imaging and histologically deﬁned irreversibly damaged tissue. The sodium signal in the core increased linearly with time,
whereas the ADC rapidly decreased by 430% within 20 minutes of stroke onset, with very little change thereafter (0.5–6 hours after
MCAO). Previous reports suggest that the time point at which tissue sodium signal starts to rise above normal (onset of elevated
tissue sodium, OETS) represents stroke onset time (SOT). However, extrapolating core data back in time resulted in a delay of
72 ± 24 minutes in OETS compared with actual SOT. At the OETS in the core, penumbra sodium signal was signiﬁcantly decreased
(88 ± 6%, P = 0.0008), whereas penumbra ADC was not signiﬁcantly different (92 ± 18%, P = 0.2) from contralateral tissue.
In conclusion, reduced sodium-MRI signal may serve as a viability marker for penumbra detection and can complement hydrogen
ADC and perfusion MRI in the time-independent assessment of tissue fate in acute stroke patients.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 103–110; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.174; published online 22 October 2014
Keywords: apparent diffusion coefﬁcient; middle cerebral artery occlusion; onset of elevated tissue sodium; penumbra;
sodium MRI

INTRODUCTION
Ischemic stroke is a catastrophic event that causes pathological
restrictions in arterial blood ﬂow to a speciﬁc brain region. In the
penumbra, tissue viability can nevertheless be maintained by a
mix of aerobic and anaerobic metabolism for several hours after
stroke onset. Eventually, if hypoperfusion persists, cells in the
penumbra become irreversibly damaged and incorporated into
the ischemic core. The term ‘penumbra’ is used in this paper to
describe hypoperfused tissue identiﬁed on magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) perfusion scans that did not exhibit markers of
irreversible damage on subsequent post-mortem histological
analysis (i.e., potentially viable hypoperfused tissue).
The accurate identiﬁcation of penumbral tissue is critical in
identifying stroke patients who could beneﬁt from thrombolysis
and in designing future clinical trials of potential neuroprotectants. Indeed, it has been shown that thrombolytic treatment
outcomes are improved in patients selected using an MRI
diagnosis.1 Brain tissue viability strongly depends on the severity
and duration of hypoperfusion.2 Nevertheless, while hypoperfusion can be determined noninvasively with MRI, stroke onset time
(SOT) and duration of hypoperfusion cannot be accurately
determined from acute scans. For instance, in ‘wake-up’ patients,
which account for ~ 25% of strokes,3 the exact SOT cannot be

determined accurately, preventing established acute stroke
treatments such as thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator being applied.4 Thus, an onset time-independent
method that could accurately identify core and penumbra tissue
in patients would be a valuable addition to MRI protocols.
However, the identiﬁcation of subregions within hypoperperfused
tissue (i.e., core and penumbra) using MRI remains elusive. The
most promising approach relies on measuring water mobility in
tissue via hydrogen diffusion MRI. The resulting quantitative value,
the apparent diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC), drops rapidly within
minutes after stroke onset in regions that are initially smaller than
the volume of hypoperfused tissue. Such ADC reduction, however,
is not exclusively restricted to irreversibly damaged tissue during
acute stroke. Low ADC values have also been measured in still
viable stroke tissue,5 requiring a speciﬁc threshold to be deﬁned
to support the ADC/core tissue hypothesis. For example, ADC
values reduced and maintained below a threshold of 0.53 μm2/ms
were reported for permanently damaged tissue as determined by
triphenyl-tetrazolium chloride staining analysis at 24 hours after
experimental stroke (middle cerebral artery occlusion, MCAO) in
rats.6 Such ADC thresholds may hence serve as a prospective
marker for core tissue during the acute phase. Validation of this
hypothesis remains a challenge because of the lack of histological

1
Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Trinity College, The University of Dublin, College Green, Dublin, Ireland; 2Glasgow Experimental MRI Centre, Institute of
Neuroscience and Psychology, College of Medicine, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK and 3Centre for Advanced Medical Imaging, St James’s
Hospital/Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. Correspondence: Dr F Wetterling, Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Trinity College, The University of Dublin, College
Green, Lloyd building, Dublin 5, Ireland.
E-mail: wetterlf@tcd.ie
This work was funded by the Science Foundation Ireland (grant numbers "06/RFP/PHY006" and "06/RFP/PHY006STTF08").
Received 24 March 2014; revised 18 August 2014; accepted 17 September 2014; published online 22 October 2014

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

104
markers that could serve as an independent gold standard to
deﬁne early tissue damage during the acute phase.
Monitoring changes in local sodium ion concentration may
provide an alternative or complementary MRI approach for
identiﬁcation of core and penumbra regions noninvasively via
sodium MRI. It is reported that following an ischemic insult,
sodium concentration (intracellular plus extracellular) increases
within core tissue at a rate of ~ 2%/hour in humans,7–9 ~ 5-8%/
hour in monkeys,10 ~ 12%/hour in rabbits,11 and ~ 22–25%/hour in
rats.12–14 The core lesion size appears to determine the rate of
sodium increase as a function of time, with faster rates in smaller
lesions as described recently in a mathematical adaptation of
Fick’s second law.15 A study by Wang et al16 suggested that
sodium MRI may also serve as a ticking clock for determining SOT,
whereas Jones et al12 reported that SOTs in rat models of MCAO
can be calculated retrospectively from a linear extrapolation with
less than a 4-minute error.
In a previous rat MCAO study, variable delays were observed in
the hemisphere ipsilateral to the stroke before the tissue sodium
concentration (TSC) increased, with an early increase in the
presumed core and a delayed increase in the presumed penumbra
(regions of interest (ROIs) estimated from experience with this
model).13,17 Furthermore, an initial decrease in sodium concentration of ~ 4 mmol/L was observed in the presumed penumbra.13
Bartha et al11 also reported a decrease of ~ 8% in stroke tissue
(no discrimination made between the core and penumbra) during
the acute phase in a rabbit stroke model, whereas Tyson et al18
measured a 5% sodium reduction, acquired spectroscopically, in
normoglycemic tissue during 10 minutes of transient forebrain
ischemia. However, as neither perfusion nor diffusion values were
recorded in these studies, it was impossible to verify whether the
tissue was hypoperfused and potentially salvageable. The lack of
precise time course measurements and localization of penumbra
and core tissues has thus hampered a full evaluation of the use of
sodium MRI in acute stroke.
Recent patient data indicate that the sodium signal remains
unchanged in presumed penumbra tissue8,9 and that sodium
signal changes in the core do not reverse after reperfusion.19
During acute stroke it has been reported that the lesion identiﬁed
from increased sodium concentration can be smaller than the
lesion identiﬁed from decreased ADC.19 However, the heterogeneity in stroke progression between individual patients as well
as the need for a dedicated ADC threshold to determine lesion
size poses a challenge. The lack of sufﬁcient clinical data at
different acute time points makes it difﬁcult to interpret these
results with respect to sodium signal changes in relation to the
time after arterial occlusion and the time of tissue viability loss. In
vivo serial scanning of ischemic stroke models can deliver the
required temporal information in individual animals.
The aim of the current study was to investigate the changes in
sodium signal and ADC values in penumbra and core tissues and
to check the validity of using sodium image intensity, ﬁrst, to
predict the SOT and, second, to identify potentially salvageable
penumbral tissue. Using an established model of permanent
focal cerebral ischemia (MCAO), alternating sodium and ADC
measurements were made from 0.5 to 6 hours after stroke with
subsequent perfusion imaging for penumbra assessment using
perfusion/histology mismatch. To check the validity of using tissue
sodium to predict the SOT, the time point after MCAO at which
sodium increases above normal tissue sodium in the affected
hemisphere is hereinafter called the onset of elevated tissue
sodium (OETS).
We hypothesize that in the penumbra, where cells are still
capable of maintaining a membrane potential and a sodium
concentration gradient, the sodium signal will be normal or
reduced and will remain below or at the sodium signal level from
nonischemic (contralateral ROI) tissue. As time progresses and the
tissue loses its viability—transitioning to core tissue—the sodium
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

signal in this region will increase and will be higher than
contralateral sodium levels.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Sodium- and Hydrogen MRI
A double-tuned sodium/hydrogen surface resonator was used for sodiumand hydrogen—MRI; the design of this transceiver (TXRX) coil is described
in detail elsewhere.17 A three-dimensional 3D Fast Low Angle SHot (FLASH)
sequence was used to acquire sodium images with high spatial and
temporal resolution using a 7T system (Bruker BioSpec 70/30 system,
Ettlingen, Germany). A TE of 2.6 ms was achieved with 10% partial echo
acquisition to minimize T2*-weighting effects on the measured signal
intensity. Steady-state imaging was achieved using a short repetition time
(TR) of 23 ms, which was appropriate considering that T1 in brain tissue at
high ﬁeld strengths ⩾ 7 T for sodium in vivo is ~ 40 ms.20,21 The transmit
power was set so that a ﬂip angle equal to the Ernst angle was located
in the center of the brain, and the receiver bandwidth was set to 4 kHz.
The ﬁeld of view was 80 mm × 80 mm × 80 mm and the matrix size
was 80 × 80 × 20 resulting in a voxel resolution of 1 mm × 1 mm × 4 mm in
a 5-minutes acquisition time (TA) for eight averages. A nominal voxel
resolution of 0.5 mm × 0.5 mm × 2 mm was achieved after twofold
three-dimensional zero-ﬁlling. Two 8-mm-diameter cylindrical ﬁducial
vials, permanently attached to the top of the surface detector coil, were
included in the imaged ﬁeld of view to establish the symmetrical coil
positioning relative to the rat head in each experiment.
1
H diffusion weighted images (DWIs) were acquired using an echo
planar imaging sequence with TR/TE = 4,000/32 ms, a b value of 600 s/mm2
applied along three different orthogonal directions, voxel size (0.25 ×
0.25 × 1.9) mm3, eight slices with 0.1 mm slice gap, and 8.5 minutes acquisition time. ADC maps were generated for each slice.
Hydrogen perfusion images (PI) were acquired before the rats were
killed by swopping the sodium coil system with a standard transmit-only
receive-only (TORO) resonator system (72 mm diameter linear volume
resonator and 20 mm diameter receive-only surface coil) in a pseudocontinuous arterial spin labeling (pCASL) echo planar imaging-based
sequence22 with repetitive labeling pulse applied every 60 ms (50 pulses)
and slice selective labeling once around the neck and once above the
head. The read-out EPI parameters were as follows: TR/TE = 4,000/22 ms,
TA = 2 minutes per slice, in-plane resolution = (0.26 × 0.26) mm2, and slice
thickness = 2 mm. Five slices were acquired that matched the diffusion
slice positions. Perfusion images were computed as the difference
between the labeled and unlabeled images, and values reported herein
are given as a percentage change relative to the contralateral cortex.
A ﬁnal hydrogen DWI data set was then acquired with the same
hydrogen TORO resonator system using a 2D echo planar imaging sequence with the following: TR/TE = 4,000/26 ms, voxel size (0.25 × 0.25 × 1.9)
mm3, eight slices with 0.1 mm slice gap, and 2 minutes 8 seconds acquisition time. A b value of 600 s/mm2 was applied along each of the
three orthogonal directions in space, and one unweighted b = 0 s/mm2
acquisition was recorded. ADC maps were generated for each slice.

Stroke Model
In vivo experiments were performed under license from the UK Home
Ofﬁce and were subject to the Animals (Scientiﬁc Procedures) Act, 1986. All
research complied with the Declaration of Helsinki. Six male Sprague–
Dawley rats (bodyweight ~ 300 g, Harlan, Bicester, UK) were anesthetized
with 5% isoﬂurane in a ratio of nitrous oxide:oxygen of 70:30. A tracheal
cannula was surgically implanted for artiﬁcial ventilation via a small animal
respirator pump (6025 rodent ventilator, Ugo Basile Srl, Monvalle Varese,
Italy), anesthesia maintained using 2–2.5% isoﬂurane and femoral arteries,
and veins were cannulated. Experimental stroke was induced by
permanently occluding the left middle cerebral artery with an intraluminal
ﬁlament.23 Filaments were prepared from 3/0 Dermalon blue nylon
monoﬁlament (1744-41, Sherwood, UK), the tip was heated with a lowtemperature cauterizing pen (AA90, Bovie, UK) to create a bulb of 300 μm
diameter for animals of 275-350 g. Data from all animals that were
included in the study are presented. No animals died under procedure or
were excluded from the study. Blood pressure (from femoral artery
cannula), heart rate (MRI-compatible electrocardiogram electrodes, Red
Dot neonatal monitoring electrodes, 2269 T, 3 M), body temperature (MRIcompatible rectal probe, Bruker), and blood gases were monitored and
maintained within normal limits throughout surgery and MRI scanning.
© 2015 ISCBFM

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

105
Experimental Workﬂow
Following induction of cerebral ischemia, the rat was positioned on a
support cradle, for movement in and out of the magnet bore, and kept
warm by a warm water circulation jacket. The double-tuned surface
resonator was tuned and matched in situ. The automatic adjustment
procedures of the MRI system were performed via the hydrogen channel
on the resonator, following which the survey hydrogen images were
acquired to verify correct animal and coil positioning inside the magnet.
Manual adjustments of the reference pulse attenuation value and
shimming were then performed for the sodium surface coil using a
sodium-free induction decay experiment. Ten sodium-MRI scans and one
hydrogen DWI acquired consecutively were recorded for up to 5.5 hours
using the TXRX surface resonator, followed by a hydrogen-PI and -DWI
scan with the standard hydrogen TORO resonator system. Six stroke rats
were scanned in total, referred to herein as stroke 1–6. For the last two
experiments (strokes 5 and 6) a different sodium surface transceiver
resonator with similar detection properties (20 mm inner diameter, planar,
double-tuned hydrogen/sodium surface transceiver, Bruker BioSpin GmbH)
was used. The spacing between ADC acquisitions was 30 minutes for
strokes 1, 5, and 6 and 60 minutes for strokes 2, 3, and 4.

Infarct Size Analysis
Following completion of scanning (330 ± 50 minutes after MCAO, Table 1)
animals were killed (time of killing = 378 ± 42 minutes after SOT, Table 1) by
transcardial perfusion ﬁxation using 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate
buffer and the location and volume of irreversible ischemic damage was
determined from histology sections. The brains were harvested, processed,
and embedded in parafﬁn wax, subsequently sectioned at 6 μm and
collected over eight stereotaxic coronal levels covering the same
rostrocaudal extent of MCA territory as the MRI slices (2–12.2 mm from
the interaural line24) with appropriate sections matched up to each of the
sodium-MRI brain slices using neuroanatomical landmarks. Histology
sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined with
light microscopy. The boundary of the ischemic lesion was determined on
the basis of neuronal morphology (darkly stained, pyknotic neurones) and
vacuolated neuropil. This boundary was then transcribed on coronal line
diagrams from a stereotaxic atlas24 as described elsewhere25 to correct
infarct measurements for any ischemia-associated brain swelling and brain
shrinkage associated with histological processing.

Image Co-Registration
The fourth stereotaxic coronal level covering the center slice of the
rostrocaudal extent of MCA territory (8.2 mm from the interaural line) was
used to carry out noninvasive perfusion, ADC, and sodium measurements
on a single slice.
The hydrogen-PI and -DWI images acquired with the hydrogen TORO
system and the histology maps were co-registered to the sodium and
hydrogen ADC images that were acquired with the double-tuned surface
resonator. In order to maintain the high spatial resolution of the histology
maps, all images were resized using nearest neighbor interpolation to a
matrix size of 1,024 × 1,024. Image co-registration was carried out by
setting corresponding markers in anatomically identical regions of the
brain using the control point selection tool in Matlab (The Mathworks,
Natick, MA, USA), with an afﬁne transformation used to register the images.

Table 1.

This allowed for the accurate placement of ROIs in the different
multimodal images and parametric maps for later computation purposes,
some examples of which are shown in Figure 1.

Determination of Penumbra and Ischemic Core
In this study the core ROI was deﬁned within the boundary of the
histologically veriﬁed, irreversibly damaged tissue, and the penumbra ROI
from the mismatch between the area of hypoperfusion and the histology
deﬁned area of irreversible tissue damage. The area of perfusion deﬁcit
was calculated on the basis of a 57% reduction of the cerebral blood ﬂow
relative to the mean contralateral cerebral blood ﬂow in the cortex25,26
using a code developed in Matlab (The Mathworks). ROIs delineating core
and penumbra regions (Figure 1d) were manually deﬁned, guided by the
location of hypoperfusion and histology at 5–6 hours after stroke in order
to observe the temporal sodium signal and hydrogen ADC evolution in
each distinct region. Corresponding ROIs were also manually deﬁned in
contralateral tissue homotopic to the core and penumbra in order to
correct for the slight sodium coil-sensitivity proﬁle; an example of all ROIs
thus deﬁned for one representative rat are presented in Figure 1d. The
sodium values were then computed as the mean and s.d. of the respective
ROIs relative to the contralateral tissue. All images were masked to the rat
brain, wherein the mask was computed from manually drawn contours
drawn around the edge of the brain as visualized in a diffusionweighted image.
23

Na and Apparent Diffusion Coefﬁcient Data Analysis

For qualitative presentation of the ADC maps and sodium MR images, each
pixel value was normalized to the mean sodium signal values and ADC in
contralateral tissue using a ROI placed over the entire contralateral
hemisphere. For quantitative measurements of the sodium signal, the
mean signal in the core and penumbra was normalized to the mean
sodium signal values measured in ROIs contralateral to the core and
penumbra, respectively. Assuming a linear increase in the sodium signal in
ischemic core tissue (as reported in previous studies12,13,17), the signal in
core ROI was ﬁtted to a linear function according to
SignalNa ðtÞ

¼

c þ s´t

where the line to which the sodium signal was ﬁtted was characterized by
the intercept c (the estimated sodium signal at SOT) and the rate of
sodium signal change as a function of time s (the slope).
The OETS—the time after MCAO at which tissue sodium in the ischemic
core ROI starts to rise above contralateral tissue sodium—was computed
from the linear regression results according to
100% - c
s
The
s.d. and the mean values were computed for the ADC and sodium
.
signal in both the core and penumbra ROIs at OETS and at the end of the
experiment.
OETS ¼

Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as the mean ± s.d. The paired samples’ t-test was used
for comparison of ipsilateral sodium and ADC signals with contralateral
values. Statistical signiﬁcance was assumed when P o0.05.

Timings and sodium data in the penumbra and core

Rat stroke number
OETS (min after actual stroke onset)
Final MR measurement time after stroke (min)
Time of killing after stroke (min)
Na in penumbra at OETS (% contr.)
Na in penumbra at end (% contr.)
Na in core at end (%contr.)
Na slope in core (%contr/hour)
Histology deﬁned lesion size (mm3)

1

2

3

4

5

6

Mean ± s.d.

P value

75
290
325
91
95
147
13.1
292

61
351
370
83
109
152
10.8
146

99
330
340
88
102
138
9.9
119

57
419
440
99
127
214
18.9
364

98
280
400
83
93
140
13.2
298

39
315
390
86
82
142
9.1
208

72 ± 24
330 ± 50
378 ± 42
88 ± 6
101 ± 16
155 ± 29
12.5 ± 3.5
238 ± 96

0.00003a
0.0008b
0.83b
0.0009b

MR, magnetic resonance; OETS, onset of elevated tissue sodium; SOT, stroke onset time. Timings and sodium data in the penumbra and core for each rat
(n = 6). The measurement time point ‘end’ corresponds to the ﬁnal MR measurement time after stroke given in this table. aWith respect to actual SOT. bWith
respect to contralateral tissue.

© 2015 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

106

Figure 1. Region of interest (ROI) selection for penumbra and core tissue for one representative rat (stroke 2) using imaging data acquired at
the end of the experiment (5 hours after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)) and histology maps. (A) Relative perfusion-weighted
images and (B) apparent diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC) maps were used to determine (C) the perfusion–diffusion mismatch area, where the
perfusion deﬁcit was deﬁned as regions exhibiting perfusion level o57% of the contralateral cortex, whereas ADC values below a threshold
of 0.53 μm2/ms deﬁned the ADC lesion. Dark gray regions indicate the diffusion–perfusion mismatch, and white the hypoperfused core with
low ADC. (D) Core (white) and penumbra (dark gray) ROIs deﬁned with reference to the histology and perfusion image (PI) data. Mirror ROIs in
contralateral hemisphere are also shown. The histology deﬁned outline, delineating permanently damaged core tissue is superimposed on
each of the four images/maps.

Figure 2. Apparent diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC) maps (upper row) and sodium images (lower row) for one representative rat (stroke 2), where
the signal in the latter was normalized to the contralateral hemisphere. Numbers above each image indicate the time after middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO). The lower boundary of the gray scale on the ADC maps represents the 0.53-μm2/ms core threshold and delineates
the ADC-deﬁned lesion. The histology deﬁned white outline, delineating permanently damaged core tissue is superimposed on each of the
ADC and sodium images. Note the low sodium signal in the ipsilateral cortex during the early time points (arrow 1) and during the entire
experiment (arrow 2). Sodium signal change is highly heterogeneous in core and penumbra. Within the core territory, the ipsilateral ventral
cortex (arrow 3) presenting with initially low sodium exhibits a delayed onset of tissue sodium elevation at 3 hours after stroke. Note that the
sodium signal is approximately twofold higher in voxels containing cerebrospinal ﬂuid (i.e., within the ventricles) compared with voxels
containing brain tissue.34

RESULTS
Middle cerebral artery occlusion induced a region of reduced ADC
with a larger perfusion deﬁcit and an increase in tissue sodium
signal within MCA territory. The spatial change in the ADC and the
normalized sodium signal as a function of time after MCAO, are
presented for a representative rat in Figure 2. The quantitative
sodium values for the group, together with experimental timings,
histology-deﬁned lesion size, and OETS, are listed in Table 1. The
corresponding ADC values are listed in Table 2.
In the contralateral hemisphere, the ADC values were 0.83 ± 0.06
and 0.87 ± 0.04 μm2/ms, respectively, for ROIs homotopic to the
penumbra and core. The ipsilateral ADC data were thresholded at
0.53 μm2/ms,6 with values below this threshold shaded black.
Qualitative data in Figure 2 show that tissue with ADC values
below this threshold appeared rapidly within the ﬁrst 20 minutes
in a large fraction of the (later deﬁned) core ROI. Thereafter, there
was a slight increase in ADC-deﬁned lesion size in this and other
animals in the group (Figures 2 and 3).
A linear increase in the sodium signal was observed in core
tissue (Figure 3). By the end of the experiment (330 ± 50 minutes
after MCAO), the sodium signal in core tissue averaged 155 ± 29%
of contralateral values. The OETS, averaged across the group,
deviated by 72 ± 24 minutes from the actual time of arterial
occlusion.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

When sodium in the core starts to rise above contralateral values
(OETS = 72 ± 24 minutes after MCAO), the penumbra sodium signal
was signiﬁcantly decreased (88 ± 6% of contralateral, P = 0.0008)
gradually rising to 101 ± 16% of contralateral tissue (P = 0.83) by the
end of the experiment. Using sodium data from OETS to the end of
the experiment, the rate of rise in tissue sodium was 2.9 ± 2.3%/hour
in the penumbra and 12.5 ± 3.6%/hour in the core tissue.
At the OETS, the ADC value in histologically deﬁned core was
already signiﬁcantly lower than in the contralateral ROI, whereas
the ADC value in the penumbra was not signiﬁcantly different
from the contralateral ROI (Table 2). By the end of the experiment,
the penumbra ADC value was signiﬁcantly lower than the
contralateral ROI but was still above the viability threshold (group
data 0.71 ± 0.10 μm2/ms, P = 0.026).
DISCUSSION
Because viability of brain tissue requires maintenance of a strong
sodium concentration gradient between the intra- and extracellular spaces, the ischemic penumbra may be deﬁned as a
region of constrained blood supply in which the sodium concentration gradient is maintained. If perfusion is not restored, energy
stores become exhausted, membranes depolarize and the
concentration gradient is lost as sodium levels increase in the
© 2015 ISCBFM

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

107
Table 2.

Hydrogen ADC results in the penumbra and core

Rat stroke number
ADC
ADC
ADC
ADC
ADC
ADC
ADC
ADC

in
in
in
in
in
in
in
in

penumbra at OETS (μm2/ms)
ROI contralateral to penumbra at OETS (μm2/ms)
penumbra at end (μm2/ms)
ROI contralateral to the penumbra at end (μm2/ms)
core at OETS (μm2/ms)
ROI contralateral to the core at OETS (μm2/ms)
the core at end (μm2/ms)
ROI contralateral to the core at end (μm2/ms)

1

2

3

4

5

6

Mean ± s.d.

P value

0.68
0.70
0.61
0.78
0.54
0.84
0.52
0.80

0.71
0.81
0.69
0.80
0.51
0.88
0.54
0.90

0.78
0.83
0.77
0.80
0.57
0.90
0.54
0.87

0.79
0.88
0.59
0.81
0.52
0.90
0.51
0.91

0.82
0.94
0.77
0.90
0.49
0.90
0.52
0.87

0.86
0.85
0.84
0.91
0.59
0.86
0.60
0.85

0.77 ± 0.07
0.84 ± 0.08
0.71 ± 0.10
0.83 ± 0.06
0.54 ± 0.04
0.88 ± 0.03
0.54 ± 0.03
0.87 ± 0.04

0.180
0.026
5 × 10 − 9
2 × 10 − 8

ADC, apparent diffusion coefﬁcient; OETS, onset of elevated tissue sodium; ROI, region of interest. Hydrogen ADC results in the penumbra and core for each
rat (n = 6). The measurement time point ‘end’ corresponds to the ﬁnal MR measurement time after stroke given in Table 1.

intracellular space. When this occurs, the tissue takes on the
characteristics of the ischemic core, which also includes a
signiﬁcant reduction in ADC. We have explored two potential
uses for MR-deﬁned TSC: (1) to predict SOT and (2) to identify
penumbral tissue.
1. Tissue Sodium Signal to Predict Stroke Onset Time
The time point at which tissue sodium, in the affected hemisphere,
increases above contralateral levels (i.e., the OETS) has been
reported to provide an estimation of the SOT; the present study
highlights the limitations of such an approach, given the
heterogeneity in ischemic stroke patients.
Deﬁning the onset of elevated tissue sodium from linear regression
data Jones et al12 reported a linearly extrapolated sodium signal
equal to normal sodium signal levels at the time of arterial
occlusion, resulting in an estimated SOT accuracy of ± 4 minutes.
From the current study, it is clear that SOT estimation via
extrapolation of sodium time course data is prone to signiﬁcant
errors. In all rats investigated, the backward extrapolation of the
linearly increasing sodium signal resulted in a consistent underestimation of the SOT (Table 1). The tissue sodium signal in the
core ROI rose above normal contralateral levels at ~ 70 minutes
after arterial occlusion. The linear-extrapolation method is based
on the hypothesis that the tissue within the analyzed core ROI
becomes irreversibly damaged immediately following the arterial
occlusion. However, tissue included in the core region, as
determined by PI and post-mortem histology analysis at 7 hours
after MCAO, may not have been irreversibly damaged at early time
points, resulting in the signiﬁcant error in the SOT estimation.
Indeed, in a previous study carried out using this experimental
stroke model, time delays varying from 0 to 4 hours after MCAO
were observed before the sodium concentration increased in
tissue that was subsequently displayed as infarct on histology.13
An earlier study in rats estimated SOT with an error of 41–52
minutes using this method,16 whereas in monkeys a study
reported estimated SOTs that were out by 27 minutes.10 Recent
studies involving human sodium MRI in the acute stroke period
showed that sodium signal levels measured in the core tissue,
deﬁned by visibly increased DWI signal, remained normal up to
7 hours after arterial occlusion before eventually increasing.8,9 This
is consistent with the current and previous13,17 rat stroke studies,
where variable delay times were measured before TSC increased,
coupled with early small decreases in sodium levels in the
penumbra, suggesting that any increase above normal levels (we
propose this as a viability threshold level) would indicate
irreversible damage. In this case, permanent tissue damage would
not be directly correlated with SOT, that is, the time of arterial
occlusion, but rather the time at which sodium signal begins to
increase above normal levels. Hence, given a viability threshold at
© 2015 ISCBFM

nonpathological TSC values,13 a pixelwise linear extrapolation
back in time (for any regions exhibiting an increase in Na signal
above normal values) may indicate the time of tissue viability loss
at that speciﬁc location, rather than the time of arterial occlusion.
Indeed, the very concept of a ‘SOT’ is not particularly useful from a
sodium MRI perspective, given the impossibility of uniquely
deﬁning ‘core’ tissue (i.e., tissue that was deﬁnitively irreversibly
damaged immediately after the stroke occurred) and hence the
impossibility of estimating the onset time with any degree of
accuracy by extrapolating sodium time course data back in time.
From a clinical perspective, it is also unlikely that repeat
measurements on patients in the acute phase would be justiﬁable
before treatment is initiated, and hence the minimum of two time
point measurements required to determine a slope and thereby
extrapolate back to estimate an onset time are unlikely to ever be
realized in practice.
2. TSC to Identify Penumbral Tissue—23Na Decrease in Penumbra
Tissue
At the OETS, in comparison with the core, the penumbra displays a
signiﬁcant decrease in sodium signal (88 ± 6% compared with
contralateral sodium signal) coincident with a small nonsigniﬁcant
decrease in ADC value (Tables 1 and 2). A similar-sized decrease in
sodium signal was observed in a previous study,11 although the
authors did not differentiate between penumbra and core tissues.
We have previously reported a 4 mmol/L decrease in sodium at
various times after MCAO in presumed penumbra tissue,13 whereas
a nuclear magnetic resonance study reported a 5% sodium signal
decrease after artery occlusion in normoglycemic tissue, with no
change in hypo- and hyperglycemic tissues.18 Factors that could
conceivably contribute to the observed decrease in tissue sodium
in the penumbra include the following:
A perfusion effect. Immediately after arterial occlusion, blood ﬂow
reduces in the territory of the blocked blood vessel, whereas the
intravascular volume remains constant, which will have no effect
on the overall sodium content in the intravascular space of
hypoperfused voxels. Consequently, perfusion effects are not
thought to contribute signiﬁcantly to the observed decrease in
tissue sodium in the penumbra.
Relaxation-time effect. The relaxation time differences between
intra- and extracellular sodium nuclei can have a strong effect on
the measured sodium signal, particularly considering that intraand extracellular T2* relaxation times are quite different27 and that
the compartmental sodium content changes during nonhomeostasis. During the acute stroke phase, a strong sodium inﬂux into
cells has been observed in isolated heart muscle after coronary
artery occlusion and reperfusion using chemical shift reagents to
separate the intra- and extracellular sodium components.28
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

108

Figure 3. Relative sodium signal and apparent diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC) proﬁles in each animal. Data are averaged across regions of interest
(ROIs) in the penumbra and core tissue (shown in the inset stereotaxic atlas plates), expressed as a % of the contralateral ADC of ROI ADC and
sodium values and plotted as a function of time after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Note that linear extrapolation of the core
sodium signal (red circles) back to the y axis intersects at a value well below 100% of contralateral ROI sodium, leading to an underestimation
of stroke onset times in all cases (averaging at 72 ± 24 minutes).

Despite no change in the overall sodium content, the measurable
relaxation time-weighted signal, hence, can change dramatically
because of faster relaxation effects on sodium ions in the intracellular compartment. Furthermore, during the chronic phase, at
24 hours after ischemic stroke, a recent mouse study reported
increasing T2* relaxation time in the core tissue.29 Although a
decrease in T2* relaxation time remains to be experimentally
veriﬁed during the acute phase, it must be considered as one
potential reason for the sodium signal reduction measured in the
current study, for instance, as an effect of increased intracellular
sodium concentration.
Considering that the intravascular compartment (with a 5%
volume fraction) and the extracellular compartment (20% volume
fraction) both contain a 140-mmol/L concentration of sodium,
whereas the intracellular compartment (75% volume fraction) has
a lower concentration of 10 mmol/L, the net density-weighted
sodium signal originating from the extracellular space is ~ 82%. At
9.4 T, the transversal relaxation time for the sodium nuclei T2*brain
was measured to be 4.8 ms in the mouse brain.29 However, there
is a lack of further data in the published literature reporting
speciﬁc compartmental T2*-relaxation times, and hence we
estimated the extracellular component T2*e to be in the range
of 6 ms, with an intracellular component T2*i of ~ 2.1 ms, using the
fact that the extracellular T2* component is longer than the
intracellular T2* component and the assumption of a monoexponential relaxation behavior in each compartment.
At 8.5 T, the intracellular longitudinal relaxation time, T1i has
been determined to be monoexponential with a value of 23 ms30
and T1e is assumed to be similar to measured brain cerebrospinal
ﬂuid of 50 ms.31 For further computational purposes, the following
sequence parameters were extracted from the current study:
TR = 23 ms, TE = 2.6 ms, and ﬂip angle = 60°.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

The relative sodium signal for each compartment (Srel) can then
be computed according to the following equation:32
Srel ðTE; TRÞ

¼

1-e

- TTR
1

1 - cos αUe

- TTR
1

U sin αUe

- TE
T

2

The signal levels measured for different sodium concentrations,
(Na), and volumes, V, can be computed as follows:
SðNai ; Nae Þ ¼ ½Nai UV i USrel;i þ ½Nae UV e USrel;e
To give a numerical estimation, it is further assumed that the
inﬂux of sodium ions into still viable penumbra cells leads to an
increase in intracellular sodium concentration to 20 mmol/L33
because the Na/K ATPase pump is still active and the extracellular
sodium compartment is much smaller volumetrically so that it
would be hard to increase the intracellular concentration
drastically from 10 to 140 mmol/L within minutes. Then we further
assume that the net amount of sodium ions contributing to the
MR signal measured from a single voxel in such tissue remains
constant and that the volumetric ratios are unchanged during the
acute stroke phase. To raise the intracellular sodium concentration
by 10 mmol/L through an inﬂux of ions from the extracellular
compartment, the extracellular sodium concentration must
decrease from 140 to 110 mmol/L. This would result in a 4%
signal reduction. If the extracellular sodium concentration were to
be reestablished at 140 mmol/L, a 14% signal increase would thus
be expected, in obvious contradiction to the measured values in
the penumbra in the current study. Although present, the
relaxation time effect on the measured sodium reduction may
thus be negligible when a sufﬁciently short TE is used in the data
acquisition, as in this study.
© 2015 ISCBFM

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

109
Cell swelling effect. A decrease in TSC of 7 ± 2% has been measured in the presumed penumbra in a rat permanent MCAO
study in which there was no relaxation time weighting.13 It is thus
assumed that the sodium signal reduction observed in the current
study most likely results from an actual TSC reduction in observed
penumbra tissue. An actual TSC decrease can be caused by
an increase in intracellular sodium concentration, resulting in
disturbed homeostasis and subsequent water inﬂux, which in turn
increases the intracellular compartmental volume fraction.
Because the measured voxel size is constant during the experiment, the extracellular space thus decreases and consequently the
total sodium concentration reduces. Assuming an increase in the
intracellular volume normally comprising 75% of a tissue voxel to
79% and an intracellular sodium concentration that, hence, is
diluted to the normal content of 10 mmol/L with 140 mmol/L
extracellular sodium concentration, a 13% signal decrease is
computed using the above-mentioned equations. This is in good
agreement with the measured reduction of 12% in this study. Cell
swelling will be accompanied by an ADC decrease, as measured in
penumbra in the current study where an ADC decrease of ~ 15%
was evident by 6 hours after stroke. Indeed, the reduction in ADC
values because of cellular edema during the acute stroke phase is
a well-documented phenomenon.5 The speciﬁc time at which the
ADC decreases below the viability threshold appears to occur later
in tissue that remains viable for longer,5 whereas the sodium
signal was observed to be decreased in penumbra tissue long
before ADC values reduced signiﬁcantly below contralateral values
in the same region (Figure 3).
Reduced sodium signal may hence serve as a measure for cell
swelling in still-viable tissue. A decreased sodium signal in hypoperfused tissue was also previously reported in a study involving
stroke in rabbits.11 However, no pathophysiological interpretation
was proffered because separate penumbra and core identiﬁcation
was not possible.
Temporal Variations in Sodium Signal in Core and Penumbra
Tissue
The observed sodium slope in the core was measured to be
12.5 ± 3.5%/hour, which is below the rate reported in previous rat
studies (~22–25%/hour).12–14 However, considering the T2*- and
T1-weighting of the sequence used in this study, a lower overall
effect of the sodium accumulation was expected and hence these
values are within the expected slope range for rat MCAO
experiments. The sodium signal difference between brain tissue
and cerebrospinal ﬂuid is normally a factor of three; however, for
the sequence used herein these differences reduced to a factor of
two (see Figure 2). Furthermore, the maximum sodium signal that
can be reached with the imaging pulse sequence is also reduced.
As an explanation serves that the sequence has been set to
achieve the Ernst angle for brain tissue and its respective longitudinal relaxation parameters. In permanently damaged tissue,
one can assume that the longitudinal relaxation time becomes
more like in cerebrospinal ﬂuid and hence a reduced slope is
measured.
After the OETS, the subsequent gradual increase of 2.5%/hour
observed in the penumbra sodium signal could potentially be
explained by the gradual rupturing of cellular membranes within
the affected region, that is, as the tissue gradually becomes
irreversibly damaged. The resulting increase in TSC this would
engender has been described previously;7 in the model proposed
here, the occurrence of an intermediary phase in tissue at risk,
wherein cellular swelling results in a reduction in TSC, is added.
Further studies are required to verify this hypothesis.
It remains unclear, however, whether the slow increase in
sodium signal observed in penumbra tissue is occurring in stillviable tissue, or whether it is because of the loss of cellular
integrity for progressively large numbers of individual cells within
© 2015 ISCBFM

the penumbra tissue, with the rest remaining intact. It should be
noted that the observed increase could be inﬂuenced by a partial
volume effect from the neighboring core area, given the relatively
small penumbral area in these animals, or diffusion in extracellular
Na+ along the concentration gradient from the core, to the
neighboring penumbral tissue. This question could be answered
by chemical shift imaging experiments. Shift reagents have acute
toxicity issues in vivo but allow a discrimination of intracellular and
extracellular sodium in each voxel.
Prolonged Tissue Survival in the Penumbra
By 6 hours after MCAO, it had been expected, from previous
experience with this model that no penumbra would remain. Over
the ﬁrst 4–6 hours after MCAO, the ADC lesion normally grows
until it encompasses the whole of the hypoperfused region. The
results in this study show that this was the case for none of the six
investigated strokes (suggesting that the penumbra can survive
for longer than previously thought). We assume that the tight
control and maintenance of the physiology of the animals within
normal limits (e.g., PaO2, PaCO2, blood pressure, and temperature)
during MRI scanning may have resulted in the prolonged tissue
survival.
Sodium magnetic resonance imaging for Clinical Acute Stroke
Diagnostic Imaging
The current treatment guidelines for stroke patients recommend a
time window of 4.5 hours from stroke onset for thrombolytic
therapy. In cases where SOT is unknown, a technique that could
determine SOT would clearly be of beneﬁt within this framework.
However, a technique that could reveal the extent of penumbral
tissue is arguably of more utility to stroke clinicians. Thrombolytic
therapy could beneﬁt some patients who still have penumbra
beyond 4.5 hours, but put patients lacking penumbra within the
4.5-hour window at increased risk of hemorrhage. It may be here
that sodium MRI has most to offer, through identiﬁcation of the
presence of penumbral tissue, leading to a more patient-speciﬁc
treatment regime. A combination of sodium MRI and DWI, for
example, could represent an optimal protocol for guiding patient
management: the former indicating whether at-risk but potentially
salvageable tissue is still present in the patient, with the latter
giving an overall sense of the extent of damage in the brain, and
the combination used to determine whether the patient is likely to
beneﬁt from the treatment.
CONCLUSION
A signiﬁcant decrease in the sodium signal in the acute phase of
stroke has been measured for the ﬁrst time in penumbra tissue
identiﬁed using a combination of perfusion and histology data. It
is clear from the current and previous studies that increased tissue
sodium levels indicate irreversibly damaged tissue, suggesting
that a threshold for tissue viability lies close to normal values.
Given that it is now accepted that the DWI (or ADC) lesion is likely
to include some penumbral tissues at early time points after
stroke, sodium MRI may more accurately identify both potentially
viable penumbra and nonviable core tissue, although its potential
to accurately determine a patient’s SOT seems doubtful. Nevertheless, by serving as a marker for tissue viability, sodium MRI may
obviate the need to estimate SOT, opening the way for a more
patient-speciﬁc treatment regime, perhaps via a combination of
sodium and diffusion MRI. Normal and reduced sodium levels are
a good indicator for still-viable tissue.
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

Characterization of tissue sodium in the penumbra and core
F Wetterling et al

110
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr Friedrich Wetterling acknowledges funding from the School of Physics and the
Faculty of Engineering (Marie Curie Fellowship, SYSWIND) at the Trinity College
Dublin as well as ﬁnancial postdoctoral fellowship support from the University of
Heidelberg.

REFERENCES
1 Schellinger PD, Thomalla G, Fiehler J, Kohrmann M, Molina CA, Neumann-Haefelin
T et al. MRI-Based and CT-based thrombolytic therapy in acute stroke within and
beyond established time windows—an analysis of 1210 patients. Stroke 2007; 38:
2640–2645.
2 Jones TH, Morawetz RB, Crowell RM, Marcoux FW, Fitzgibbon SJ, DeGirolami U
et al. Thresholds of focal cerebral ischemia in awake monkeys. J Neurosurg 1981;
54: 773–782.
3 Barreto AD, Martin-Schild S, Hallevi H, Morales MM, Abraham AT, Gonzales NR
et al. Thrombolytic therapy for patients who wake-up with stroke. Stroke 2009; 40:
827–832.
4 Marler JR. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med
1995; 333: 1581–1588.
5 Miyasaka N, Kuroiwa T, Zhao FY, Nagaoka T, Akimoto H, Yamada I et al. Cerebral
ischemic hypoxia: discrepancy between apparent diffusion coefﬁcients and
histologic changes in rats. Radiology 2000; 215: 199–204.
6 Shen Q, Ren H, Fisher M, Bouley J, Duong T. Dynamic tracking of acute ischemic
tissue fates using improved unsupervised ISODATA analysis of high-resolution quantitative perfusion and diffusion data. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2004; 24: 887–897.
7 Thulborn KR, Gindin TS, Davis D, Erb P. Comprehensive MR imaging protocol for
stroke management: tissue sodium concentration as a measure of tissue viability
in nonhuman primate studies and in clinical studies. Radiology 1999; 213:
156–166.
8 Tsang A, Stobbe R, Asdaghi N, Hussain MS, Bhagat Y, Beaulieu C et al. Relationship
between sodium intensity and perfusion deﬁcits in acute ischemic stroke. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2011; 33: 41–47.
9 Tsang A, Stobbe R, Hussain S, Bhagat Y, Beaulieu C, Emery D et al. Sodium Image
Intensity Increases in Ischemic Core Tissue, but not Penumbra in Acute and Sub-Acute
Stroke. In Stroke Journal of the American Heart Association: San Diego, 2009.
10 LaVerde GC, Jungreis CA, Nemoto E, Boada FE. Sodium time course using 23Na
MRI in reversible focal brain ischemia in the monkey. J Magn Reson Imaging 2009;
30: 219–223.
11 Bartha R, Lee TY, Hogan MJ, Hughes S, Barberi E, Rajakumar N et al. Sodium T2*weighted MR imaging of acute focal cerebral ischemia in rabbits. Magn Reson
Imaging 2004; 22: 983–991.
12 Jones SC, Kharlamov A, Yanovski B, Kim DK, Easley KA, Yushmanov VE et al. Stroke
onset time using sodium MRI in rat focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2006; 37:
883–888.
13 Wetterling F, Gallagher L, Macrae IM, Junge S, Fagan AJ. Regional and temporal
variations in tissue sodium concentration during the acute stroke phase. Magn
Reson Med 2012; 67: 740–749.
14 Yushmanov VE, Kharlamov A, Yanovski B, LaVerde G, Boada FE, Jones SC. Inhomogeneous sodium accumulation in the ischemic core in rat focal cerebral
ischemia by Na-23 MRI. J Mag Reson Imaging 2009; 30: 18–24.
15 Boada FE, Qian Y, Nemoto E, Jovin T, Jungreis C, Jones SC et al. Sodium MRI and
the assessment of irreversible tissue damage during hyper-acute stroke. Transl
Stroke Res 2012; 3: 236–245.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 103 – 110

16 Wang Y, Hu W, Perez-Trepichio AD, Ng TC, Furlan AJ, Majors AW et al. Brain tissue
sodium is a ticking clock telling time after arterial occlusion in rat focal cerebral
ischemia. Stroke 2000; 31: 1386–1391.
17 Wetterling F, Högler M, Molkenthin U, Junge S, Gallagher L, Mhairi Macrae I et al.
The design of a double-tuned two-port surface resonator and its application to
in vivo Hydrogen- and Sodium-MRI. J Magn Reson 2012; 217: 10–18.
18 Tyson RL, Sutherland GR, Peeling J. 23Na nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
changes during and after forebrain ischemia in hypoglymeci, normoglymic, and
hyperglymic rats. Stroke 1996; 27: 957–964.
19 Wetterling F, Ansar S, Handwerker E. Sodium-23 magnetic resonance imaging
during and after transient cerebral ischemia: multinuclear stroke protocols for
double-tuned 23 Na/ 1 H resonator systems. Phys Med Biol 2012; 57: 6929.
20 Schepkin VD, Ross BD, Chenevert TL, Rehemtulla A, Sharma S, Kumar M et al.
Sodium magnetic resonance imaging of chemotherapeutic response in a
rat glioma. Magn Reson Med 2005; 53: 85–92.
21 Winter PM, Bansal N. TmDOTP5- as a Na-23 shift reagent for the subcutaneously
implanted 9 L gliosarcoma in rats. Magn Reson Med 2001; 45: 436–442.
22 Baskerville TA, McCabe C, Weir CJ, Macrae IM, Holmes WM. Noninvasive MRI
measurement of CBF: evaluating an arterial spin labelling sequence with Tc-99mHMPAO CBF autoradiography in a rat stroke model. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2012; 32: 973–977.
23 Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle cerebral-artery
occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 1989; 20: 84–91.
24 Paxinos G, Watson C. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates/George Paxinos,
Charles Watson. Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2007.
25 McCabe C, Gallagher L, Gsell W, Graham D, Dominiczak AF, Macrae IM. Differences
in the evolution of the ischemic penumbra in stroke-prone spontaneously
hypertensive and Wistar-Kyoto rats. Stroke 2009; 40: 3864–3868.
26 Santosh C, Brennan D, McCabe C, Macrae IM, Holmes WM, Graham DI et al.
Potential use of oxygen as a metabolic biosensor in combination with T2*weighted MRI to deﬁne the ischemic penumbra. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2008;
28: 1742–1753.
27 LaVerde G, Nemoto E, Jungreis CA, Tanase C, Boada FE. Serial triple quantum
sodium MRI during non-human primate focal brain ischemia. Magn Reson Med
2007; 57: 201–205.
28 Jansen MA, Van Emous JG, Nederhoff MGJ, Van Echteld CJA. Assessment of
myocardial viability by intracellular Na-23 magnetic resonance Imaging. Circulation 2004; 110: 3457–3464.
29 Heiler PM, Langhauser FL, Wetterling F, Ansar S, Grudzenski S, Konstandin S et al.
Chemical shift sodium imaging in a mouse model of thromboembolic stroke at
9.4 T. J Magn Reson Imaging 2011; 34: 935–940.
30 Burstein D, Fossel ET. Intracellular sodium and lithium NMR relaxation times in the
perfused frog heart. Magn Reson Med 1987; 4: 261–273.
31 Madelin G, Regatte RR. Biomedical applications of sodium MRI in vivo. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2013; 38: 511–529.
32 Konstandin S, Nagel A. Measurement techniques for magnetic resonance
imaging of fast relaxing nuclei. Magn Reson Mater Phys Biol Med 2014; 27:
5–19.
33 van Emous JG, van Echteld CJA. Changes of intracellular sodium T2 relaxation
times during ischemia and reperfusion in isolated rat hearts. Magn Reson Med
1998; 40: 679–683.
34 Thulborn KR, Davis D, Adams H, Gindin T, Zhou J. Quantitative tissue sodium
concentration mapping of the growth of focal cerebral tumors with sodium
magnetic resonance imaging. Magn Reson Med 1999; 41: 351–359.

© 2015 ISCBFM

