Basic Sciences
Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate,
a Pentose Phosphate Pathway Product, Might Be a Novel
Drug Candidate for Ischemic Stroke
Mei Li, PhD*; Zhi-Peng Zhou, MD*; Meiling Sun, MS; Lijuan Cao, MS; Jieyu Chen, MS;
Yuan-Yuan Qin, PhD; Jin-Hua Gu, PhD; Feng Han, PhD; Rui Sheng, PhD;
Jun-Chao Wu, PhD; Yuqiang Ding, PhD; Zheng-Hong Qin, MD, PhD

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Background and Purpose—Our previous study has defined a role of TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator in
neuroprotection against ischemic injury through increasing the flow of pentose phosphate pathway. We hypothesized that
the pentose phosphate pathway product nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) could be a novel drug
for treatment of ischemic stroke.
Methods—The NADPH was given before, at the onset, or after stroke onset with single or repeated intravenous (mice and
rats) or intraperitoneal injections (monkey). The short- and long-term therapeutic effects of NADPH were evaluated
in male adult ICR mice (total=614) with transient middle cerebral artery occlusion, in male adult Sprague–Dawley
rats (total=114) with permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion, and in male adult rhesus monkey (total=12) with
thrombotic middle cerebral artery occlusion.
Results—Administration of NADPH led to a dramatic increase in the levels of ATP and reduced form of glutathione, whereas
it decreased the levels of reactive oxygen species. NADPH significantly reduced infarct volume, improved poststroke
survival, and recovery of neurological functions in mouse and rat models of stroke. Robust neuroprotection of a single
dose of NADPH was seen when it was administered within 5 hours after reperfusion; however, repeat administration of
NADPH twice a day for 7 days starting 24 hours after the onset of stroke also offered therapeutic effects. Pretreatment
with NADPH also significantly improved the outcome of stroke insult.
Conclusions—Administration of exogenous NADPH significantly protected neurons against ischemia/reperfusioninduced injury in 2 rodent stroke models. Thus, NADPH might be a promising drug candidate for treatment of ischemic
stroke.   (Stroke. 2016;47:187-195. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.009687.)
Key Words: NADPH ◼ reactive oxygen species ◼ reperfusion injury ◼ stroke ◼ TIGAR protein, mouse

I

schemic stroke, the most common type of stroke, is the
leading cause of death and disability in aged society,1 and
the treatment options in clinic are limited. Thrombolytic therapy with recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator is
the first line therapeutic choice in stroke management, but its
clinical application is limited because of the narrow therapeutic window and side effects.2 Less than 10% of patients with
stroke will have the clinical indication for use of tissue-type
plasminogen activator. Therefore, developing novel therapeutic drugs for ischemic stroke is urgently needed.

The interruption of blood flow to brain tissue during stroke
attack causes a metabolic crisis, which results in reduced
energy supply and a burst increase in reactive oxygen species
(ROS). It is generally accepted that neurons are particularly
vulnerable to ischemic injury because neurons have little
activity of anaerobic glycolysis. Meanwhile, neurons consume a large amount of energy for maintaining normal neurotransmission. Many studies have indicated that oxidative
stress is a key pathological player in ischemic brain injury and
have proposed it as a therapeutic target.3–5 However, previous

Received May 13, 2015; final revision received October 11, 2015; accepted October 16, 2015.
From the Laboratory of Aging and Nervous Diseases, Department of Pharmacology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Translational Research and Therapy
for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, College of Pharmaceutical Science,
Soochow University, Suzhou, China (M.L., M.S., L.C., J.C., Y.-Y.Q., R.S., J.-C.W., Z.-H.Q.); Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin
Medical College, Guilin, China (Z.-P.Z.); Department of Pathophysiology, Nantong University School of Medicine, Nantong, China (J.-H.G.); Institute
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zhejiang University School of Pharmaceutical Science, Hangzhou, China (F.H.); and Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias,
Ministry of Education, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China (Y.D.).
*Drs Li and Zhou contributed equally.
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.
115.009687/-/DC1.
Correspondence to Zheng-Hong Qin, PhD, Laboratory of Aging and Nervous Diseases, Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Science,
Soochow University, 199 Ren Ai Rd, Suzhou 215123, China, E-mail qinzhenhong@suda.edu.cn or Yuqiang Ding, PhD, Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias,
Ministry of Education, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 1239 Siping Rd, Shanghai 200092, China, E-mail dingyuqiang@gmail.com
© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org	

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.009687

187

188  Stroke  January 2016

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

studies with various antioxidants offered limited clinical efficacy in patients with stroke.3 One possible reason is that ROS
are produced inside of cells and before they are released into
extracellular space, the oxidative damage of DNA, proteins
and lipids have already been produced. Thus, scavenge of
extracellular space ROS may have limited benefits to neurons.
TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator was
reported to inhibit glycolysis and increase the flow of pentose
phosphate pathway.6 It plays an important survival role in cancer cells.6 Our previous studies found that TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator was predominantly expressed
in brain neurons and rapidly responded to ischemia/reperfusion insult. TP53-induced glycolysis and apoptosis regulator exerted neuroprotection against ischemic brain injury
through increasing the flux of pentose phosphate pathway.7
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), a
metabolic product of pentose phosphate pathway, is a coenzyme and classic molecule involved in many anabolic reactions in cells.8 It serves as hydrogen and electron donors in
reductive biosynthesis of amino acids, lipids, and nucleotides.
Another important biological function of NADPH is to provide redox power to antioxidant systems that mediate the cell
response to oxidative stress.9–11 Reduced form of glutathione
is essential for the functions of key antioxidant enzyme glutathione peroxidase,12 and NADPH is required for its regeneration. NADPH is also implicated in the production of ATP, and
together with the respiratory chain-oxidized NAD, it maintains cell energy homeostasis.9,13 We expected that supply of
exogenous of NADPH would reduce intracellular oxidative
stress and improve energy supply after stroke attack. This
study, thus, was sought to investigate whether supplementation of exogenous NADPH had a therapeutic effect in rodent
and primate models of ischemic stroke. The results of this
study strongly suggest that NADPH may be a novel therapeutic drug for stroke.

Materials and Methods
Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion Model in
Rodents
Male ICR mice (25–30 g) and male adult Sprague–Dawley rats (250–
280 g) were purchased from SLACCAL Lab Animal Ltd (Shanghai,
China). All animals were used in accordance with the institutional
guidelines for animal use and care, and the study protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of Soochow University. Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) surgery was performed as described
previously.14,15 In brief, mice and rats were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injection of 1% pentobarbital sodium, the right external
carotid artery was exposed, and a small incision was made. A 6-0
(for mouse) or 3-0 (for rat) monofilament nylon suture (Doccol Co,
Redlands, CA) was inserted from the external carotid artery into the
internal carotid artery to occlude the right MCA at its origin. Two
hours after occlusion, filament was withdrawn to allow blood reperfusion. Sham-operated animals underwent identical procedures, except
for the suture insertion. Cerebral blood flow was monitored (LDF,
ML191 Laser Doppler Blood Flow Meter, Australia), and only those
animals with 90% reduction of blood flow during MCAO and 85% to
95% recovery of blood flow during reperfusion were used (Figure I
in the online-only Data Supplement). A homoeothermic heating blanket was used to maintain the core body temperature at 37°C during
ischemia/reperfusion operation. For permanent MCAO (pMCAO),
the occluding filament was left in situ until the end of experiment.

Mice and rats were euthanized post ischemia/reperfusion at indicated
time. Brains were harvested and stored at −80°C for further analysis.
In the experiments using rhesus monkeys (age, 6–8 years), animals were allocated to experimental groups, so that the differences
in the average body weight among groups were minimized. In the
experiments using mice and rats, whose body weights were relatively
uniform, the animals were randomly allocated to each experimental
group. The criteria for exclusion, the results of the exclusion, and
mortality in each group are shown in Table I in the online-only Data
Supplement. All of the evaluations and administration of drug in the
experiments were performed in a masked manner.

Measurement of Infarct Volume in Rodents
The mice and rats were anesthetized with 1% pentobarbital sodium,
and brains were rapidly removed 24 hours or 7 days after MCAO.
Brains were sliced with plastic modules (Harvard Apparatus, MA),
and sections were incubated in 1% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride in saline for 20 minutes at 37°C. The infarct area was measured
on 5 sections (mice, 2-mm thickness; rat, 3-mm thickness) per brain
using digital imaging and image analysis software (Image Pro Plus,
Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD) by an observer who was
blinded to experimental conditions. The presence or absence of infarction was determined by examining 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride–stained sections for the areas on the side of infarction that
did not stain with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride. Infarct volume
was expressed as a percentage of total hemisphere.14,16

Measurement of Neurological Score and Brain
Water Content After MCAO
Behavioral deficits were evaluated 24 hours after reperfusion by
an observer blinded to the condition of treatments according to the
method previously described.17 The following rating scores were
used: score 0, no neurological deficit; score 1, failure to extend left
forepaw fully; score 2, circling to the left; score 3, falling to the left;
and score 4, did not walk spontaneously and had a depressed level
of consciousness. Mice and rats that did not show behavioral deficits
immediately after reperfusion (neurological score, 0) were excluded
from the study.
After the wet weight of the brains was quantified, the red and
white parts of these brains were desiccated at 105°C for 48 hours until
the weight was constant. The total weight of the dried 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride–stained brains was obtained, and the water
content of each brain was measured as follows: water content=(wet
weight−dried weight)/wet weight×100%.18

Evaluation of the Blood–Brain Barrier Integrity
The integrity of the blood–brain barrier was evaluated by using Evans
blue extravasations. Evans blue (2% in saline, 4 mL/kg) was injected
intravenously at 22 hours after reperfusion. The sample collection
and measure protocol were followed as the previous study.19

Thromboembolic MCAO Model in Monkeys
Twelve male adult rhesus monkeys (age, 6–8 years; weight, 6–8
kg) were purchased from Yongfu Laboratory Animal Breeding Base
(Guilin, Guangxi, China). Twelve monkeys were randomly divided
into 2 groups: NADPH (N7505; Sigma, Saint Louis, MO) group
and saline group, 6 in each group. All animals were fasted for 24
hours with free access to water before surgery. Monkeys were intramuscularly injected with composite anesthetic (ketamine 10 mg/
kg+midazolam 1 mg/kg+scopolamine 0.02 mg/kg). Anesthetized
animals were examined with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
T2-weighted scanning before surgery to exclude intracranial lesions. After MRI scanning, all animals were sent to interventional
radiological operation room with nasal oxygen, ECG, respiration,
and blood pressure monitor systems. Intravenous injection of propofol was used to maintain anesthesia. Animal autologous blood
(5 mL) with heparin was centrifuged for 3 minutes, and the upper

Li et al   NADPH Protects Brain Ischemic Injury    189
layer serum was collected. Serum was added with coagulase and
injected into an epidural anesthesia tube (1 mm diameter; Henan
Camel Medical Device Company, Xinxiang City, China) to make
blood clots. The femoral artery was punctured using the Seldinger
technique, and the microcatheter was introduced to the compartment
M2 segment of MCA through a 4F guiding catheter (all catheter and
guidewire were from Cordis corporation production [New York]).
The blood flow was monitored with MCA angiography. The 3-cm
length of blood clot was injected into MCA through the microcatheter. The occlusion of blood flow was confirmed with angiography.
After 30 minutes of MCAO, the NADPH group was administered 1
mg/kg of NADPH by intraperitoneal injection. All monkey procedures were approved by the Ethical Committee of Guilin Medical
College Affiliated Hospital.

Measurement of Infarct in Monkeys With MRI

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

MRI was performed in all animals with 3T (Magnetom Verio;
Siemens Medical Systems) equipped with a 32-channel system, axial
slice scanning. MRI sequences and parameters are detailed in Table
I in the online-only Data Supplement. Both T2WI and diffusionweighted imaging were taken 2 hours after MCAO. Animals were
then awakened and allowed to recover. All animals were reanesthetized and scanned 24 hours and 10 days after MCAO. The ischemic
brain tissue also showed a high signal in diffusion-weighted imaging,
but the infarct area in T2WI was seen clearer than that in diffusionweighted imaging because of the brighter pixels; so we defined the
infarct area using T2WI images. All images were amplified to outline
the boundary of infarction and the infarct area then be measured using
a MRI workstation.

Results
Exogenous NADPH Performs Biological Functions
To test whether exogenous NADPH can get into mouse brain
tissues and neurons, normal mice were given intravenous
injection of NADPH of 2.5 mg/kg and the concentrations of
NADPH in plasma and brain were determined. The results
showed that the injection of NADPH significantly increased
NADPH levels in mouse blood and brain tissues. The half-life
of NADPH was ≈6 hours in mouse blood (Figure 1A) and
7 hours in brain tissues (Figure 1B). Next, we determined
whether exogenous NADPH produced biological functions
under ischemia and reperfusion conditions. The supply of
NADPH did not elevate ATP levels under normal conditions.
However, ATP levels in mouse brain were markedly decreased
after ischemic attack. Intravenous administration of NADPH
significantly increased brain ATP levels during reperfusion
period (Figure 1C). Dihydroethidium staining is a reliable
method for detecting ROS production.20 NADPH administration significantly reduced the number of dihydroethidiumpositive cells and intensity of dihydroethidium staining in the
ischemic brain sections (Figure 1D). Moreover, the levels of
NADPH and reduced form of glutathione in brains of control
mice were significantly decreased during reperfusion but were

Measurement of NADPH Levels
Mice were intravenously administered with NADPH (2.5 mg/kg).
Mice (6 per group) were anesthetized with 1% pentobarbital sodium
and decapitated. Brains were removed and immediately dissected
on a cooled ice pack (−20°C) at the indicated time. Brain and blood
NADPH concentrations were measured at the indicated time with the
enzychrom NADPH/NADP assay kit (BioAssay Systems, Hayward,
CA) following manufacturer’s instructions.

Measurement of ATP Levels
Mice were intravenously administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) at
the onset of reperfusion. Mice (6 per group) were anesthetized with
1% pentobarbital sodium and decapitated 3 hours after MCAO/reperfusion. Brains were removed and immediately dissected on a cooled
ice pack (−20°C). In each hemisphere, the whole-ischemic cortex (infarct tissue and penumbra tissue) was collected and quick frozen in
liquid nitrogen. The ATP content in cortex was measured at 3 hours
after reperfusion with the ATP assay kit (Beyotime, Nantong, China)
following manufacturer’s instructions.

Measurement of ROS
For assessing ROS in vivo, dihydroethidium (2 mg/kg, Sigma) was
injected intraperitoneally 1 hour before the end of experiment. Mice
were anesthetized and decapitated, and brain sections (10 μm) were
cut with a cryostat (Leica). The dihydroethidium fluorescence in brain
sections was observed with a fluorescence microscope (Olympus,
Tokyo, Japan).

Statistical Analysis
Data were presented as mean±SEM and were evaluated with 1-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparisons post hoc test for comparisons of >2 means and unpaired Student t test if the statistical differences between 2 groups were compared. Differences in survival
rates were assessed using the Log-rank test followed by Holm–Sidak
method for all pair-wise multiple comparisons. The multiple comparison methods are described in the figure legends. A difference was
considered statistically significant when P<0.05.

Figure 1. Exogenous nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) improved energy supply and reduced oxidative
stress. A and B, Time courses of changes in NADPH concentrations in plasma (A) and brain (B) after intravenous injection.
Normal mice were intravenously injected with NADPH (2.5 mg/
kg), and the half-life of NADPH in the plasma and brain was ≈6
and 7 hours, respectively. *P<0.05, **P<0.01, and ***P<0.001 vs
vehicle (saline) by 1-way ANOVA with Bonferonni post hoc test.
C, The effects of NADPH on ATP levels in mouse ischemic cortex
3 hours after reperfusion. NADPH (7.5 mg/kg, immediately after
reperfusion) significantly increased ATP levels in mouse brain
during reperfusion. ***P<0.001 vs sham and ###P<0.001 vs vehicle
by 1-way ANOVA with Bonferonni post hoc test. D, NADPH
(7.5 mg/kg IV, applied at the onset of reperfusion) inhibited
reperfusion-induced increases in reactive oxygen species levels
as revealed by dihydroethidium staining. ***P<0.001 vs sham and
#P<0.05 vs vehicle by 1-way ANOVA with Bonferonni post hoc
test. Scale bar, 50 µm. Data are expressed as mean±SEM. There
were 6 animals in each group.

190  Stroke  January 2016

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

reversed by the NADPH administration (Figure IIA and IIB in
the online-only Data Supplement). To further confirm whether
the exogenous NADPH penetrates into brain tissue through
the blood–brain barrier, the level of NADPH was determined
in mice brains with or without perfusion (to remove blood in
brain). The results demonstrated that NADPH levels were significantly increased by injection of exogenous NADPH in the
brain tissue with or without perfusion, suggesting that exogenous NADPH may, at least partially, penetrate into brain tissues (Figure IIC in the online-only Data Supplement).
To determine whether NADPH penetrates into the plasma
membrane of neurons, NADPH was added to cultured mouse
cortical neurons and intracellular NADPH was measured.
The results showed that intracellular NADPH concentration in cultured mouse cortical neurons was significantly
increased 2 hours after the addition of exogenous NADPH
(Figure IID in the online-only Data Supplement). To further
demonstrate whether the biological actions of exogenous
NADPH were produced in the neurons, cortical primary
neurons were exposed to oxygen–glucose deprivation/reoxygenation and the effects of NADPH on neuronal bioenergy homeostasis were determined. The results showed that
NADPH did not change the ATP level in neurons under normal conditions. However, NADPH induced a drastic increase
in the ATP level in the neurons 3 hours after oxygen–glucose
deprivation/reoxygenation (Figure IIE in the online-only
Data Supplement). The results also indicated that NADPH
had no effect on neuronal survival as measured 3 hours after
reoxygenation and dead cells did not produce ATP (Figure
IIE and IIF in the online-only Data Supplement). These data
suggest that NADPH can increase the production of ATP
in survival neurons when oxygen becomes available again.
There was a significant decrease in reduced form of glutathione levels in the cortical neurons after oxygen–glucose deprivation/reoxygenation when compared with control, whereas
higher levels of reduced form of glutathione were observed
in the neurons that were treated with NADPH (Figure IIG
in the online-only Data Supplement). Moreover, the ROS
levels in primary neurons (dihydroethidium-positive cells)
were significantly increased to ≈6-folds when compared with
their control group. The treatment of neurons with NADPH
reduced ROS levels (Figure IIH and III in the online-only
Data Supplement). These studies confirmed that exogenous
NADPH could get into neurons to perform its biological
functions.
To test whether NADPH has other novel biological actions,
we determined the in vivo and in vitro effects of NADPH
on platelet aggregation. We found that pretreatment with
NADPH for 30 minutes in rats dramatically suppressed the
ADP-induced platelet aggregation (Figure IIIA and IIIB in the
online-only Data Supplement). Meanwhile, we demonstrated
that in vitro administration of NADPH (30–90 μmol/L) also
inhibited ADP-induced platelet aggregation in a dose-dependent manner (Figure IIIC and IIID in the online-only Data
Supplement). In addition, we also found that treatment with
NADPH 30 minutes after pMCAO mildly increased cerebral
blood flow in ischemic hemisphere (Figure IIIE and IIIF in the
online-only Data Supplement).

Exogenous NADPH Reduces Ischemic Injury in 2
Rodent Stroke Models
We then asked whether exogenous NADPH could be a therapeutic agent for stroke treatment. We used a mouse brain
ischemia/reperfusion model to determine the dose–response
of the exogenous NADPH on brain ischemic injury. Mice
were intravenously administered with NADPH 2.5, 5, and
7.5, mg/kg (immediately at reperfusion), and infarct volume
and neurological deficits were assessed 24 hours after ischemic insult. The data showed that NADPH reduced infarct
volume from 59.99±2.77% to 39.61±4.03%, 38.36±3.69%,
and 30.41±4.10%, respectively (P<0.05 and P<0.01 compared with vehicle [model] mice; Figure 2A and 2B). The
administration of NADPH also markedly attenuated ischemia/
reperfusion-induced behavioral deficits and increases in water
content (P<0.05 and P<0.01 compared with vehicle mice;
Figure IVA and IVB in the online-only Data Supplement).

Figure 2. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
administration reduced ischemic injury in mouse model of transient focal cerebral ischemia. Representative images of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining (A) and quantitative
analysis of infarct volume (B) 24 hours after reperfusion. Mice
were subjected to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion for
2 hours, and NADPH (2.5, 5, and 7.5 mg/kg) was administered
by tail vein injection immediately after reperfusion. *P<0.05 and
**P<0.01 vs vehicle by 1-way ANOVA with Bonferonni post hoc
test. Representative images of TTC staining (C) and quantitative
analysis of infarct volume (D) 24 hous after reperfusion. Mice
were intravenously administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) at 0, 2,
4, 5, 6, and 7 hours after reperfusion, respectively. *P<0.05 and
**P<0.01 vs vehicle by 1-way ANOVA with Bonferonni post hoc
test. Data are expressed as mean±SEM. There were 15 animals
in each group.

Li et al   NADPH Protects Brain Ischemic Injury    191

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Because 7.5 mg/kg of NADPH displayed more powerful neuroprotective effects, we next determined the therapeutic windows of a single dose of NADPH on ischemic brain injury
with this dose. The results showed that intravenous administration of a single dose of NADPH within a 5-hour time
window after reperfusion was effective (P<0.05 and P<0.01;
Figure 2C and 2D; Figure IVC and IVD in the online-only
Data Supplement). Furthermore, a single dose (administered
at the onset of reperfusion) or multiple doses (administered 0,
4, and 8 hours after reperfusion) of NADPH produced similar effects on reduction in infarct volume, behavioral deficits,
and water content (Figure 3A–3C). No significant difference
between the 2 dose regimes was observed in the recovery of
motor and cognitive functions (Figure VA–VC in the onlineonly Data Supplement) but seemed to increase the long-term
survival rate 28 days post ischemia/reperfusion with multiple
doses of NADPH (treated with NADPH at the onset and 8
hours after reperfusion and then twice a day for 3 weeks;
Figure 3D). To characterize the effects of NADPH on postischemic brain pathology, we examined global morphology
and histology of mouse brain 28 days post ischemia/reperfusion. Both single and multiple doses of NADPH robustly

Figure 3. The protective effects of single and multiple doses of
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) in mouse
model of transient focal cerebral ischemia. The single and multiple doses of NADPH decreased ischemia/reperfusion-induced
infarction (A), neurological deficits (B), and water content (C) 24
hours after reperfusion. A single dose of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) was
intravenously administered at the onset of reperfusion. Multiple
doses of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) were intravenously administered at
the onset, 4, and 8 hours after reperfusion, respectively. **P<0.01
and ***P<0.001 vs vehicle by 1-way ANOVA with Bonferonni post
hoc test. There were 12 animals in each group. D, The effects
of the single dose and multiple doses of NADPH on poststroke
survival rate 28 days after stroke. *P<0.05 vs vehicle by using
Log-rank test. There were 11 animals in each group. Single dose
of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) was intravenously administered at the
onset of reperfusion. Multiple doses of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) were
intravenously administered at the onset, 8 hours after reperfusion, and then twice a day for 3 weeks. Data are expressed as
mean±SEM.

alleviated the shrinkage of the ischemic hemisphere (P<0.01;
Figure VIA and VIB in the online-only Data Supplement).
Meanwhile, profound neuronal loss was observed in control
brains, but NADPH treatment markedly increased the number
of surviving neurons in ischemic cortex (Figure VIC in the
online-only Data Supplement).
To further confirm the protective effect, we evaluated the
efficacy of NADPH in mice and rats using filament-induced
pMCAO, a procedure in which no complete blood reperfusion
occurs.21 Administration of NADPH 1 hour after pMCAO also
decreased infarct volume to 34.81±4.83% from 59.08±2.11%
(P<0.01; Figure 4A), behavioral score to 1.93±0.15 from
2.87±0.24 (P<0.01; Figure 4B), and brain water content
from 83.72±0.45% to 81.42±0.68% (P<0.01) 24 hours after
pMCAO (Figure VIIA in the online-only Data Supplement).
Similar results were obtained in rats with pMCAO, as
shown by the data that NADPH administration reduced
infarct volume from 57.78±1.57% to 30.09±6.78% (P<0.01;
Figure 4C), neurological score from 3.2±0.19 to 1.9±0.23
(P<0.01; Figure 4D), and water content from 82.52±0.77%
to 79.85±0.48% (P<0.05; Figure VIIB in the online-only Data
Supplement). In addition, the effects of multiple doses of
NADPH were also evaluated in rats that received NADPH at 2
and 8 hours after pMCAO and then twice a day until 7 days of
postischemic survival. Cresyl violet staining (Figure VIIC in
the online-only Data Supplement) was used to determine the

Figure 4. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
reduced ischemic injury in mouse and rat models of permanent
focal cerebral ischemia. A, NADPH reduced infarct volume and
neurological deficits (B) in mice 24 hours after permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO). Mice were intravenously
administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) 1 hour after pMCAO.
C, NADPH reduced infarct volume and neurological deficits
(D) in rats 24 hours after pMCAO. Rats were intravenously administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) 1 hour after pMCAO. Data were
expressed as mean±SEM. P values by unpaired Student t test
are shown. There were 15 mice or 12 rats animals in each group.

192  Stroke  January 2016
neuroprotective effects of the NADPH 7 days after the induction of ischemia. The sham group showed normal appearance
of the neuronal nuclei, whereas dead cells in the ischemic cortex (treated with vehicle) displayed the pyknotic nuclei. The
administration of NADPH dramatically increased survival
neurons in ischemic cortex (Figure VIID in the online-only
Data Supplement). Prolonged treatment with NADPH also
significantly alleviated pMCAO-induced neurological deficits (P<0.05 and P<0.01; Figure VIIE in the online-only Data
Supplement). All rats that received multiple doses of NADPH
survived, whereas only 6 rats of 12 in control survived 7 days
after pMCAO (P<0.05; Figure VIIF in the online-only Data
Supplement).

Preliminary Observations of the Effects of
Exogenous NADPH in a Primate Stroke Model
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

To test the therapeutic potential of NADPH in primates, we
evaluated the neuroprotective effects of NADPH in rhesus
monkeys with thrombotic occlusion of M3 segment of brain
MCA.22 Representative MRI scanning images showed that
NADPH administration (1 mg/kg) reduced ischemia–induced
infarct areas (Figure 5A). Quantification of serial brain images
revealed that NADPH significantly reduced the infarct volume
from 5.53±0.94 mm3 to 2.69±0.84 mm3 24 hours after ischemic
onset (P<0.05; Figure 5B). To examine the long-term benefit,
we quantified infarction areas and found that NADPH administration significantly reduced infarction areas in the cortex 10
days post ischemia (Figure 5C). Higher clinical examination rating scores were observed in saline-treated monkeys at 24 hours
after ischemia, which was ameliorated in NADPH-treated monkeys (P<0.01; Figure 5D). The amelioration of rating scores
by single dose of NADPH persisted for 29 days after ischemic
attack (Figure VIII in the online-only Data Supplement).

Prestroke or Poststroke Treatment With Exogenous
NADPH Produces Robust Beneficial Effects
To determine whether preventive treatment with exogenous
NADPH had a beneficial effect on the outcome of ischemic
stroke, mice were intravenously administered with 7.5 mg/
kg of NADPH twice a day for 7 days. Mice were subjected to
ischemia/reperfusion insult and infarct volume, and neurological deficits were assessed 24 hours after ischemic insult. No
NADPH was given during and post stroke. The result showed
that ischemia/reperfusion-induced infarct volume and neurological deficits were markedly reduced by pretreatment with
NADPH (Figure 6A and 6B). The Evans blue extravasation and
brain water content were significantly induced 24 hours post
ischemia/reperfusion by pretreatment with NADPH (Figure 6C;
Figure IXA in the online-only Data Supplement). Furthermore,
we examined whether continuous administration of NADPH
after stroke offers beneficial effects on recovery of neurological
functions. The NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) was given twice daily for
14 days starting 24 hours after stroke insult. The results showed
that NADPH significantly increased the long-term survival rate
and the recovery of motor and cognitive functions and 28 days
post ischemia/reperfusion (Figure IXB–IXE in the online-only
Data Supplement). The morphological examination demonstrated that exogenous NADPH notably decreased the shrinkage of the ischemic hemisphere (Figure 6D).

Discussion
This study demonstrated, for the first time, that systemic
administration of exogenous NADPH significantly protected
neurons against ischemia/reperfusion-induced injury in 2
rodent stroke models. It not only substantially reduced infarct
volume after stroke insult but also significantly reduced
long-term mortality and improved recovery of neurological

Figure 5. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) administration reduced ischemic
injury in a monkey stroke model with thrombotic
middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. A, Representative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
images of a rhesus monkey 24 hours after ischemia. NADPH (1 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally 30 minutes after MCA occlusion. B, The
quantification of infarct volume 24 hours after MCA
occlusion. P values by unpaired Student t test are
shown. C, The quantification of the T2-weighted
MRI scans of infarct area 10 days after MCA occlusion. D, Clinical examination rating scores 24
hours after MCA occlusion. The sum of the score
was 41, comprising consciousness (range, 0–2),
defense reaction (range, 0–2), grasp reflex (range,
0–1×2), and extremity movement (range, 0–4×4),
gait (range, 0–3), circling (range, 0–2), bradykinesia
(range, 0–2), balance (range, 0–2), neglect (range,
0–2×2), visual field cut/hemianopsia (range, 0–1×2),
and facial weakness (range, 0–2×2). The difference
was significant (*P<0.05 compared with saline
control by unpaired Student t test). There were 6
animals in each group.

Li et al   NADPH Protects Brain Ischemic Injury    193

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Figure 6. Prestroke or poststroke treatment with exogenous nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) reduced ischemic
injury in mice. Pretreatment with NADPH reduced infarct volume (A), neurological deficits (B), and the Evans blue extravasation (C) in mice
24 hours after ischemia/reperfusion. Mice were intravenously preadministered with 7.5 mg/kg NADPH twice a day for 7 days.
D, Post-treatment with NADPH reduced brain shrinkage of the ischemic hemisphere (right hemisphere) 28 days post ischemia/reperfusion. The data are expressed as percentage of contralateral hemisphere. ***P<0.001 vs sham and #P<0.05 vs vehicle by 1-way ANOVA
with Bonferonni post hoc test. Poststroke administration of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) was started 24 hours after reperfusion and then twice a
day for 2 weeks. P values by unpaired Student t test are shown. Data are expressed as mean±SEM. There were 6 (C), 8 (D), or 12 (A and
B) animals in each group. EB indicates Evans Blue.

functions. The extent of neuroprotection offered by NADPH is
exceptional, and the therapeutic window of NADPH efficacy
is much larger than that of tissue-type plasminogen activator23
in rodent models. NADPH could also be used for preventive
treatment to reduce ischemic injury and poststroke treatment
to improve survival of animals and recovery of neurological
functions in rodent models. The acute toxicity of NADPH
seemed to be low as mice could tolerate approximately a
400-fold increase of its therapeutic dose (Mice were slowly
injected with NADPH [1, 2 or 3 g/kg] via tail vein. No animal died after the drug administration. Twenty mice were used
in this preliminary experiment). Therefore, we propose that
NADPH may be a novel drug candidate for stroke therapy.
This notion is strongly supported by several unique features
of NADPH and its biological functions.
Effective therapeutic agents for the treatment of stroke
must enter into the brain parenchyma through the blood–brain
barrier, which is one of the major obstacles for treating central nervous system diseases.24 This study demonstrated that
NADPH levels in brains were increased after intravenous
injection of NADPH. This study further demonstrated that
addition of NADPH in culture medium significantly increased

intracellular NADPH. Furthermore, administration of exogenous NADPH increased the levels of reduced form glutathione
and ATP, suggesting that NADPH can effectively penetrate the
blood–brain barrier and cell membranes to produce biological
functions. It should be pointed out that the brain NADPH we
measured in this study might only reflect NADPH accumulation in the vasculature but not in the brain cells.
One of the functions of NADPH is to produce reduced
form of glutathione. This property enables exogenous NADPH
to block the elevation of intracellular ROS levels during ischemia/reperfusion. In addition, when oxygen is available,
excess NADPH can be used by mitochondria for production
of ATP.9 A rapid recovery of ATP levels after ischemic insult
certainly favors rescue of neurons to avoid irreversible injury.
In an attempt to find novel biological actions of NADPH,
we evaluated whether NADPH inhibits platelet aggregation.
A complete blockade of cerebral blood flow in our MCAO
and pMCAO models was reached because of the formation
of blood clot around the head of inserted nylon suture. Thus,
inhibition of platelet aggregation may suggest that NADPH
could improve blood supply to ischemic hemisphere. In fact, a
slight increase in blood flow to ischemic cortex was observed

194  Stroke  January 2016

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

in a pMCAO model. Although these observations remain to
be carefully evaluated in a well-designed study in future, we
believe that the inhibitory effect on platelet function is an
additional benefit of NADPH for stroke treatment.
One of the big challenges in stroke management is missing
the optimal therapeutic window when patients administered
into hospital. This study demonstrated that a single dose of
NADPH remained effective if administered within 5 hours
after onset of reperfusion. However, NADPH still produced
therapeutic benefits when administered 24 hours after onset
of stroke if multiple dosages were used for prolonged time
period. To test the rationale for preventive use of NADPH,
we administered NADPH twice a day for 1 week and stopped
the treatment on the day of onset of stroke and thereafter. The
results demonstrated that preventive treatment with NADPH
robustly reduced ischemic injury and improved long-term survival and recovery of neurological functions. Thus, NADPH
could be a drug for acute treatment, preventive treatment, and
poststroke treatment.
As no single animal model can completely mimic the
pathology of human ischemic stroke, multiple animal models
were used for evaluation of short- and long-term therapeutic
effects of NADPH in the present study. The short- and longterm therapeutic effects of NADPH were verified in multiple
animal stroke models. As people may argue that in human
patients with stroke, complete reperfusion of blood may not
occur; thus, this study tested the protective effects of NADPH
in mouse and rat models of pMCAO, in which blood flow
was permanently interrupted. The results demonstrated that
NADPH reduced infarct volume, increased long-term survival, and recovery of neurological functions. Considering the
fundamental differences between rodent brains and human
brains, we also evaluated the therapeutic effects of NADPH in
a primate stroke model, which represents the best model for
human ischemic stroke.22 In this model, focal blood flow was
blocked by direct injection of a thrombus into the midbrain
artery. This procedure produced brain infarct in the territory
supplied by M3 segment of middle brain cerebral artery. The
initial studies showed that NADPH was effective as evidenced
by reductions in infarct volume and neurological deficits.
However, only limited number of monkeys was used in this
study, and the infarct area was small with current protocol.
The efficacy of NADPH in primates remains to be further
confirmed.
It should also be pointed out that there are additional flaws
in this study. The selection of dosage of NADPH in mice,
rats, and monkeys was not carefully converted according to
pharmacokinetics in different species in this study. The routes
of NADPH administration in rodents and monkeys were also
different. These pitfalls might affect the reliability of the
study. Furthermore, except for antioxidative stress offered by
NADPH, the other mechanisms that may also be responsible
for NADPH’s robust neuroprotective effects remain to be further determined.

Conclusions
This study showed that NADPH offered robust short- and
long-term therapeutic effects in 2 rodent stroke models.

NADPH may have clinical advantages as it has a relatively big
therapeutic window, low acute toxicity, and no risk of cerebral
breeding. NADPH had neither beneficial nor harmful effect on
a hemorrhage stroke model (our unpublished observations).
The biological actions of NADPH also strongly suggest that
NADPH may prolong tissue-type plasminogen activator’s
therapeutic window and prevent secondary injury associated
with reperfusion after thrombolysis. Thus, NADPH might be a
promising drug candidate for therapeutic intervention of cerebral ischemia.

Sources of Funding
This study was supported by the Natural Science foundation of
China (no. 31500822, 81271459, 31030034), the “973” project from
the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2011CB51000),
the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher
Education Institutes, and the Graduate Education Innovation Project
of Jiangsu Province (CXZZ12_0850).

Disclosures
None.

References
	 1.	Heuschmann PU, Kolominsky-Rabas PL, Roether J, Misselwitz B,
Lowitzsch K, Heidrich J, et al; German Stroke Registers Study Group.
Predictors of in-hospital mortality in patients with acute ischemic stroke
treated with thrombolytic therapy. JAMA. 2004;292:1831–1838. doi:
10.1001/jama.292.15.1831.
	 2.	 He Z, Wang X, Wu Y, Jia J, Hu Y, Yang X, et al. Treadmill pre-training
ameliorates brain edema in ischemic stroke via down-regulation of aquaporin-4: an MRI study in rats. PLoS One. 2014;9:e84602. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0084602.
	 3.	Sugawara T, Chan PH. Reactive oxygen radicals and pathogenesis of neuronal death after cerebral ischemia. Antioxid Redox Signal.
2003;5:597–607. doi: 10.1089/152308603770310266.
	 4.	 Moro MA, Almeida A, Bolaños JP, Lizasoain I. Mitochondrial respiratory chain and free radical generation in stroke. Free Radic Biol Med.
2005;39:1291–1304. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2005.07.010.
	 5.	 Ray PD, Huang BW, Tsuji Y. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) homeostasis and redox regulation in cellular signaling. Cell Signal. 2012;24:981–
990. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.01.008.
	 6.	 Bensaad K, Tsuruta A, Selak MA, Vidal MN, Nakano K, Bartrons R, et
al. TIGAR, a p53-inducible regulator of glycolysis and apoptosis. Cell.
2006;126:107–120. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.05.036.
	 7.	 Li M, Sun M, Cao L, Gu JH, Ge J, Chen J, et al. A TIGAR-regulated metabolic pathway is critical for protection of brain ischemia. J Neurosci.
2014;34:7458–7471. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4655-13.2014.
	 8.	Jeon SM, Chandel NS, Hay N. AMPK regulates NADPH homeostasis to promote tumour cell survival during energy stress. Nature.
2012;485:661–665. doi: 10.1038/nature11066.
	 9.	 Ying W. NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH in cellular functions and
cell death: regulation and biological consequences. Antioxid Redox
Signal. 2008;10:179–206. doi: 10.1089/ars.2007.1672.
	 10.	 Tan SX, Teo M, Lam YT, Dawes IW, Perrone GG. Cu, Zn superoxide
dismutase and NADP(H) homeostasis are required for tolerance of endoplasmic reticulum stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol Biol Cell.
2009;20:1493–1508. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-07-0697.
	11.	 Ogasawara Y, Funakoshi M, Ishii K. Determination of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate concentration using highperformance liquid chromatography with fluorescence detection: ratio
of the reduced form as a biomarker of oxidative stress. Biol Pharm Bull.
2009;32:1819–1823.
	12.	 Seiler KS, Starnes JW. Exogenous GSH protection during hypoxiareoxygenation of the isolated rat heart: impact of hypoxia duration. Free
Radic Res. 2000;32:41–55.
	13.	 Xia W, Wang Z, Wang Q, Han J, Zhao C, Hong Y, et al. Roles of
NAD(+)/NADH and NADP(+)/NADPH in cell death. Curr Pharm Des.
2009;15:12–19.

Li et al   NADPH Protects Brain Ischemic Injury    195
	 14.	 Clark WM, Lessov NS, Dixon MP, Eckenstein F. Monofilament intraluminal middle cerebral artery occlusion in the mouse. Neurol Res.
1997;19:641–648.
	 15.	 Sheng R, Liu XQ, Zhang LS, Gao B, Han R, Wu YQ, et al. Autophagy
regulates endoplasmic reticulum stress in ischemic preconditioning.
Autophagy. 2012;8:310–325. doi: 10.4161/auto.18673.
	16.	Swanson RA, Morton MT, Tsao-Wu G, Savalos RA, Davidson C,
Sharp FR. A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1990;10:290–293. doi: 10.1038/
jcbfm.1990.47.
	 17.	 Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke. 1989;20:84–91.
	18.	Mdzinarishvili A, Kiewert C, Kumar V, Hillert M, Klein J.
Bilobalide prevents ischemia-induced edema formation in vitro
and in vivo. Neuroscience. 2007;144:217–222. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2006.08.037.
	19.	 Belayev L, Busto R, Ikeda M, Rubin LL, Kajiwara A, Morgan L, et
al. Protection against blood-brain barrier disruption in focal cerebral

ischemia by the type IV phosphodiesterase inhibitor BBB022: a quantitative study. Brain Res. 1998;787:277–285.
	 20.	 Wu LJ, Wu G, Akhavan Sharif MR, Baker A, Jia Y, Fahey FH, et al. The
voltage-gated proton channel Hv1 enhances brain damage from ischemic
stroke. Nat Neurosci. 2012;15:565–573. doi: 10.1038/nn.3059.
	21.	 Bacigaluppi M, Comi G, Hermann DM. Animal models of ischemic
stroke. Part two: modeling cerebral ischemia. Open Neurol J. 2010;4:34–
38. doi: 10.2174/1874205X01004020034.
	 22.	 Roitberg B, Khan N, Tuccar E, Kompoliti K, Chu Y, Alperin N, et al.
Chronic ischemic stroke model in cynomolgus monkeys: behavioral,
neuroimaging and anatomical study. Neurol Res. 2003;25:68–78. doi:
10.1179/016164103101200950.
	23.	 Tsirka SE, Rogove AD, Strickland S. Neuronal cell death and tPA.
Nature. 1996;384:123–124. doi: 10.1038/384123b0.
	 24.	 Ryou MG, Liu R, Ren M, Sun J, Mallet RT, Yang SH. Pyruvate protects
the brain against ischemia-reperfusion injury by activating the erythropoietin signaling pathway. Stroke. 2012;43:1101–1107. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.111.620088.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Reduced Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide Phosphate, a Pentose Phosphate Pathway
Product, Might Be a Novel Drug Candidate for Ischemic Stroke
Mei Li, Zhi-Peng Zhou, Meiling Sun, Lijuan Cao, Jieyu Chen, Yuan-Yuan Qin, Jin-Hua Gu,
Feng Han, Rui Sheng, Jun-Chao Wu, Yuqiang Ding and Zheng-Hong Qin
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Stroke. 2016;47:187-195; originally published online November 12, 2015;
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.009687
Stroke is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2015 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
World Wide Web at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/47/1/187

Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2015/11/12/STROKEAHA.115.009687.DC1.html

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published
in Stroke can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office.
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.
Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
NADPH, a pentose phosphate pathway product, might be a novel drug candidate
for ischemic stroke
1,a
2,a
Mei Li , PhD; Zhi-Peng Zhou , MD; Meiling Sun1, MS; Lijuan Cao1, MS; Jieyu
Chen1, MS; Yuan-Yuan Qin1, PhD; Jin-hua Gu3, PhD; Feng Han4, PhD; Rui Sheng1,
PhD; Jun-Chao Wu1, PhD; Yuqiang Ding5,*, PhD; Zheng-Hong Qin 1,*, MD, PhD
Affiliations:
1
Department of Pharmacology and Laboratory of Aging and Nervous Diseases,
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Translational Research and Therapy for
Neuro-Psycho-Diseases, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational
Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, College of Pharmaceutical Science, Soochow
University; Suzhou 215123, China
2
Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical College, Guilin,
541001, China
3
Department of Pathophysiology, Nantong University School of Medicine, Nantong,
226002, China
4
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zhejiang University School of
Pharmaceutical Science, Hangzhou
5
Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias, Ministry of Education, East Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China
a
These authors contribute to this work equally.
*: Corresponding authors:
Zheng-Hong Qin, PhD
Department of Pharmacology and Laboratory of Aging and Nervous Diseases,
Soochow University School of Pharmaceutical Science, 199 Ren Ai Road, Suzhou
215123, China
Phone: 86-512-65882071
Fax: 86-512-65882071
Email: qinzhenhong@suda.edu.cn
Yuqiang Ding, PhD
Key Laboratory of Arrhythmias, Ministry of Education, East Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, 1239 Siping Road, Shanghai 200092, China
Phone: 86-21-65980497
Fax: 86-21-65983853
Email: dingyuqiang@gmail.com
Supplemental Methods:
Neuronal culture
ICR mouse primary neurons were prepared from the cerebral cortex of day 17
embryos (E17) as described previously 1. Glia growth was suppressed by addition of
10 M cytosine arabinoside. Ninety-seven percent of cultured cells were neurons at
4th day and fed every 2 days with fresh medium. All experiments were performed at
8th day of culture.
1

Oxygen-glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R)
The cultured primary neurons (8 days) were rinsed 3 times with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated with glucose-free Hank’s balanced
salt solution (HBSS) (in mM) 116 NaCl, 5.4 KCl, 0.8 MgSO4, 1.0 NaH2PO4, 1.8
CaCl2, and 26 NaHCO3 (pH 7.3) and placed in an ischemic chamber
(Billups-Rothenberg, MC-101, San Diego, CA, USA) that was filled with 95% N2 and
5% CO2 at 37°C. Control cells were placed in HBSS containing 3 mM D-glucose and
incubated under normal culture conditions for the same time period. After OGD 4 h,
cultures were replaced with the normal culture medium and cultured under normal
conditions (reoxygenation) for 24 h. NADPH (10 M) was added immediately at
reoxygenation to study its biological effects in neurons.
Measurement of ATP levels
Primary neurons were cultured in 6-well plates for 8 days and subjected to
OGD/R as described above. NADPH (10 M) was added to cultured primary neurons
at the onset of OGD/R. ATP contents in the cell lysates of cultured primary neurons
and extracellular medium were measured at 3 h after reoxygenation with the ATP
assay kit (Beyotime, Nantong, China) following manufacturer’s instructions.
Measurement of ROS
Primary neurons were cultured and subjected OGD/R as described above,
intracellular ROS was measured 3 h after reoxygenation by incubation with 1 μM
DHE (Sigma) for 30 min at 37°C. Fluorescence intensity was measured with a laser
confocal microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Measurement of NADPH and rGSH levels
Mice were intravenously administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) at the onset of
reperfusion. Mice (six per group) were anesthetized with 1% pentobarbital sodium
and decapitated. Brains were removed and immediately dissected on a cooled ice pack
(−20°C) at the indicated time after reperfusion. Brain NADPH and rGSH
concentrations were measured at the indicated time after reperfusion with the
enzychrom NADPH/NADP assay kit (BioAssay Systems, Hayward, CA, USA) and
the GSH kit (Beyotime) following manufacturer’s instructions. To investigate if the
exogenous NADPH penetrates into brain tissue through the blood-brain-barrier, mice
were intravenously administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) at the onset of reperfusion.
Mice (six per group) were anesthetized with 1% pentobarbital sodium and perfused
with pre-cooled phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) to remove blood. The levels
of NADPH in mice brains with or without perfusion were measured at the indicated
time after reperfusion with the enzychrom NADPH/NADP assay kit.
Cultured primary neurons (8th day) were treated with NADPH (10 M) at the
onset of OGD/R. Intracellular NADPH and GSH concentrations were measured 3 h
after reoxygenation using the enzychrom NADPH/NADP assay kit and the GSH kit
(Beyotime). To determine penetration of NADPH into neurons, primary neurons were
plated in 6-well plates, cultured primary neurons (8th day) were treated with NADPH
(10 M) at the onset of OGD/R. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold
phosphate-buffered saline 3 h after reoxygenation, then neurons were lyzed and
NADPH was measured with the NADPH/NADP assay kit. The NADPH in
2

supernatant after the third wash was also determined and fund that supernatant had no
NADPH, indicating that all extracellular NADPH was removed.
Cell viability assay
Primary neurons were plated in 96-well plates, cultured primary neurons (8th day)
were treated with NADPH (10 M) at the onset of OGD/R. Cell viability of cultured
primary neurons was evaluated 3 h after reoxygenation with a nonradioactive cell
counting kit (CCK-8; Do-Jindo) according to manufacturer’s protocols.
Platelet aggregation test
In vitro or in vivo whole blood was collected from the vena cava of the normal
rats and rat injected intravenously with NADPH (7.5mg/kg) or saline for 30 min and
anti-coagulated with acid-citrate-dextrose buffer (9:1, v/v). Platelet-rich plasma (PRP)
was obtained by centrifugation of the blood at 250 g for 15 min. To obtain
platelet-poor plasma (PPP), the remaining blood sample was further centrifuged at
2000 g for 15 minutes. The pallets were washed 3 times with a modified Tyrode’s
buffer without Ca2+(134 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 0.3 mM NaH2PO4, 2 mM MgCl2, 5
mM HEPES, 5 mM glucose, 12 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM EGTA, and 3.5 mg/mL BSA).
Platelet number was adjusted to a final concentration at 2 x 108 cells/ml. Platelet
aggregation was measured using a Chrono-Log 590 Aggregation System (Chrono-Log,
Havertown, PA, USA) with stirring at 37 °C. Platelet aggregation was induced with
adenosine diphosphate (ADP, 20 µM, Sigma), and recorded the change of
transmission. Platelet aggregability was evaluated by the maximal percent of platelet
aggregation.
Behavioral tests
In all animals, a battery of behavioral tests (Beam walk test, Rotor-rod test and
The Y-maze task) was performed 7 or 28 days after pMCAO or MCAO as described
previously 2-4 by two investigators who were blinded to the experimental conditions.
Histopathological evaluation
Histopathological examination was performed on the brain tissues of all groups as
previously described 5. At 4 weeks after ischemia, the mice were anesthetized using
sodium pentobarbital and sacrificed. The brains were then dissected. Frozen brain
sections (10 m) were cut with a cryostat (Leica, NuBloch, Germany) and fixed in
4% paraformaldehyde, then stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) for histological
examination. Rats subjected to post-ischemia for 1 week were perfusion-fixed with
4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) under anesthesia. Brains
were removed quickly and further fixed with the same fixation solution overnight at
4 °C. Brain sections (20 μm thick) were cut with a cryostat (Leica) and stained with
0.1% (w/v) cresyl violet and examined with a light microscopy to assess neuronal
damage. The number of surviving cortical neuronal cell per mm was counted as the
neuronal density. Histological examinations were performed with light microscopy by
two investigators who were blinded to the experimental conditions.
NHPSS scores
NHPSS scores in monkeys that subjected to stroke were evaluated by an observer
with experience in evaluating neurologic deficit who was blinded to the treatment
conditions 24 h after MCAO and up to 29 days of post-survival time with the
3

following subcategorized parameters: consciousness, defense reaction, grasp reflex,
and extremity movement, gait, circling, bradykinesia, balance, neglect, visual field
cut/hemianopia, facial weakness6. Defense reaction is a complex response which
included sharp movement away from a threat, lifting the head and opening of the
mouth enough to show the canines. The stimulus for the visual field evaluation was a
piece of fruit presented from each side, with the examiner directly facing the animal
in its home cage. Normal response to this stimulus is turning the gaze and the head
toward it and usually reaching for the food. Blinking reflex is elicited by rapid
approach of a stimulus from the periphery toward the eye. Bradykinesia and circling
was self-explanatory. All the assessments were done in the home cage. From a total of
41 points, 0 corresponded to normal behavior and 41 to severe bilateral neurological
impairment6.
Supplemental Tables and Figures:
Supplemental Table Ⅰ. Exclusion criteria and mortality in animal testing
Supplemental Table Ⅱ. MRI sequences and parameters
Supplemental Figure Ⅰ. Representative of cerebral blood flow of mice exposed
to MCAO for 120 min and reperfusion.
Supplemental Figure Ⅱ . Exogenous NADPH entered into neuronal cells and
reduced oxidative stress
Supplemental Figure Ⅲ. NADPH inhibited platelet aggregation and improved
pMCAO induced- blood flow
Supplemental Figure Ⅳ . NADPH reduced ischemia/reperfusion-induced
neurological deficits and increases in brain water content
Supplemental Figure Ⅴ . NADPH improved functional recovery after
ischemia/reperfusion
Supplemental Figure Ⅵ. Post-stroke treatment with NADPH improved long-term
brain pathology and functional recovery
Supplemental Figure Ⅶ . NADPH administration reduced ischemia-induced
neurological deficits and increases in brain water content in mouse and rat models of
permanent focal cerebral ischemia
Supplemental Figure Ⅷ. NADPH decreased clinical examination rating scores in a
monkey thrombotic middle cerebral artery occlusion model
Supplemental Figure Ⅸ. Pre- and post-stroke treatment with NADPH improved
functional recovery and long-term survival after ischemia/reperfusion

4

Supplemental TableⅠ. Exclusion criteria and mortality in animal testing
Experiment
Exclusion criteria
Excluded animals
Transient focal
cerebral ischemia
in mice

Death during the surgical operation
and the following-up period before
the examination of neurological
deficits

Did not meet the requirements of the
cerebral blood flow after reperfusion

Permanent focal
cerebral ischemia
in mice

Permanent focal
cerebral ischemia
in rat

Thrombotic MCA
occlusion in
monkeys

Death during the surgical operation
and the following-up period before
the examination of neurological
deficits
Death during the surgical operation
and the following-up period before
the examination of neurological
deficits
Death during the surgical operation
and the following-up period before
the examination of neurological
deficits

None allocated to any group (death
during the surgical operation);
3 in vehicle (saline)-treated group a;
1 in NADPH (2.5mg/kg) group a;
1 in NADPH (5 mg/kg) group a ;
3 in vehicle-treated group b ;
1 in 2 h-NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) group b;
2 in 5 h-NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) group b;
2 in 7 h-NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) group b;
1 in vehicle-treated group c;
2 in vehicle-treated group d;
2 in pre-NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) group d;
(a,b,c,d death during the follow-up period)
5

4 in vehicle-treated group (death during
the follow-up period)*;
2 in NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) group (death
during the follow-up period)*

2 in vehicle-treated group (death during
the follow-up period)*

None

a,b,c,d,*

There was no statistical significance in the death of animals in each of the
NADPH treated group as compared with vehicle (saline)-treated group.

Supplemental Table Ⅱ. MRI sequences and parameters
5

MRI
TR
TE
FOV
Matrx
Sequence
DWI EPI 7300 ms
100 ms 171×210 156×192
T2WI TSE 6000 ms 96 ms 160×200 512×640
*TR: repetition time; TE: echo time; SL: slice thickness.

Average
4
2

SL (mm)
3
3

Supplemental Figure Ⅰ.
Representative of cerebral blood flow of mice exposed to
MCAO for 120 min and reperfusion.

6

Supplemental Figure Ⅱ. Exogenous NADPH entered into neuronal cells and
reduced oxidative stress. A, B, The changes in NADPH (A) and rGSH (B) levels in
mouse ischemic mouse cortex. Mice were injected with NADPH (i.v., 7.5 mg/kg) at
the onset of reperfusion. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs vehicle by one-way
ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. There were six animals in each group. C,
The changes in NADPH levels in mouse ischemic mouse cortex 3 h after reperfusion.
Mice were injected with NADPH (i.v., 7.5 mg/kg) at the onset of reperfusion. Mice
were perfused with PBS to remove blood in brains. ***P < 0.001 vs sham, ##P < 0.01
vs vehicle by one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. There were six
animals in each group. D, Increase in NADPH content in cultured primary neurons.
The neurons were cultured for 8 days, then NADPH (10 M) were added to culture
medium for 2 h, and they were rinsed with PBS and lyzed for determination of
NADPH content. ***P < 0.001 vs control by one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s
post hoc test. E, F, The effects of NADPH on ATP content (E) and neuronal survival
(F) of neurons 3 h after reoxygenation. NADPH (10 M) was added to cell culture
medium at the onset of reoxygenation. ***P < 0.001 vs cont, #P < 0.05 vs OGD/R 3 h
by one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. G, H, I, The levels of rGSH (G)
7

and ROS (H, I) in cultured neurons 3 h after reoxygenation. NADPH (10 M) was
added to cell culture medium at the onset of reoxygenation. Scale bar, 20 m. **P <
0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs cont, ##P < 0.01 vs OGD/R 3 h by one-way ANOVA with
Bonferonni’s post hoc test. Data were expressed as mean ± s.e.m. There were six
independent experiments.

Supplemental Figure Ⅲ. NADPH inhibited platelet aggregation and improved
blood flow in a pMCAO model. A, B, NADPH inhibited ADP-induced platelet
aggregation in vivo. Rats were intravenously injected with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) or
vehicle (saline) for 30 min and platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was obtained and
monitored platelet aggregation induced by ADP (20 µM). P-values by unpaired
Student’s t-test were shown. There were six animals in each group. C, D, NADPH
inhibited ADP-induced platelet aggregation in vitro. PRP from normal rats was
8

pre-incubated at 37 °C for 5 min with NADPH (30-90 μΜ) and platelet aggregation
was induced with ADP (20 µM). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 vs ADP by one-way ANOVA
with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. E, F, Administration of NADPH 15 min after
pMCAO in rat enhanced partial recovered blood flow. Rats were injected
intravenously with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) or saline 15 min after pMCAO and then rat
cerebral blood flow was monitored using Laser Doppler Blood Flow Meter and (F)
average CBF during occlusion of the MCA. Baseline (average CBF value of
pre-MCAO). *P <0.05 vs saline by two-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test.
Data were expressed as mean ±s.e.m. There were five animals in each group.

Supplemental Figure Ⅳ . NADPH reduced ischemia/reperfusion-induced
neurological deficits and increases in brain water content. Neurological deficits (A)
and water content (B) 24 h after reperfusion. Mice were subjected to tMCAO for 2 h,
and NADPH (2.5, 5 and 7.5 mg/kg) was administered by tail vein injection
immediately after reperfusion. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs vehicle by
one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. Neurological deficits (C) and water
content (D) 24 h after reperfusion. Mice were intravenously administered with
NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) at 0, 2, 4, 5, 6, and 7 h after reperfusion, respectively. *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vs vehicle by one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc
test. Data were expressed as mean ±s.e.m. There were fifteen animals in each group.

9

Supplemental Figure Ⅴ . NADPH improved functional recovery after
ischemia/reperfusion. A, The effects of a single dose and multiple doses of NADPH
on beam balance test (A), Rota-rod test (B) and Y-maze test (C). Single dose of
NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) was intravenously administered at the onset of reperfusion.
Multiple doses of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) were intravenously administered at the onset,
8 h after reperfusion and then twice a day for 3 weeks. Data were expressed as mean ±
s.e.m. There were 11 animals in each group.

10

Supplemental Figure Ⅵ . Post-stroke treatment with NADPH improved
long-term brain pathology and functional recovery. A, B, Representative images of
morphology of mouse brain (A) and quantification of the shrinkage of the ischemic
hemisphere (B) 28 days post-ischemia/reperfusion. The data were expressed as
percentage of contralateral hemisphere. ***P < 0.001 vs sham, ##P < 0.01 vs vehicle
11

by one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. There were 10 animals in each
group. C, Representative images of histology of mouse brain ischemic cortex tissue
with H&E staining 28 days post-ischemia/reperfusion. Black boxes indicate where
inlets were taken. Black arrows indicate damaged neurons. Scale bar = 100 m.

Supplemental Figure Ⅶ . NADPH administration reduced ischemia-induced
neurological deficits and increases in brain water content in mouse and rat
models of permanent focal cerebral ischemia. Water contents (A) in mice 24 h after
pMCAO. Mice were intravenously administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) 1 h after
pMCAO. Water content (B) in rats 24 h after pMCAO. Rats were intravenously
administered with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) 1 h after pMCAO. P-values by unpaired
Student’s-test were shown. There were fifteen animals in each group. C, NADPH
reduced infarct volume as measured on cresyl violet-stained brain sections in rats 7
days after pMCAO. D, cell density was expressed as the number of cells per 1-mm
length of the brain sections counted with a light microscopy. ***P < 0.001 vs sham,
###
P < 0.001 vs vehicle by one-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. Scale
bar = 100 m. There were six rats animals in each group. The effects of post-stroke
treatment with NADPH on neurological deficits (E) in rats 7 days after pMCAO. *P
<0.05, **P <0.01 vs vehicle by two-way ANOVA with Bonferonni’s post hoc test. F,
Post-stroke survival rate 7 days after stroke of rats that subjected to pMCAO. The
12

difference was significant (P=0.034 by using log-rank test). There were twelve (E, F)
rats animals in each group. Multiple doses of NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) were intravenously
administered at the onset, 8 h after reperfusion and then twice a day for 3 weeks.
P-values by unpaired Student’s t-test were shown. Data were expressed as mean ±
s.e.m.

Supplemental Figure Ⅷ. NADPH decreased clinical examination rating scores
in a monkey thrombotic middle cerebral artery occlusion model. Clinical
examination rating scores 1-29 d after MCA occlusion. NADPH (1 mg/kg) was
administered intraperitoneally 30 min after MCAO. Data were expressed as mean ±
s.e.m. P-values by unpaired Student’s-test were shown. There were six animals in
each group.

13

Supplemental Figure Ⅸ . Pre- and post-stroke treatment with NADPH
improved functional recovery and long-term survival after ischemia/reperfusion.
A, Water content in mice 24 h after ischemia/reperfusion. Mice were intravenously
pre-administered with 7.5 mg/kg NADPH twice a day for 7 days. P-values by
unpaired Student’s-test were shown. There were twelve animals in each group. The
effects of post-stroke treatment with NADPH on beam balance test (B), rota-rod test
(C) and Y-maze test (D). E, The effects of post-stroke treatment with NADPH on
survival rate 28 days after stroke. *P <0.05 vs vehicle by using log-rank test.
Post-stroke treatment with NADPH (7.5 mg/kg) was started 24 h after reperfusion and
then twice a day for 3 weeks. Data were expressed as mean ± s.e.m. There were 11
animals in each group.
Supplemental references：
1.
Yonekura I, Takai K, Asai A, Kawahara N, Kirino T. P53 potentiates
hippocampal neuronal death caused by global ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 2006;26:1332-1340
2.
Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Lu D, Lu M, et al. Therapeutic benefit of
intravenous administration of bone marrow stromal cells after cerebral
ischemia in rats. Stroke. 2001;32:1005-1011
3.
Muller HD, Hanumanthiah KM, Diederich K, Schwab S, Schabitz WR,
14

4.

5.

6.

Sommer C. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor but not forced arm use improves
long-term outcome after photothrombotic stroke and transiently upregulates
binding densities of excitatory glutamate receptors in the rat brain. Stroke.
2008;39:1012-1021
Yamada K, Tanaka T, Zou LB, Senzaki K, Yano K, Osada T, et al. Long-term
deprivation of oestrogens by ovariectomy potentiates beta-amyloid-induced
working memory deficits in rats. Br J Pharmacol. 1999;128:419-427
Ren J, Fan C, Chen N, Huang J, Yang Q. Resveratrol pretreatment attenuates
cerebral ischemic injury by upregulating expression of transcription factor
nrf2 and ho-1 in rats. Neurochem Res. 2011;36:2352-2362
Roitberg B, Khan N, Tuccar E, Kompoliti K, Chu Y, Alperin N, et al. Chronic
ischemic stroke model in cynomolgus monkeys: Behavioral, neuroimaging
and anatomical study. Neurol Res. 2003;25:68-78

15

