ORIGINAL
RESEARCH
A Comparison of 2 Stroke Devices: The New
Aperio Clot-Removal Device and the
Solitaire AB/FR
C. Roth
D. Junk
P. Papanagiotou
A. Keuler
H. Ko ¨rner
M. Schumacher
W. Reith
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Several studies have shown promising results for the use of selfexpandable
intracranial stents for the treatment of acute ischemic stroke. This new technique combines
immediate flow restoration after stent deployment with high recanalization rates. In the present
study, the safety and efficacy of the new Aperio clot-removal device was tested in comparison with the
Solitaire AB device.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The experiments were performed in swine with a weight of 35–50 kg
following established models. The experimental thrombi were prepared by using a new flow model
(Thrombus Loop) to produce radiopaque thrombi. Thrombi were cut into lengths of 10 mm and injected
into the target vessel. The occlusion was verified by DSA and rated with the help of the TICI score. A
microcatheter was placed distal to the thrombus. The devices were placed with the proximal third
within the thrombus and were retrieved under continuous aspiration in their released state into the
guiding sheath. We performed 23 procedures with the Aperio device and 18 procedures with the
Solitaire AB and FR devices. Control angiograms were obtained 3 and 5 minutes after device
deployment to evaluate the flow restoration. The number of attempts to reach a TICI 2/3 score was
recorded as well as the time to recanalization and the device-related complications. Vasospasm,
vascular perforation, intramural arterial dissection, or embolization of a previously uninvolved territory
was defined as a device-related complication.
RESULTS: Defined radiopaque thrombi from whole blood could reliably be created by using the
Thrombus Loop. Both devices demonstrated a high recanalization rate of 100% (TICI 3) in the target
vessel with no device-related complications. No significant differences were found between the 2
devices.
CONCLUSIONS: In this small study, we could show that radiopaque thrombi of whole blood with a
defined diameter could be reliably created by using the Thrombus Loop. The new “stent-retriever”
(Aperio System) seems to be a very efficient and safe addition to the existing repertoire of clot-removal
devices.
ABBREVIATIONS: BaSo
4
 barium sulfate; mRS modified Rankin Scale; TICI Thrombolysis in
Cerebral Infarction score
In the past few years, interventional treatment of acute ischemic
stroke has developed rapidly. Stroke is the third leading
cause of death in North America, Europe, and Asia; also it is
one of the leading causes of adult disability. The only known
drug therapy for acute ischemic stroke is thrombolysis with
rtPA.Inmanyclinicaltrials,treatmentwithrtPAhasprovedto
be effective in improving the clinical outcome and reducing
subsequent disability. However, the advancement of this treatmentapproachhasstalled.Theonlyimprovementinthistherapeutic
regimen has been the extension of the time frame in
which it can be safely administered.1-7Treatment of ischemic
stroke in patients with a large intracranial vessel occlusion still
remains a challenge because IV thrombolysis often reaches its
limit.8,9 The recanalization rates achieved with IV rtPA for
large-vessel arterial occlusion are low, within ranges of 4%–
32% depending on the vessel, 4% for ICA occlusions and 32%
for MCA occlusions.10,11
Several trials have shown the efficacy of a mechanical treatment
approach in acute stroke caused by large-vessel occlusion.12 These trials were able to show that a mechanical approach
alone or in combination with IV and intra-arterial
rtPA administration could improve the recanalization rate
and thereby the outcome of the treated patients. Several reports
of the use of intracranial stent placement in acute ischemic
stroke have been published. In these trials, a recanalization
rate of up to 100% could be achieved. Recently a new
technique by using a self-expendable intracranial stent as a
thrombectomy device was introduced.13,14 Several studies
have shown recanalization rates of up to 90% (TICI 3) and
good clinical outcome in 54% of the patients (mRS 0–2) by
using this technique.
In this study, we compared the Solitaire AB/FR stent (ev3,
Irvine, California) against the new Aperio device (Acandis,
Pforzheim, Germany) in an animal stroke model. The Aperio
is a hybrid-design stent-based clot retriever with alternating
segments of small closed cells and wider hybrid cells for high
Received August 16, 2010; accepted after revision October 27.
From the Clinic for Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology (C.R., D.J., P.P., H.K.,
W.R.), Saarland University Hospital, Homburg/Saar, Germany; and Department of Neuroradiology
(A.K., M.S.), University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
C. Roth and D. Junk contributed equally to this work.
Please address correspondence to Christian Roth, Clinic for Diagnostic and Interventional
Neuroradiology, Geb. 90.4, Kirrberstr., 66421 Homburg, Germany; e-mail: Christian.roth@
uks.eu
http://dx.doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A2962
INTERVENTIONAL ORIGINAL RESEARCH
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 33:1317–20  August 2012  www.ajnr.org 1317
(8.0.0.2542,1293474414 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
flexibility, improved vessel apposition, and better thrombus
fixation during retrieval.
Materials and Methods
Revascularization Devices
The Solitaire AB/FR device is a laser-cut self-expanding split-design
closed-cell nitinol stent device. It is available with a diameter of 4 mm
(length, 15 or 20 mm) or 6 mm (length, 20 or 30 mm) and is delivered
through a 0.021- or 0.027-inch microcatheter.
The Aperio is a self-expanding nitinol laser-cut stentlike thrombectomy
device. It contains 3 distal device markers to indicate device
expansion (Fig 1B, gray arrow) as well as a proximal and distal wire
marker (Fig 1B, white and black arrows). The device has a hybrid
design with a mixture of closed and partially open cells. The small
closed cells (Fig 1A,small black circle) are supposed to optimize vessel
adaption; the wider hybrid cells, clot-catching cells (Fig 1A,large black
circle), contain an anchoring element for optimal clot fixation in tortuous
vessels. It is available with a diameter of 4.5 mm and a length of
40 mm for the treatment of vessels ranging from 2 to 4 mm. It is
bundled with the 0.027-inch Acandis microcatheter, which has a
length of 1550 mm and is compatible with 0.010- to 0.014-inch guidewires
and 6F guiding catheters.
Animal Care
All procedures were conducted according to international guidelines.
Eight swine ranging from 35 to 50 kg were used in this study. Each
animal had free access to food and water until the morning of the
angiography.
Sedation was induced by a mixture of ketamine (KetaVet, 30 mg/
kg) and xylazine (TranquiVed, 2.5 mg/kg) and atropine (0.05 mg/kg).
Endotracheal intubation was performed. General anesthesia was
maintained by IV infusion of thiopental (Trapanal, 2.6-g/100 mL sodium
chloride solution, 15–20 mL/hr). After the swine was put under
general anesthesia, the femoral artery and vein were exposed surgically
and an 8F sheath (AvantiIntroducer, Cordis, Bridgewater, New
Jersey) and a 4F (Cordis) sheath, respectively, were introduced into the
vessels. As a guiding catheter, an 8F balloon catheter (Merci; Concentric
Medical, Mountain View, California) was used. The procedures were
performed with the swine under systemic heparinization.
Vital parameters such as arterial blood pressure, heart rate, and
expired oxygen and carbon dioxide levels were continuously recorded.
The expired oxygen levels were kept at 30% of the expired vol.
After the experiments, the animals were euthanized with an IV injection
of pentobarbital.
Angiography
Selective intra-arterial DSA was performed on a high-resolution angiographic
system (Ziehm Vision imaging, Nuremberg, Germany);
Ultravist-370 (iopromide; Bayer Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany)
was used for vessel contrast. Selective occlusion of vessels in the subclavian
or carotid vasculature within a 2- to 4-mm size range was
performed. These vessel regions simulate the anatomic setting of an
occlusion of the MCA and the basilar artery in the human circulation.
The guiding catheter was pulled back into a larger vessel segment to
restore arterial flow. The occluded vessel segment was then navigated
with a 0.21-inch microcatheter (Rebar 18, ev3) for the deployment of
the Solitaire device or with the microcatheter that comes with the
Aperio device, both in combination with a 0.014-inch microwire
(Traxcess; MicroVention, Aliso Viejo, California).
Preparation of the Experimental Thrombi
The thrombi used for the trial were prepared with a modified method
of the Chandler loop,15,16with the help of a dynamic clot-generating
system (Thrombus Loop, Acandis). A polyvinyl chloride tubing with
an inner diameter of 5 mm and a length of 50 cm was filled with 3 mL
of blood from the corresponding swine for the trial. For better fluoroscopic
visibility, the blood was mixed with 300 mg of BaSo
4
/12 mL
of blood. The tubing rotated at a rate of 20 rpm in a water basin at
37°C. After 15 minutes, the thrombi were drained and rinsed with
physiologic saline solution and stored in a basin with the same solution
at room temperature for 60 minutes.
Thrombus Application
After cutting the thrombi in lengths of 10 mm, we injected the
thrombi, with help of polytetrafluoroethylene tubing (4-mm inner
diameter) with a 20-mL syringe, both filled with physiologic saline
solution to avoid air embolism, via a long 6F sheath (Strada; St Jude
Medical, St Paul, Minnesota) into the target vessel.
Mechanical Thrombectomy
An 8F balloon catheter (Merci) was advanced into the proximal subclavian
artery and the proximal common carotid artery, respectively.
The target vessel occlusion was verified angiographically and rated
with the help of the TICI scale.17 The thrombus was passed with a
microcatheter (3F Microcatheter, Acandis; Rebar, ev3) with a 0.014-
inch microwire (Traxcess; SilverSpeed, ev3). After placement of the
microcatheter distal to the thrombus, verified by intra-arterial contrast
medium injection, we advanced the device through the microcatheter
and placed it with the proximal third within the thrombus. A
control angiogram was obtained after successful unfolding of the device
to evaluate re-establishment of flow and again after 3 and 5 minutes.
Then the balloon at the tip of the guiding catheter was inflated,
and the device was pulled back in its unleashed state under continuous
aspiration with a 50-mL syringe together with the microcatheter
into the guiding sheath. After removal of the device and the microcatheter
, another 50 mL was aspirated from the guiding sheath to
prevent re-embolization of a possibly lost clot. If the following control
Fig 1. A, The small circle shows the smaller closed cells with a diameter of 1.7 mm; the
larger circle illustrates the larger hybrid (clot-catching) cells for better thrombus fixation in
tortuous vessel segments (3.7 mm). B, The Aperio device in its unfolded state. The white
and black arrows mark the distal and proximal radiopaque wire markers; the gray arrow
shows the radiopaque markers at the end of the device, indicating complete device
unfolding.
1318 Roth  AJNR 33  August 2012  www.ajnr.org
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
angiogram showed a TICI score lower than 2, the procedure was
repeated until a TICI score of 2 or 3 was achieved.
Measurement of Outcome
The time to recanalization, the number of attempts to reach recanalization
, device deployment, and the rate of device-related complications
were recorded. For device-related complications, we noted vasospasm
, vascular perforation, intramural arterial dissection, or
embolization of a previously uninvolved territory.
The DSAs were analyzed by 2 experienced neuroradiologists (M.S.
and W.R.), who were blinded to the devices used, on a MacPro
workstation (Apple, Bothell, Washington) running OsiriX 3.8.1
open-source DICOM software (Pixmeo, Geneva, Switzerland). The
angiograms were carefully read for any sign of postinterventional vasospasm
, dissection, or vessel perforation. The evaluation of embolization
of previously uninvolved vessel territories during the retrieval
attempt was done by reading the unsubtracted images for radiopaque
clot as well as reading the subtracted images for newly occluded
branches.
Results
A total of 8 swine with a weight of 35–50 kg were randomized
for this study. There were 23 procedures performed with the
new Aperio device and 18 procedures, with the Solitaire
AB/FR device. There were no significant differences in the
baseline characteristics between the 2 devices.
With the modified clot-generating procedure, we were able
to generate clots similar in size and length with a high radiopacity
because of the added BaSo
4
(Fig 2).
Both devices demonstrated a very good fluoroscopic visibility
and good unfolding of the device after deployment. Furthermore
, both devices showed a high recanalization rate of
100% in the target vessel (with the following average TICI
scores: Aperio, TICI 2.8; Solitaire AB/FR, TICI 2.7) (Fig 3) and
excellent device performance with no device-related acute
thrombosis, vessel dissection, or vessel perforation. Distal embolization
was recorded in 8% of the procedures with the Aperio
and in 11% with the Solitaire AB. Device-related vasospasm
was seen in 9% of the procedures with the Aperio device
and in 6% with the Solitaire AB/FR device. A mean of 1.4 runs
was needed with the Aperio device to reach a TICI2 score
and 1.2 runs, for the Solitaire, respectively (Table and Fig 3).
Discussion
Successful recanalization is associated with improved outcomeafteracuteischemicstroke.18IVrtPAadministrationhas
proved useful up to 4.5 hours after stroke-symptom onset.3
However, recanalization rates in large-vessel occlusions are
low, within ranges of 4%–32%, depending on the vessel, 4%
for ICA occlusions, and 32% for MCA occlusions.10,11 Recently
, a new technique by using a self-expandable stent system
as a clot-removal device has been introduced.14 The first
results using this technique show high recanalization rates and
a high rate of favorable clinical outcome (mRS2inupto
45% at 90 days).13,19
The aim of our study was to compare the safety and efficacy
of the new Aperio clot-removal device with the Solitaire
AB/FR device, which was the device mostly used in the previous
studies with this treatment approach.
In this study, immediate flow restoration could be achieved
in all cases after device deployment. However, the rate of recanalization
decreased with time so that after 5 minutes, the
target vessel was almost re-occluded in most of the cases, no
matter which device was used. This outcome indicated that
there would not be a benefit in leaving the device in place for
much longer. This phenomenon might be caused by migra-
Fig 3. Comparison of the Solitaire AB/FR and the Aperio devices regarding acute
recanalization and clot removal.
Comparison of the 2 devices
Aperio Solitaire
No. of attempts, TICI 2/3 1.4 1.2
TICI 2/3 score 100% 100%
Distal embolization 8% 11%
Vasospasm 9% 6%
Acute thrombosis/dissection/perforation 0 0
Fig 2. A, Thrombus before insertion. B, Radiographic image of radiopaque thrombus. C, Thrombus after extraction.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 33:1317–20  August 2012  www.ajnr.org 1319
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
tion of the thrombus into the stent struts.20Both devices were
able to reach recanalization rates of 100% of the target vessel
(TICI 2/3). These rates are higher than those in previous clinical
studies; however, the vessels presented in this animal
model were less tortuous and less elongated and showed no
sign of atherosclerotic changes, and the recanalization rates
were within the range of those in previous animal studies using
a similar model.20 No device-related complications occurred
regarding vessel dissection or perforation; however, vasospasm
was seen in up to 8% of the cases. This is a common
occurrence in this type of animal model.21
Limitations
In this animal model, the vessels used for thrombectomy maneuvers
were within the size range of intracranial human vessels
; however, the whole vascular system was less tortuous and
less elongated and no atherosclerosis was present and the vessels
were prone to vasospasm. Because only 1 entity of thrombus
was used, different compositions of thrombi might show
different results in the treatment with the 2 devices.
Conclusions
In this small study, we could show that radiopaque thrombi of
whole blood with a defined diameter could be reliably created
by using the Acandis Thrombus Loop. The new “stent-retriever”
(Aperio System) seems to be a very efficient and safe
addition to the existing repertoire of clot-removal devices.
Disclosure: Andreas Keuler—RELATED: Provision of Writing Assistance, Medicines, Equipment
, or Administrative Support: University Hospital Freiburg, Germany,* Comments:
payment by the Acandis company for animal experiments testing the clot retriever. Martin
Schumacher—RELATED: Provision of Writing Assistance, Medicines, Equipment, or Administrative
Support: University Hospital Freiburg, Germany,* Comments: payment by the
Acandis company for animal experiments testing the clot retriever. (*Money paid to the
institution.)
References
1. Tissueplasminogenactivatorforacuteischemicstroke:theNationalInstitute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study Group.N Engl J Med
1995;333:1581–87
2. Intracerebralhemorrhageafterintravenoust-PAtherapyforischemicstroke:
the NINDS t-PA Stroke Study Group.Stroke1997;28:2109–18
3. Hacke W, Kaste M, Bluhmki E, et al.Thrombolysiswithalteplase3to4.5hours
after acute ischemic stroke.N Engl J Med2008;359:1317–29
4. Hacke W, Kaste M, Fieschi C, et al. Randomised double-blind placebo-controlled
trial of thrombolytic therapy with intravenous alteplase in acute ischaemic
stroke (ECASS II): Second European-Australasian Acute Stroke Study
Investigators.Lancet1998;352:1245–51
5. Steiner T, Bluhmki E, Kaste M, et al. The ECASS 3-hour cohort: secondary
analysis of ECASS data by time stratification—ECASS Study Group. European
Cooperative Acute Stroke Study.Cerebrovasc Dis1998;8:198–203
6. Wahlgren N, Ahmed N, Da ´valos A, et al.Thrombolysis with alteplase for acute
ischaemicstrokeintheSafeImplementationofThrombolysisinStroke-Monitoring
Study (SITS-MOST): an observational study.Lancet2007;369:275–82
7. Wahlgren N, Ahmed N, Davalos A, et al.Thrombolysis with alteplase 3–4.5 h
afteracuteischaemicstroke(SITS-ISTR):anobservationalstudy.Lancet2008;
372:1303–09. Epub 2008 Sep 12
8. Schellinger P, Kohrmann M, Hacke W.Thrombolytic therapy for acute stroke.
In: Fisher M, ed. Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol. 94. Amsterdam, the
Netherlands: Elsevier; 2008:1155–93
9. Schellinger P, Ringleb P, Hacke W.European Stroke Organisation 2008 guidelinesformanagingacutecerebralinfarctionortransientischemicattack.Part
2.[in German].Nervenarzt2008;79:1180–84, 1186–88, 1190–201
10. Bhatia R, Hill MD, Shobha N, et al. Low rates of acute recanalization with
intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator in ischemic stroke:
real-world experience and a call for action.Stroke2010;41:2254–58
11. Tomsick T, Broderick J, Carrozella J, et al. Revascularization results in the
Interventional Management of Stroke II trial. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2008;29:582–87
12. Furlan A, Higashida R, Wechsler L, et al.Intra-arterial prourokinase for acute
ischemic stroke: the PROACT II study—a randomized controlled trial.
Prolyse in Acute Cerebral Thromboembolism.JAMA1999;282:2003–11
13. Roth C, Papanagiotou P, Behnke S, et al.Stent-assisted mechanical recanalization
for treatment of acute intracerebral artery occlusions. Stroke 2010;41:
2559–67
14. Papanagiotou P, Roth C, Walter S, et al. Treatment of acute cerebral artery
occlusion with a fully recoverable intracranial stent: a new technique.Circulation2010;121:2605–06
15. Kan I, Yuki I, Murayama Y, et al.A novel method of thrombus preparation for
use in a swine model for evaluation of thrombectomy devices. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol2010;31:1741–43. Epub 2010 Jan 21
16. Poole JC.A study of artificial thrombi produced by a modification of Chandler
’s method.Q J Exp Physiol Cogn Med Sci1959;44:377–84
17. Higashida RT, Furlan AJ, Roberts H, et al.Trial design and reporting standards
for intra-arterial cerebral thrombolysis for acute ischemic stroke. Stroke
2003;34:e109–37
18. Rha JH, Saver JL.The impact of recanalization on ischemic stroke outcome: a
meta-analysis.Stroke2007;38:967–73
19. Castan ˜o C, Dorado L, Guerrero C, et al. Mechanical thrombectomy with the
Solitaire AB device in large artery occlusions of the anterior circulation: a
pilot study.Stroke2010;41:1836–40
20. Mordasini P, Frabetti N, Gralla J, et al.In vivo evaluation of the first dedicated
combined flow-restoration and mechanical thrombectomy device in a swine
model of acute vessel occlusion.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:294–300
21. GrallaJ,SchrothG,RemondaL,etal.Adedicatedanimalmodelformechanical
thrombectomy in acute stroke.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2006;27:1357–61
1320 Roth  AJNR 33  August 2012  www.ajnr.org
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.567559015)
