Original Article

Direct Stimulation of Angiotensin II Type 2 Receptor Initiated
After Stroke Ameliorates Ischemic Brain Damage
Li-Juan Min,1 Masaki Mogi,1 Kana Tsukuda,1 Fei Jing,1 Kousei Ohshima,1 Hirotomo Nakaoka,1
Harumi Kan-no,1 Xiao-Li Wang,1 Toshiyuki Chisaka,1 Hui-Yu Bai,1 Jun Iwanami,1 and
Masatsugu Horiuchi1
initiated after MCA occlusion significantly reduced the ischemic area,
with improvement of neurological deficit in a time-dependent manner
without affecting blood pressure. The decrease of cerebral blood flow
after MCA occlusion was also ameliorated by C21 treatment. Moreover,
treatment with C21 significantly attenuated superoxide anion production and expression of proinflammatory cytokines, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, and tumor necrosis factor α. Interestingly, C21
administration significantly decreased blood–brain barrier permeability and cerebral edema on the ischemic side.

methods
Stroke was induced by middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion, and the
area of cerebral infarction was measured by magnetic resonant imaging. C21 (10 µg/kg/day) treatment was initiated immediately after MCA
occlusion by intraperitoneal injection followed by treatment with C21
once daily.

conclusions
These results provide new evidence that direct AT2 receptor stimulation with C21 is a novel therapeutic approach to prevent ischemic brain
damage after acute stroke.

results
We observed that ischemic area was enlarged in a time dependent fashion and decreased on day 5 after MCA occlusion. Treatment with C21

Keywords: acute C21 treatment; AT2 receptor stimulation; blood–brain
barrier permeability; blood pressure; cerebral blood flow; hypertension; inflammation; neuroprotection; stroke.
doi:10.1093/ajh/hpu015

Previous articles on the brain renin-angiotensin system
amainly examined the regulatory mechanism of blood
pressure; however, large clinical studies have demonstrated
that angiotensin (Ang) II type 1 (AT1) receptor blockers
(ARBs) reduce the onset of stroke, independent of their
blood pressure-lowering effect.1,2 Ang II type 2 (AT2) receptor stimulation by unbound Ang II could also be expected
during treatment of stroke with ARBs, and there is recent
accumulating evidence suggesting that in most actions,
the AT2 receptor not only opposes the AT1 receptor but
also has unique effects beyond interaction with AT1 receptor signaling.3 Fuentes et  al. reported that patients taking
antihypertensive drugs at stroke onset had a lower rate of
poor outcome than those not on antihypertensive treatment
and those taking an ARB had better outcomes than those
without an ARB, whereas analysis of other antihypertensive
drugs showed no difference.4 Recently, Li et al. reported that

ARBs significantly reduced the incidence and progression of
Alzheimer disease and dementia compared with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and other cardiovascular
drugs.5 These clinical results support the idea that both AT1
receptor blockade and AT2 receptor stimulation by unbound
Ang II are important in the neuroprotective effect of ARBs.
In a cerebral ischemic stroke model, we have observed that
the ischemic area was significantly larger in AT2 receptor–
deficient mice after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion,
with a decrease in cerebral blood flow (CBF) and an increase
in superoxide production.6 An ARB, valsartan, at a nonhypotensive dose significantly reduced the ischemic area, neurological deficit, and CBF reduction, as well as superoxide
production and NADPH oxidase activity in wild-type mice,
whereas these inhibitory effects of the ARB were weaker in
AT2 receptor–deficient mice. Li et al. also reported that after
transient MCA occlusion in rats, the reductions of ischemic

Correspondence: Masatsugu Horiuchi (horiuchi@m.ehime-u.ac.jp).

1Department of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology and Pharmacology,
Ehime University Graduate School of Medicine, Tohon, Ehime, Japan.

Initially submitted October 21, 2013; date of first revision November
11, 2013; accepted for publication January 8, 2014; online publication
February 26, 2014.

1036  American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014

© American Journal of Hypertension, Ltd 2014. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

background
Stroke is a leading cause of death and disability; however, meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials of blood pressure–lowering drugs in acute
stroke has shown no definite evidence of a beneficial effect on functional
outcome. Accumulating evidence suggests that angiotensin II type 1
receptor blockade with angiotensin II type 2 (AT2) receptor stimulation
could contribute to protection against ischemic brain damage. We examined the possibility that direct AT2 receptor stimulation by compound 21
(C21) initiated even after stroke can prevent ischemic brain damage.

Direct AT2R Stimulation Ameliorates Brain Damage

METHODS

This study was performed in accordance with the National
Institutes of Health guidelines for the use of experimental
animals. All animal studies were reviewed and approved by
the Animal Studies Committee of Ehime University.
Animals

Adult male wild-type C57BL/6J mice (aged 10–12 weeks;
weight = 25–30 g; CLEA, Tokyo, Japan) and AT2 receptor–deficient mice (based on C57BL/6J strain bred in our laboratory)
were used. Mice were kept in a room in which lighting was
controlled (12 hours on, 12 hours off) and the temperature

was maintained at 25 °C. They were given a standard diet (MF;
Oriental Yeast, Tokyo, Japan) and water ad libitum.
MCA occlusion and drug treatment

Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by permanent occlusion of the left MCA by electrocoagulation through a subtemporal approach.14 In the preventive study, C21 (10  µg/
kg/day, dissolved in saline; Vicore Pharma, Gothenburg,
Sweden) was administered to mice for 14 days before MCA
occlusion by intraperitoneal injection, and the last injection
was performed one day before MCA occlusion. In the rescue
study, C21was injected immediately after MCA occlusion
(after awakening from anesthesia), the next injection was
performed 24 hours later, and the next injection was performed at the same time point once daily. The injections were
maintained until one day before sampling (or killing). The
animals sampled (or killed) on day 1 were injected immediately after MCA occlusion (after awakening from anesthesia) only; 24 hours later, animals were sampled (or killed) for
various experiments. Systolic blood pressure was measured
by the indirect tail-cuff method with a blood pressure monitor (MK-2000ST; Muromachi Kikai, Tokyo, Japan).
Neurological score

Neurological deficit was evaluated using neurological
scores.15 Neurological scores were defined as follows: 0 = no
neurological deficit; 1  =  failure to extend left forelimb;
2 = circling to the contralateral side; 3 = falling to the contralateral side at rest; 4 = no spontaneous motor activity.
Magnetic resonant imaging

The volume of cerebral infarction was examined using an
MRmini SA (DS Pharma Biomedical, Osaka, Japan), a small
magnetic resonant imaging (MRI) machine for animals, at the
indicated times after MCA occlusion. MRI was performed with
2D-MS sequence. MRI parameters were set with average of 2
and thickness of 1. The brain images were extracted, and the
infarct volume was analyzed using Intage Realia Professional
software (Cybernet System, Tokyo, Japan). Hyperintense
ischemic areas in T2 images were marked with a region of
interest tool. The mean signal intensity of all pixels within the
region of interest was used to calculate infarct area. The data
were expressed as the percentage of infarct area/total area.
Measurement of CBF

CBF was measured with a 2-dimensional blood flow meter
(Omegazone, laser speckle blood flow imager; Omegawave,
Tokyo, Japan), as described previously.16 CBF was expressed
as a raw ratio of infarct side/noninfarct side of the whole
brain.
Detection of superoxide anion in brain

Superoxide anion production was detected by staining frozen sections prepared from ipsilateral ischemic
American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014  1037

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

brain damage and neurological deficit by treatment with an
ARB, irbesartan, were attenuated when the AT2 receptor was
blocked by its antagonist, PD123177.7 These findings demonstrate that indirect AT2 receptor stimulation during ARB
treatment has a neuroprotective effect after cerebral ischemic
stroke. These indirect AT2 receptor stimulation-mediated
neuroprotections were due to endogenously increased Ang
II levels in response to AT1 receptor blockade. Therefore,
direct AT2 receptor stimulation independent of AT1 receptor blockade is expected as a new therapeutic approach to
improve stroke, with no blood pressure–lowering effect.
AT2 receptor agonists such as compound 21 (C21) have
been newly developed and are expected to be useful agents
for improving pathological disorders.8 Synthesis of this
compound enables us to examine AT2 receptor actions in
vitro and in vivo by direct receptor stimulation, and principally offers the possibility to use AT2 receptor stimulation
as a therapeutic tool.9 Gelosa et  al. reported that administration of C21 delayed the occurrence of brain damage and
prolonged survival in spontaneously hypertensive strokeprone rats by preventing renal damage.10 Our recent study
also showed that direct AT2 receptor stimulation with C21
enhanced cognitive function in both normal mice and an
Alzheimer disease mouse model through increases in CBF
and neurite outgrowth.11
McCarthy et al. demonstrated that intracerebroventricular administration of the AT2 receptor peptide agonist,
CGP42112, commenced 6 hours after an ischemic stroke,
reduced total infarct volume, and improved motor function in spontaneously hypertensive rats, with increased neuronal survival, decreased apoptosis, and an increase in the
number of activated microglia in the core region of damage,12 suggesting that AT2 receptor agonists may be useful
therapy for acute cerebral ischemia. However, the intracerebroventricular route of administration limits the therapeutic usefulness of AT2 receptor agonists, and it will be
important to show that CGP42112 has similar effects over
a longer duration of ischemia in addition to the endothelin
1 model of ischemia.13 It is also possible that the nonpeptide
AT2 receptor agonist, C21, could be effective with systemic
administration. Therefore, we examined the possible role of
direct AT2 receptor stimulation with C21 in acute cerebral
ischemic stroke after permanent MCA occlusion and elucidated the related mechanisms.

Min et al.

hemisphere and contralateral nonischemic hemisphere
in each mouse, respectively, with dihydroethidium
(10  µM) as described previously.17 For detection of ethidium, samples were examined with a Leica DMI6000B
(Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) equipped with
a computer-based imaging system, FW4000 (Leica). The
intensity of fluorescence was analyzed and quantified
using computer-imaging software (Densitograph; ATTO
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).
Real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction

Evaluation of blood–brain barrier permeability

Blood–brain barrier (BBB) permeability was evaluated by
measuring extravasation of Evans Blue (EB) dye.18 Briefly,
EB dye (2% in saline, 4 ml/kg) was injected intravenously
through the tail and allowed to circulate for 24 hours. Mice
were perfused transcardially with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline. The brain was removed and divided into the ipsilateral ischemic hemisphere and contralateral nonischemic
hemisphere. Then each region was weighed for quantitative
measurement. Samples were homogenized in phosphatebuffered saline and mixed with 60% trichloroacetic acid,
followed by centrifugation to precipitate the protein. The
supernatant was subjected to measurement of the absorbance of EB at 610 nm. EB dye was expressed as µg/mg of
brain tissue against a standard curve.
Measurement of brain water content

Cerebral edema was evaluated as brain water content by
the wet/dry weight method.19 The ipsilateral ischemic and
contralateral nonischemic hemispheres were weighed wet.
After oven-drying at 100  ºC for 24 hours, the brains were
reweighed. Brain water content (%) was calculated as (wet
weight − dry weight)/wet weight × 100.
Statistical analysis

All values are expressed as mean ± SEM in the text and
figures. Data were evaluated by analysis of variance followed
by post hoc analysis for multiple comparisons. Differences
with P < 0.05 were considered significant.
1038  American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014

Roles of AT2 receptor stimulation in pathogenesis of focal
cerebral ischemia

To examine the effects of AT2 receptor stimulation in the
pathogenesis and development of ischemic brain injury, we
measured the time-dependent changes of cerebral infarction
volume by MRI after MCA occlusion, and the percentage of
infarct area/total area was calculated from the signal intensity of pixels (Figure  1a,b). The area of cerebral infarction
enlarged in a time-dependent manner and decreased on day
5 after MCA occlusion. Ischemic area was significantly larger
in AT2 receptor–deficient mice than in wild-type mice, as we
previously reported.6 Treatment with C21 for 2 weeks before
MCA occlusion decreased ischemic size of the brain, and
this effect of C21 was not observed in AT2 receptor–deficient
mice (Figure 1a,b).
Effect of direct AT2 receptor stimulation with compound 21
initiated after MCA occlusion on ischemic brain damage
and neurological deficit

We next examined the effect of C21 treatment initiated
just after MCA occlusion and observed that the area of cerebral infarction was reduced on day 3 and day 5 in C21treated mice, compared with that in vehicle-treated mice
(Supplementary Figure S1; Figure  2a). The dose of C21
(10 µg/kg/day) used did not have a significant effect on systolic blood pressure (Supplementary Table S1). Neurological
deficit was also increased in a time-dependent manner
in vehicle-treated mice and reached a peak at 3  days after
MCA occlusion and improved thereafter. Treatment with
C21 ameliorated the neurological deficit on day 3 after MCA
occlusion (Figure 2b).
Effect of direct AT2 receptor stimulation with compound 21
initiated after MCA occlusion on CBF, oxidative stress, and
inflammation

Brain infarct size gradually increased, reaching a peak
on day 3 after MCA occlusion, and administration of C21
was effective from day 3.  Accordingly, we measured CBF
1 day and 3 days after MCA occlusion. CBF decreased on
the infarct side starting on day 1 after MCA occlusion and
further declined on day 3, whereas treatment with C21
effectively ameliorated the decrease in CBF from day 1
after MCA occlusion (Figure  3a). To investigate the possible associations of oxidative stress and inflammation
with exaggeration of focal cerebral ischemia, we examined
superoxide anion production and expressions of MCP-1
and TNF-α because MCP-1 or TNF-α is one of the key
players in inflammatory response.20 After MCA occlusion,
in vehicle-treated mice, superoxide anion production and
mRNA levels of MCP-1 and TNF-α on the infarct side were
increased compared with those on the noninfarct side at
day 1 and day 3, whereas these increases on the infarct side
were blunted by administration of C21 (Supplementary
Figure S2; Figure 3b,c).

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Total RNA was isolated from ipsilateral ischemic hemisphere and contralateral nonischemic hemisphere in each
mouse, respectively. mRNA levels of MCP-1 and TNF-α
were examined by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with an SYBR green I kit
(MJ Research, Waltham, MA). PCR primers were as follows: MCP-1: 5′-TTAACGCCCCACTCACCTGCTG-3′
(forward) and 5′-GCTTCTTTGGGACACCTGCTGC-3′
(reverse); TNF-α: 5′-CGAGTGACAAGCCTGTAGCC-3′
(forward)
and
5′-GGTGAGGAGCACGTAGTCG-3′
(reverse). The relative level of MCP-1 and TNF-α mRNA
expression were estimated using housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase mRNA expression of
each sample as the internal reference.

RESULTS

Direct AT2R Stimulation Ameliorates Brain Damage

Effect of direct AT2 receptor stimulation with compound 21
initiated after MCA occlusion on BBB and cerebral edema

To evaluate BBB disruption and cerebral edema, we
measured BBB permeability and brain water content after
3 days of C21 treatment initiated just after MCA occlusion.
MCA occlusion caused an increase in BBB permeability
to EB dye on the ischemic side compared with the nonischemic side. Interestingly, C21 treatment markedly blunted
BBB disruption on the ischemic side after MCA occlusion
(Figure 4a). Similar results were also observed for cerebral
edema (Figure 4b); water content on the ischemic side was
much greater than that on the nonischemic side in vehicletreated mice. Interestingly, C21 administration reduced such
water content on the ischemic side; there was no difference
in water content on the nonischemic side between vehicletreated mice and C21-treated mice.

Discussion

In this study, we demonstrated that systemic administration of C21 initiated after MCA occlusion prevents ischemic
brain damage at least in part by maintaining CBF, preventing oxidative stress and inflammation, and ameliorating BBB
disruption and edema formation in the brain.
ARBs, which have been widely used for antihypertension and protection of multiple organ damage, have recently
been suggested to reduce brain damage after stroke.21,22
However, some acute ARB therapy studies, such as the
Acute Candesartan Cilexetil Therapy in Stroke Survivors
study and the Scandinavian Candesartan Acute Stroke Trial
study, showed the controversial effect of acute ARB treatment in acute stroke because of the involvement of the blood
pressure–lowering effect.23,24 AT2 receptor activation has
also been demonstrated to have neuroprotective effect after
American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014  1039

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Figure 1.  Volume of cerebral infarction after middle cerebral artery (MC) occlusion in mice with or without compound 21 (C21; 10 µg/kg/day) pretreatment. (a) Brain magnetic resonant imaging images of each slice 2 days after MCA occlusion. (b) Quantification of infarction volume expressed as
percentage of infarct area/total area calculated from the signal intensity of pixels. Abbreviations: AT2KO, angiotensin II type 2 receptor knockout mice; WT,
wild-type C57BL/6J mice. n = 8–10 mice in each group. *P < 0.01 vs. WT vehicle.

Min et al.

cerebral ischemic stroke.6,7 However, this neuroprotection of
AT2 receptor activation is mediated by indirect AT2 receptor
stimulation by unbound Ang II during AT1 receptor blockade. In our study, we explored the possibility that direct
AT2 receptor stimulation without AT1 receptor blockade
could have beneficial effects in terms of protection against
ischemic brain damage. We designed the preventive study
(14  days treatment with C21 before MCA occlusion) and
the rescue study (treatment with C21 after MCA occlusion).
In the preventive study, in wild-type mice, 14 days of treatment with C21 before MCA occlusion reduced the enlarged
ischemic size in a time-dependent manner starting on day
1 after stroke. The reductions of ischemic size by C21 treatment were not observed in AT2 receptor–deficient mice. In
the rescue study, administration of C21 initiated after MCA
occlusion reduced ischemic size from day 3 after MCA
occlusion compared with vehicle treatment, with no change
in blood pressure. These two studies suggest that direct AT2
receptor stimulation, even after stroke, prevented enlargement of ischemic brain damage. Our findings support the
speculation of direct AT2 receptor stimulation with C21 as
a new therapeutic approach to improve acute stroke independent of blood pressure reduction.
It is well known that oxidative stress and inflammation
play causative roles in the damaged tissues. In ischemic
1040  American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014

brain damage, oxidative stress and inflammation have
been demonstrated to be enhanced.25,26 ARBs have been
reported to reduce ischemic brain damage by inhibiting
oxidative stress accumulation and preventing inflammatory response.22 However, the antioxidative stress and antiinflammatory roles of the AT2 receptor in the damaged brain
seem to be controversial. Despite these issues, we showed
that C21 administration initiated just after MCA occlusion
decreased superoxide anion production and proinflammatory cytokine expression, such as that of MCP-1 and TNF-α,
in the ischemic side, suggesting that inhibitions of oxidative stress and inflammation by direct AT2 receptor stimulation were closely associated with prevention of cerebral
ischemic stroke by C21. Previously, we reported that direct
AT2 receptor signaling enhanced CBF via bradykinin,11 suggesting that direct AT2 receptor stimulation could improve
blood flow in the collateral blood vessels. In this study, treatment with C21 initiated after MCA occlusion increased
CBF and decreased oxidative stress and inflammation 1 day
after stroke; however, reduction of ischemic size was apparent from day 3 after MCA occlusion. These results suggest
that direct AT2 receptor stimulation, even after stroke, prevented ischemic brain damage not only by increasing CBF
and decreasing oxidative stress and inflammation but also by
other unknown mechanisms. Looking from different angles,

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Figure 2.  Volume of cerebral infarction and neurological deficit after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion in mice with or without acute compound
21 (C21; 10 µg/kg/day) treatment. (a) Quantification of infarction volume examined by magnetic resonant imaging; the data are expressed as percentage
of infarct area/total area calculated from the signal intensity of pixels. n = 8–10 mice in each group. *P < 0.01 vs. vehicle on day 3 and day 5, respectively.
(b) Assessment of neurological scores in vehicle or C21-treated wild-type (WT) mice on days 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 after MCA occlusion. n = 8–10 mice in each
group. *P < 0.01 vs. vehicle on days 3, 5, and 7, respectively.

Direct AT2R Stimulation Ameliorates Brain Damage

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Figure 3.  Changes of cerebral blood flow, superoxide anion production, and expression of proinflammatory cytokines after middle cerebral artery
(MCA) occlusion. (a) Left panel: Representative photographs of cerebral blood flow evaluated with a 2-dimensional blood flow meter. Right panel:
Quantification of cerebral blood flow expressed as raw ratio of infarct side/noninfarct side of the whole brain. n = 8 or 16 wild-type (WT) mice in each
group. *P < 0.01 vs. vehicle on day 1 and day 3, respectively. (b) Quantification of superoxide anion production determined by dihydroethidium staining.
The data are expressed as fluorescence intensity in arbitrary units. (c) MCP-1 and TNF-α expression in the brain determined by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Abbreviation: C21, compound 21 (10 µg/kg/day). n = 8–10 mice in each group. *P < 0.05 vs. vehicle-treated, contralateral
side; †P < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated, ipsilateral side, on day 1 and day 3, respectively.

American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014  1041

Min et al.

reduction of ischemic size apparent from day 3 after MCA
occlusion might indicate that C21 treatment enhanced damaged-neuron repair after cerebral ischemic stroke. Further
investigations are necessary to assess the mismatch between
an increase in CBF and reduced ischemic brain size by C21
in the acute phase of stroke.
We also speculated that the C21-induced reduction of
stroke size was partly due to attenuation of BBB disruption
and brain edema. Indeed, we observed that C21 administration initiated just after MCA occlusion markedly reduced
BBB permeability and brain water content on the ischemic
1042  American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014

side. Therefore, C21-induced brain protection in the acute
phase of stroke might be due to vascular-protective effects in
the penumbra region as well as neuroprotection by penetration across the BBB in the core region. However, the details
of how C21 affects BBB integrity to improve ischemic brain
damage are not clear. We recently demonstrated that the ARB
telmisartan could inhibit BBB impairment and cognitive
decline in diabetic mice directly by ameliorating ultrastructural changes of the BBB, such as astrocyte end-feet swelling,
and by enhancing expression of tight junction proteins, such
as ZO-1 and occludin.27 Therefore, further studies should be

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Figure 4.  Blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption and cerebral edema formation after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. (a) BBB permeability determined by measuring extravasation of Evans Blue (EB) dye. Upper, representative photographs of EB accumulation in brain of vehicle- (left) and compound
21 (C21; 10 µg/kg/day)–treated mice (right). Lower, quantification of accumulation of EB dye in ipsilateral ischemic hemisphere and contralateral nonischemic hemisphere. (b) Brain water content measured by wet/dry weight method. Wild-type (WT) mice were treated with C21 for 3 days, initiated just
after MCA occlusion. n = 5 mice in each group. *P < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated, contralateral side; †P < 0.01 vs. vehicle-treated, ipsilateral side.

Direct AT2R Stimulation Ameliorates Brain Damage

of C21 could provide a new therapeutic option in patients
with stroke even in the acute phase and contribute to the
improvement of functional outcome after stroke.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

Supplementary materials are available at American Journal
of Hypertension (http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org).

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by grants from the Ministry of
Education, Science, Sports, and Culture of Japan.
DISCLOSURES

The authors declared no conflict of interest.

References
	 1.	 Dahlof B, Devereux RB, Kjeldsen SE, Julius S, Beevers G, de Faire U,
Fyhrquist F, Ibsen H, Kristiansson K, Lederballe-Pedersen O, Lindholm
LH, Nieminen MS, Omvik P, Oparil S, Wedel H. Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan Intervention For Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): a randomised trial against atenolol.
Lancet 2002; 359:995–1003.
	 2.	 Schrader J, Luders S, Kulschewski A, Hammersen F, Plate K, Berger J,
Zidek W, Dominiak P, Diener HC. Morbidity and mortality after stroke,
eprosartan compared with nitrendipine for secondary prevention: principal results of a prospective randomized controlled study (MOSES).
Stroke 2005; 36:1218–1226.
	 3.	 Horiuchi M, Mogi M. Role of angiotensin II receptor subtype activation in cognitive function and ischaemic brain damage. Br J Pharmacol
2011; 163:1122–1130.
	 4.	 Fuentes B, Fernandez-Dominguez J, Ortega-Casarrubios MA, SanJose
B, Martinez-Sanchez P, Diez-Tejedor E. Treatment with angiotensin
receptor blockers before stroke could exert a favourable effect in acute
cerebral infarction. J Hypertens 2010; 28:575–581.
	 5.	 Li NC, Lee A, Whitmer RA, Kivipelto M, Lawler E, Kazis LE, Wolozin
B. Use of angiotensin receptor blockers and risk of dementia in a predominantly male population: prospective cohort analysis. BMJ 2010;
340:b5465.
	 6.	 Iwai M, Liu HW, Chen R, Ide A, Okamoto S, Hata R, Sakanaka M,
Shiuchi T, Horiuchi M. Possible inhibition of focal cerebral ischemia
by angiotensin II type 2 receptor stimulation. Circulation 2004;
110:843–848.
	 7.	 Li J, Culman J, Hortnagl H, Zhao Y, Gerova N, Timm M, Blume A,
Zimmermann M, Seidel K, Dirnagl U, Unger T. Angiotensin AT2
receptor protects against cerebral ischemia-induced neuronal injury.
FASEB J 2005; 19:617–619.
	 8.	 Wan Y, Wallinder C, Plouffe B, Beaudry H, Mahalingam AK, Wu X,
Johansson B, Holm M, Botoros M, Karlen A, Pettersson A, Nyberg F,
Fandriks L, Gallo-Payet N, Hallberg A, Alterman M. Design, synthesis,
and biological evaluation of the first selective nonpeptide AT2 receptor
agonist. J Med Chem 2004; 47:5995–6008.
	9.	Unger T, Dahlof B. Compound 21, the first orally active, selective
agonist of the angiotensin type 2 receptor (AT2): implications for
AT2 receptor research and therapeutic potential. J Renin Angiotensin
Aldosterone Syst 2010; 11:75–77.
	10.	 Gelosa P, Pignieri A, Fandriks L, de Gasparo M, Hallberg A, Banfi C,
Castiglioni L, Turolo L, Guerrini U, Tremoli E, Sironi L. Stimulation

American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014  1043

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

performed to assess whether C21 treatment would improve
ultrastructural changes of the BBB and alter tight junction
protein expression to protect against BBB dysfunction in the
future. In this study, the ameliorative effects of C21 on BBB
disruption and brain edema were observed at day 3 after C21
treatment initiated just after MCA occlusion. This temporal
relation was consistent with the improvements of ischemic
area and neurological score by C21. However, the ameliorative effects of C21 on CBF, oxidative stress, and inflammation were found from day 1 after C21 treatment initiated
just after MCA occlusion. These issues suggest that the early
ameliorative effects on CBF, oxidative stress, and inflammation preceded the protective effects on BBB disruption and
brain edema after direct AT2 receptor stimulation with C21.
Previous studies have demonstrated that cerebral ischemic
stroke could cause neuronal apoptosis and subsequently an
almost complete loss of neurons in the infarcted regions.28
Moreover, an increase in the number of activated microglia,
with movement from the infarcted core to the peri-infarct
region, was also observed after cerebral ischemic stroke.12 In
our study, we did not examine the possible protective effects
of direct AT2 receptor stimulation on neuronal apoptosis
and microglia activity in the infarcted regions. In recent
studies, when another AT2 receptor agonist, CGP42112,
was administered after acute stroke, apoptotic neuron death
was prevented, and the number of activated microglia was
enhanced in the infarcted core region.12 Li et  al. reported
that AT2 receptor stimulation supported neuronal survival
and neurite outgrowth in response to ischemic-induced
neuronal damage.7 We previously showed that AT2 receptor
signaling enhanced neuronal differentiation and neuronal
damage through a DNA repair factor, methl methanesulfonate sensitive 2.29 These findings indicate that nonvascular mechanisms of neuroprotection, including inhibition of
neuronal apoptosis, reduction of neuronal loss, enhancement of microglia activity, and neuronal repair and regeneration, might be associated with protection of ischemic brain
damage by direct AT2 receptor stimulation with C21.
Recently, Namsolleck et  al. demonstrated the beneficial effect of C21 after spinal cord injury through promotion of axonal plasticity and upregulation of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor expression.30 Moreover, Gao et  al.
showed that intracerebroventricular infusion of C21 suppresses norepinephrine excretion.31 Moreover, Mertens et al.
reported that C21 decreases dopamine synthesis in the rat
striatum.32 These results indicate that treatment with C21
may affect neurotransmitters, including sympathetic nerve
activity. There are some studies indicating that depletion of
norepinephrine or levodopa treatment improves functional
recovery of damaged brain after experimental stroke.33,34
Therefore, it is presumable that treatment with C21 would
protect against brain injury after cerebral ischemic stroke by
modulation of these neurotransmitters.
Brain neuroprotective therapy for patients with acute
stroke has been expected to improve stroke outcome such
as death, bedridden state, disability, and neurological disorder. We demonstrated that direct AT2 receptor stimulation
attenuates the decrease in CBF, prevents oxidative stress and
inflammation, and maintains BBB function, thereby ameliorating ischemic brain damage. Systemic administration

Min et al.

1044  American Journal of Hypertension  27(8)  August 2014

of acute candesartan cilexetil therapy in stroke survivors. Stroke 2003;
34:1699–1703.
	24.	 Sandset EC, Bath PM, Boysen G, Jatuzis D, Korv J, Luders S, Murray
GD, Richter PS, Roine RO, Terent A, Thijs V, Berge E. The angiotensinreceptor blocker candesartan for treatment of acute stroke (SCAST):
a randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. Lancet 2011;
377:741–750.
	25.	 Lerouet D, Beray-Berthat V, Palmier B, Plotkine M, Margaill I. Changes
of oxidative stress, iNOS activity and neutrophil infiltration in severe
transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Brain Res 2002;20:166–175.
	26.	 Berti R, Williams AJ, Moffett JR, Hale SL, Velarde LC, Elliott PJ, Yao
C, Dave JR, Tortella FC. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis of
inflammatory gene expression associated with ischemia-reperfusion
brain injury. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2002; 22:1068–1079.
	27.	 Min LJ, Mogi M, Shudou M, Jing F, Tsukuda K, Ohshima K, Iwanami
J, Horiuchi M. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activation with angiotensin II type 1 receptor blockade is pivotal for the
prevention of blood-brain barrier impairment and cognitive decline in
type 2 diabetic mice. Hypertension 2012; 59:1079–1088.
	28.	 McCarthy CA, Vinh A, Callaway JK, Widdop RE. Angiotensin AT2
receptor stimulation causes neuroprotection in a conscious rat model
of stroke. Stroke 2009; 40:1482–1489.
	29.	 Li JM, Mogi M, Tsukuda K, Tomochika H, Iwanami J, Min LJ, Nahmias
C, Iwai M, Horiuchi M. Angiotensin II-induced neural differentiation
via angiotensin II type 2(AT2) receptor-MMS2 cascade involving interaction between AT2 receptor-interacting protein and Src homology 2
domain-containing protein-tyrosine phosphatase 1. Mol Endocrinol
2007; 21:499–511.
	30.	 Namsolleck P, Boato F, Schwengel K, Paulis L, Matho K, Geurts N,
Thone-Reineke C, Lucht K, Seidel K, Hallberg A, Dahlof B, Unger T,
Hendrix S, Steckelings UM. AT2-receptor stimulation enhances axonal
plasticity after spinal cord injury by upregulating BDNF expression.
Neurobiol Dis 2013; 51:177–191.
	31.	 Gao J, Zhang H, Le KD, Chao J, Gao L. Activation of central angiotensin
type 2 receptors suppresses norepinephrine excretion and blood pressure in conscious rats. Am J Hypertens 2011; 24:724–730.
	32.	 Mertens B, Vanderheyden P, Michotte Y, Sarre S. Direct angiotensin
II type 2 receptor stimulation decreases dopamine synthesis in the rat
striatum. Neuropharmacology 2010; 58:1038–1044.
	33.	 Windle V, Power A, Corbett D. Norepinephrine depletion facilitates
recovery of function after focal ischemia in the rat. Eur J Neurosci 2007;
26:1822–1831.
	34.	 Ruscher K, Kuric E, Wieloch T. Levodopa treatment improves functional recovery after experimental stroke. Stroke 2012; 43:507–513.

Downloaded from http://ajh.oxfordjournals.org/ at University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

of AT2 receptor exerts beneficial effects in stroke-prone rats: focus on
renal damage. J Hypertens 2009; 27:2444–2451.
	11.	 Jing F, Mogi M, Sakata A, Iwanami J, Tsukuda K, Ohshima K, Min LJ,
Steckelings UM, Unger T, Dahlof B, Horiuchi M. Direct stimulation of
angiotensin II type 2 receptor enhances spatial memory. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 2012; 32:248–255.
	12.	 McCarthy CA, Vinh A, Broughton BR, Sobey CG, Callaway JK, Widdop
RE. Angiotensin II type 2 receptor stimulation initiated after stroke causes
neuroprotection in conscious rats. Hypertension 2012; 60:1531–1537.
	13.	 Dorrance AM. Angiotensin II type 2 receptor agonists as therapies for
ischemic stroke. Hypertension 2012; 60:1391–1392.
	14.	 Qu K, Chen CP, Halliwell B, Moore PK, Wong PT. Hydrogen sulfide is
a mediator of cerebral ischemic damage. Stroke 2006; 37:889–893.
	15.	 Huang Z, Huang PL, Panahian N, Dalkara T, Fishman MC, Moskowitz
MA. Effects of cerebral ischemia in mice deficient in neuronal nitric
oxide synthase. Science 1994; 265:1883–1885.
	16.	 Sakata A, Mogi M, Iwanami J, Tsukuda K, Min LJ, Fujita T, Iwai M,
Ito M, Horiuchi M. Sex-different effect of angiotensin II type 2
receptor on ischemic brain injury and cognitive function. Brain Res
2009;1300:14–23.
	17.	Szocs K, Lassegue B, Sorescu D, Hilenski LL, Valppu L, Couse TL,
Wilcox JN, Quinn MT, Lambeth JD, Griendling KK. Upregulation
of Nox-based NAD(P)H oxidases in restenosis after carotid injury.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2002; 22:21–27.
	18.	 Kalayci R, Kaya M, Ahishali B, Arican N, Elmas I, Kucuk M. Long-term
L-NAME treatment potentiates the blood-brain barrier disruption during pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures in rats. Life Sci 2006; 79:16–20.
	19.	 Dimitrijevic OB, Stamatovic SM, Keep RF, Andjelkovic AV. Absence of
the chemokine receptor CCR2 protects against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice. Stroke 2007; 38:1345–1353.
	20.	 Ferrario CM, Strawn WB. Role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system and proinflammatory mediators in cardiovascular disease. Am J
Cardiol 2006; 98:121–128.
21.	Thoene-Reineke C, Rumschussel K, Schmerbach K, Krikov M,
	
Wengenmayer C, Godes M, Mueller S, Villringer A, Steckelings U,
Namsolleck P, Unger T. Prevention and intervention studies with telmisartan, ramipril and their combination in different rat stroke models.
PLoS One 2011; 6:e23646.
	22.	Iwanami J, Mogi M, Tsukuda K, Min LJ, Sakata A, Jing F, Iwai M,
Horiuchi M. Low dose of telmisartan prevents ischemic brain damage
with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activation in
diabetic mice. J Hypertens 2010; 28:1730–1737.
23.	Schrader J, Luders S, Kulschewski A, Berger J, Zidek W, Treib J,
	
Einhaupl K, Diener HC, Dominiak P. The ACCESS study: evaluation

