Bone Marrow Stromal Cells Combined with Oxiracetam
Influences the Expression of B-cell Lymphoma 2 in Rats
with Ischemic Stroke
Chunyan Wang, MM,* Fangqin Li, MM,* Yu Guan, MM,† Lei Zhu, MM,*
Yiping Fei, MD,* Jiadong Zhang, MM,‡ and Yujun Pan, MD*

This study aimed to investigate the combination effects of bone marrow stromal cells
(BMSCs) and oxiracetam for ischemic stroke. Forty Sprague Dawley female rats
(220 6 20 g) were subjected to a 2-hour ischemic middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO)–24 hours reperfusion model. The rats were randomly divided into 4
groups. Rats from BMSCs group, oxiracetam group, and BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group
accepted injection of BMSCs (3 3 106 cells), oxiracetam (800 mg/kg), and
BMSCs 1 oxiracetam, respectively. Rats from control group did not receive any interventions after ischemia reperfusion. The neurologic function was examined by modified neurological severity scores (mNSS). B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) expression and
apoptosis were detected by immunohistochemistry and terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) staining. The mNSS was
decreased in all treatment groups and that in BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group was lower
than BMSCs group and oxiracetam group (P , .05). The expression of Bcl-2 was unregulated in all treatment groups (P , .05), and similarly, the expression of Bcl-2 in
BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group was higher than BMSCs group and oxiracetam group
(P , .05). Control group displayed more TUNEL-positive cells than the treatment
groups, and BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group displayed less apoptotic cells than BMSCs
group or oxiracetam group (P , .05). Transplantation of BMSCs can promote the
recovery of neurologic function in MCAO rats, and the effect of BMSCs combined
with oxiracetam was better than the either one. Upregulation of Bcl-2 resulting in a
decrease of apoptosis may be one of the mechanisms of BMSCs treatment for cerebral
ischemic stroke. Key Words: Ischemic stroke—BMSCs—oxiracetam—Bcl-2.
Ó 2014 by National Stroke Association

From the *Department of Neurology, The First Hospital and Clinical College, Harbin Medical University, Harbin; †Department of
Neurology, Hangzhou Hospital of Zhejiang CAPF, Hangzhou; and
‡Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Harbin, Harbin,
China.
Received May 9, 2014; revision received May 29, 2014; accepted
May 31, 2014.
This work was supported by Grants-in-aid from State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Science (grant number SKLN-201402).
Address correspondence to YuJun Pan, MD, Department of
Neurology, The First Hospital and Clinical College, Harbin Medical
University Room 501, Building 3, 23 Youzheng Street, Nangang District, Harbin 150001, China. E-mail: yujunpan@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn.
1052-3057/$ - see front matter
Ó 2014 by National Stroke Association
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jstrokecerebrovasdis.2014.05.035

Introduction
Stroke, also referred to as cerebrovascular accident,
cerebrovascular insult, or brain attack, is the loss of brain
function due to a sudden interruption of the blood supply
to brain. The World Health Organization estimates that 15
million people suffer stroke every year worldwide two
thirds of whom die or are permanently disabled.1
Ischemic stroke, occurring when an artery to the brain is
blocked, accounts for about 88% of all strokes.2 Therefore,
effective therapies for ischemic stroke are badly needed.
Ischemic stroke leads to the death of all cells within the
affected tissue.3 A programmed cell death plays an important role in focal cerebral ischemia in rats.4 Apoptosis
appears to be an orderly process of energy-dependent

Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular Diseases, Vol. 23, No. 10 (November-December), 2014: pp 2591-2597

2591

C. WANG ET AL.

2592
5

programmed cell death. Besides, recent evidence supports that many neurons in the ischemic penumbra will
undergo apoptosis after stroke.6 B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl2), an antiapoptotic protein of the Bcl-2 family, plays an
important role in the ischemic cerebral injury.7-9 Okazaki
et al10 reported a upregulation of Bcl-2 and survival in
the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) rats after a
reperfusion of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs).
BMSCs are nonhematopoietic stem cells that present in
the bone marrow reticular interstitial with a high degree
of self-replication and differentiation potential. BMSCs
can differentiate to neural-like cells expressing neuronal
markers.11 BMSCs can promote the secretion of the neurotrophic factors in brain tissue or stimulate production of
endogenous neurotrophic factor at the injury focus and
thereby contributing to the repair of brain tissue and
reduce apoptosis.10,12-16
Oxiracetam, a new ring gamma amino acid butyric acid
derivative, can promote phosphorylcholine and phosphoryl ethanolamine synthesis, improve the ratio of brain
adenosine triphosphate/adenosine diphosphate (ATP/
ADP), and increase the synthesis of proteins and nucleic
acids in the brain.17 Oxiracetam has a protective effect
in cerebrovascular impairment.18 Oxiracetam improves
local cerebral glucose utilization after focal cerebral
ischemia in rats.19 Thus, it has been used in treatment of
cerebrovascular disease.
In the present study, we established a MCAO model.
The combinative effects of BMSCs and oxiracetam for
treatment of cerebral ischemic stroke rats were investigated by histopathologic examination. The expression of
Bcl-2 was investigated to explore the underlying mechanism of BMSCs for ischemic stroke treatment.

Materials and Methods
Animals and Materials
A total of 40 healthy female Sprague Dawley rats
(220 6 20 g) and the BMSCs were provided by Experimental Animal Center of First Clinical College of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, China. Oxiracetam was purchased from ShiXin Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd, Guangdong,
China.

Establishment of the MCAO Model
The MCAO model was established according to Zea–
Longa suture-occluded method.20 The criteria for judging
the success of MCAO model were as follows:
(1) The neurologic deficit rating scored 2-3 points
according to Zea–Longa method (0 point: no
neurologic deficit; 1 point: mild neurologic deficits, failing to extend left forepaw fully; 2 points:
moderate focal neurologic deficit, circling to the
left; 3 points: severe focal neurologic deficit, falling to the left; and 4 points: rats could not walk

spontaneously and had a depressed level of consciousness).
(2) Infarct size was confirmed by triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. Twenty-four hours
after ischemia, the rats were decapitated, and the
brain was taken by cutting the skull and stained
by 2% TTC. The normal brain tissue was stained
red, and ischemic (infracted) tissue was pale.
(3) Pathologic examination. Brain tissues were fixed
in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours and was
then dehydrated, paraffin-embedded, and sliced
for hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining. Cell
morphology was observed under a light microscope (Nikon 50i; Nikon Inc, Tokyo, Japan).
The rats were then randomly divided into 4 groups
(10 rats in each group): control group, BMSC group, oxiracetam group, and BMSC 1 oxiracetam group.

Ischemia Reperfusion and Treatment
All model rats received ischemia reperfusion 2 hours
later. Rats were intraperitoneally injected with an overdose of chloral hydrate for deep anesthesia, followed by
cardiac perfusion of 200 mL of saline and 300 mL 4%
paraformaldehyde. The protocols of ischemia reperfusion
were as follows: the anesthetized rats were fixed on the
operating table, and the left chest skin and muscle were
cut open to expose the ribs. Then the left sternal ribs
were cut at the left, and the thoracic cavity was pulled
out to expose the beating heart. A ninth needle that was
connected with intravenous infusion (has drained the
air) was pierced into the left ventricle (right ventricle
was dark red and left ventricular was pink), and the right
atrial appendage was cut by a micro scissor at the same
time. Then 200 mL of saline was used to wash out the
blood, and the ventricles were perfused with 300 mL
4% paraformaldehyde. Rat limbs twitched during perfusion; and finally, the whole body turned tonic stiff.
Twenty-four hours after ischemia reperfusion,
the rats from BMSC group, oxiracetam group, and
BMSC 1 oxiracetam group were treated with caudal
vein injection of BMSCs (3 3 106 cells), intraperitoneal injection of oxiracetam (800 mg/kg), and both BMSCs and
oxiracetam, respectively. The rats from control group did
not receive any interventions after ischemia reperfusion.

Neurologic Severity Scores
The modified Neurological Severity Scores (mNSS),21,22
a composite of motor, sensory, reflex, and balance tests,
was used for evaluation of the neurologic function
impairment severity of the rats before modeling and
after modeling and at the third and seventh day after
treatment. Neurologic function was graded 0-18 scores
(0, normal; 18, maximal deficit). In the severity scores of
injury, 1 score point is awarded for the inability to

BMSCs AND OXIRACETAM FOR ISCHEMIC STROKE

2593

perform the test or for the lack of a tested reflex; that is,
the higher the score, the more severe is the injury.

Brain Tissue Preparation for Pathologic Examination
The brain tissues were taken out, respectively, at the
third day or the seventh day after reperfusion as the protocols mentioned in the following. The skins and muscle
tissues at the skull surface were cut. A rongeur was
used to bite open the foramen magnum and occipital
bone, exposing the brain stem, cerebellum, and the posterior of the parietal bone. The posterior of the parietal bone
was clamped and ripped to 2 sides, exposing both sides of
the cerebral hemispheres. The temporal bone and part of
the frontal were removed by a rongeur, exposing brain tissue. The brain stem cerebellum side cranial nerves were
cut off by an ophthalmic scissor, and the brain stem was
gently pried and trigeminal nerve and optic nerve at the
skull base to separate the entire brain and skull base structure. Finally, the entire brain tissue was removed and
placed in 4% paraformaldehyde. The brain tissues were
sliced into 3 mm-thick serial coronal sections after conventional graded alcohol dehydration, xylene clearing, and
paraffin embedding for pathologic examination.

HE Staining
HE staining was performed according to the conventional protocols. Briefly, the section was dewaxed in
xylene for 10 minutes and dehydrated in absolute ethyl
alcohol, 95% and 80% ethyl alcohol and washed with
water. Then the section was stained in HE. After dehydration by graded ethyl alcohol and clearing by xylene, the
section was fixed in neutral balsam for observation.

Immunohistochemical Staining for Bcl-2
The expression of Bcl-2 was determined by an immunohistochemical method. Briefly, after dewaxing, dehydration, and enzyme deactivation, the section was closed
with normal rabbit serum and then incubated with Bcl-2
antibody (diluted 1: 100; Abcam, Cambridge, MA). The
secondary antibody rabbit antigoat IgG (Abcam) was
used. Coloration was conducted with 3,30 -diaminobenzidine followed by hematoxylin redyeing. Microscopic
examination was performed. Cytoplasm in claybank indicated positive stain.

Figure 1.

Functional deficit of middle cerebral artery occlusion rats.

nous peroxidase blocker (.3% H2O2 dissolved in methyl
alcohol) at room temperature for 30 minutes and washed
3 times with PBS for 5 minutes. A volume of 50 mL TUNEL
reagent was added on the section and incubated in wet
box at 37 C for 60 minutes, followed by PBS washes.
The section was incubated with 50 ml transforming
agent-peroxidase in wet box at 37 C for 30 minutes and
washed with PBS. For coloration, a volume of 100 mL
3,30 -diaminobenzidine was added at room temperature,
followed by hematoxylin redyeing. After washing with
water, dehydration, clearing, and mounting, the results
were observed under a light microscopy. The normal
cell nucleus was stained blue, and the apoptotic cell nucleus was stained claybank.

Statistical Analysis
The data were represented as mean 6 standard deviation
(SD). All statistical analyses were performed by using SPSS

In Situ Apoptosis Detection
The in situ apoptotic cell labeling by the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) was conducted as previously described.23
Briefly, after dewaxing and dehydration, the section was
incubated with proteinase K (20 mg/mL, dissolved in
Tris/HCL, pH 7.4-8.0) at room temperature for 15 minutes
and washed 3 times with phosphate buffer solution (PBS)
for 5 minutes. The section was then incubated in endoge-

Figure 2. TTC staining of brain tissue of middle cerebral artery
occlusion rats.

C. WANG ET AL.

2594

Figure 3. Results of hematoxylin and eosin
staining (3200). Abbreviation: BMSCs, bone
marrow stromal cells.

13.0 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL). Comparisons were
conducted by t test and analysis of variance with StudentNewman-Keuls method as the post hoc multiple comparison test. P , .05 was considered with significant difference.

Results
Behavioral and Pathologic Observation of the MCAO
Rats
The rats after MCAO modeling presented motor
functional deficit—left forefoot adduction as shown
in Figure 1. The infarct size of the brain tissue was
confirmed by TTC staining (the pale region in Fig 2). HE
staining of the rat coronal brain slices showed infarction
in the frontal, parietal cortex, and the basal ganglia. There
were a mass of neuronal loss in the softened and necrotic
zone of the infarction center and some grid cells and a
small number of neutrophils in all groups (Fig 3). These
results confirmed the success of MCAO modeling.

Expression of Bcl-2 Determined by
Immunohistochemistry
Positive cells were found in all groups 3 days after
the treatment, but they were significantly less in
BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group than the other groups (Fig 5).
The Bcl-2 expression was significantly higher in all treatment groups (P , .05) and that in BMSCs 1 oxiracetam
group was significantly higher than BMSCs group and
oxiracetam group (P ,.05, Fig 6) at the third day after treatment. At the seventh day, the Bcl-2 expressions in 3 treatment groups were significantly higher than that in the
control group (P , .05), but there was no statistical significance between the BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group and oxiracetam group (P . .05, Fig 6).

Neurologic Function Score
The mNSS scoring was conducted for the rats before
modeling (0 day), 1 day after modeling, 3 and 7 days
after treatment (Fig 4). Three days after treatment,
the mNSS scores in BMSCs group, oxiracetam group,
and BMSC 1 oxiracetam group were significantly
decreased compared with those of the control group
(P , .05), and the mNSS scores in BMSCs group and
BMSC 1 oxiracetam group were significantly lower
than those in oxiracetam group (P , .05). After treated
for 7 days, the mNSS scores in BMSCs group showed
a sharp fall (P , .05) compared with other groups.

Figure 4. Results of modified Neurological Severity Scores (mNSS)
scoring. *P , .05 compared with control group; #P , .05 compared with
bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) group; &P , .05 compared with oxiracetam group.

BMSCs AND OXIRACETAM FOR ISCHEMIC STROKE

2595

Figure 5. Expression of B-cell lymphoma 2 at
the third day by immunohistochemistry (3400).
Abbreviation: BMSCs, bone marrow stromal
cells.

Cell Apoptosis Tested by TUNEL Method
TUNEL-positive cells were found in the ischemia areas
all groups, which showed a typical morphology: nuclear
was colored dark brown, condensation shape, and visible
chromosome condensation (Fig 7). Integral optical density of the positive cells represented the apoptosis of the
brain cells. Figure 8 showed that the apoptotic cells in
control group were significantly more than other groups
and those in BMSCs 1 oxiracetam group were significantly less than BMSCs group and oxiracetam group
(P , .05).

Discussion
Cerebrovascular disease is one of the 3 leading causes
of death worldwide,24-26 and ischemic stroke is the most
common type of cerebrovascular disease.27 Therefore,

Figure 6. Statistical chart of expression of B-cell lymphoma 2 at the third
day and seventh day. *P , .05 compared with control group; #P , .05
compared with bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) group; &P , .05
compared with oxiracetam group.

to find a reasonable way to improve the cure rate and
reduce the mortality and recurrence rates has become a
hot medical research. The present revealed the combinative effects of BMSCs and oxiracetam in a successfully
established ischemic stroke rat model—MCAO, which
were confirmed by neurologic examination, TTC staining,
and HE staining.
Ischemic stroke is an abrupt interruption of the blood
flow to the brain and ischemia/reperfusion causes neurologic function damage leading to a change of ethology.28
The results of mNSS indicated a moderate injury of
ischemic stroke rats, and the behavioral observation suggested a motor function defect. Therefore, to improve
cerebral metabolism and increase cerebral blood flow
are critical for treatment of the neurologic injury after
cerebral ischemia.
Intravenous administration of BMSCs has been reported
to provide therapeutic benefit after stroke.15 The present
study indicated that injection of BMSCs significantly
decreased the mNSS at time-dependent manner within
7 days. BMSCs transplantation may promote the cerebral
ischemic brain structure and neural functional recovery
through a variety of mechanisms: differentiation of
marrow stromal cells into cells of neural lineage, neuroprotection, creation of a favorable environment for regeneration, expression of growth factors, vascular effects or
remyelination,29 and promotion of various growth factor
(BDNF [brain derived neurotrophic factor], NGF [nerve
growth factor], bFGF [basic fibroblast growth factor],
IGF-1 [insulinlike growth factor 1], HGF [hepatocyte
growth factor], VEGF [vascular endothelial growth factor],
angiogenic factor, and SCF [stem cell factor]) secretion.12-16
These growth factors in the early stage of brain injury

C. WANG ET AL.

2596

Figure 7. Results of terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling
method. Abbreviation: BMSCs, bone marrow
stromal cells.

promote the recovery of damaged brain function by
inducing angiogenesis and neurogenesis, promoting
synapses formation and dendritic cell apoptosis, and
reducing peripheral nerve damage. The results of our
study showed that the expression of antiapoptotic
protein Bcl-2 was significantly elevated; and also, the
apoptotic cells were increased in ischemic stroke rats in
treatment group. These results confirmed the important
role of apoptosis in the process of cerebral ischemia/reperfusion after stroke. BMSCs may function by inhibiting of
the apoptosis of ischemia area. As an antiapoptotic protein,
the upregulation of Bcl-2 on the one hand reduced the
apoptosis of nerve cells in ischemic penumbra and on
the other hand inhibited the apoptosis of implanted
BMSCs to increase the survival rate of BMSCs.
Besides, we found that oxiracetam also had positive
effects in improving the neurologic function. Oxiracetam
can promote cerebral metabolism and increase the brain
oxygen and glucose utilization and ATP/ADP ratio19,30
and thereby reduce the cell apoptosis and improve

the survival rate of BMSCs. Therefore, combination of
BMSCs and oxiracetam more effectively improved
the neurologic function of ischemia/reperfusion rats.
Additionally, oxiracetam inhibited the expression of
Bcl-2 and decreased the apoptotic cells in brain tissues.
However, the experiments in this study are based on a
rat’s model, which is different from human diseases.
Although the clinical trials are underway, the effects of
BMSCs combined with oxiracetam in ischemic stroke
have not been verified. Therefore, the feasibility and
safety of clinical applications of BMSCs combined with
oxiracetam are badly needed to be verified by preclinical
and clinical trials.31
Transplantation of BMSCs can promote the recovery of
neurologic function in MCAO rats after ischemia/reperfusion, and the effect BMSCs combined with oxiracetam
is better than the either one. The upregulation of Bcl-2
expression resulting in a decrease of apoptosis may be
one of the mechanisms of BMSCs for treatment of cerebral
ischemia.

References

Figure 8. Statistical charts of cell apoptosis. *P , .05 compared with control group; #P , .05 compared with bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs)
group; &P , .05 compared with oxiracetam group.

1. Poynter B, Shuman Hon M, Diaz-Granados N, Kapral M,
Grace SL, Stewart DE. Sex differences in the prevalence of
post-stroke depression: a systematic review. Psychosomatics 2009;50:563-569.
2. Osborne H. Non-iconic abstraction. British Journal of
Aesthetics 1976;16:291-304.
3. Sims NR, Muyderman H. Mitochondria, oxidative metabolism and cell death in stroke. Biochimica et biophysica
acta 2010;1802:80-91.
4. Linnik MD, Zobrist RH, Hatfield MD. Evidence supporting a role for programmed cell death in focal cerebral
ischemia in rats. Stroke 1993;24:2002-2008.

BMSCs AND OXIRACETAM FOR ISCHEMIC STROKE
5. Taylor RC, Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Apoptosis: controlled
demolition at the cellular level. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 2008;9:231-241.
6. Broughton BR, Reutens DC, Sobey CG. Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2009;40:e331-e339.
7. Chan PH. Mitochondria and neuronal death/survival
signaling pathways in cerebral ischemia. Neurochemical
research 2004;29:1943-1949.
8. Dubal DB, Shughrue PJ, Wilson ME, Merchenthaler I,
Wise PM. Estradiol modulates bcl-2 in cerebral ischemia:
a potential role for estrogen receptors. The Journal of
neuroscience 1999;19:6385-6393.
9. Graham SH, Chen J, Clark RS. Bcl-2 family gene products
in cerebral ischemia and traumatic brain injury. Journal of
neurotrauma 2000;17:831-841.
10. Okazaki T, Magaki T, Takeda M, Kajiwara Y, Hanaya R,
Sugiyama K, et al. Intravenous administration of bone
marrow stromal cells increases surviving and Bcl-2 protein expression and improves sensorimotor function
following ischemia in rats. Neuroscience letters 2008;
430:109-114.
11. Yang L-L, Zhou Q-J, Wang Y, Wang Y-Q. Differentiation of
human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
into neural-like cells by co-culture with retinal pigmented
epithelial cells. International journal of ophthalmology
2010;3:23.
12. Hokari M, Kuroda S, Chiba Y, Maruichi K, Iwasaki Y.
Synergistic effects of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor on bone marrow stromal cell transplantation for mice
cerebral infarct. Cytokine 2009;46:260-266.
13. Wu J, Sun Z, Sun H-S, Wu J, Weisel RD, Keating A, et al.
Intravenously administered bone marrow cells migrate
to damaged brain tissue and improve neural function
in ischemic rats. Cell transplantation 2007;16:993-1005.
14. Li Y, Chen J, Chen X, Wang L, Gautam S, Xu Y, et al. Human marrow stromal cell therapy for stroke in rat: neurotrophins and functional recovery. Neurology 2002;
59:514-523.
15. Chen J, Li Y, Katakowski M, Chen X, Wang L, Lu D, et al.
Intravenous bone marrow stromal cell therapy reduces
apoptosis and promotes endogenous cell proliferation after stroke in female rat. Journal of neuroscience research
2003;73:778-786.
16. Zhang J, Li Y, Chen J, Yang M, Katakowski M, Lu M, et al.
Expression of insulin-like growth factor 1 and receptor in
ischemic rats treated with human marrow stromal cells.
Brain research 2004;1030:19-27.
17. New clinical use of oxiracetam and optical isomer of
oxiracetam. Google Patents; 2012.

2597
18. Kometani M, Okada M, Takemori E, Hasegawa Y,
Nakao N, Inukai T. Effect of oxiracetam on cerebrovascular impairment in rats. Arzneimittel-Forschung 1991;
41:684-689.
19. Hokonohara T, Sako K, Shinoda Y, Tomabechi M,
Yonemasu Y. The effects of oxiracetam (CT-848) on local
cerebral glucose utilization after focal cerebral ischemia
in rats. Japanese journal of pharmacology 1992;
58:127-135.
20. Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. stroke 1989;20:84-91.
21. Chen J, Sanberg PR, Li Y, Wang L, Lu M, Willing AE, et al.
Intravenous administration of human umbilical cord
blood reduces behavioral deficits after stroke in rats.
Stroke 2001;32:2682-2688.
22. Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Lu D, Lu M, et al. Therapeutic benefit of intravenous administration of bone
marrow stromal cells after cerebral ischemia in rats.
Stroke 2001;32:1005-1011.
23. Negoescu A, Lorimier P, Labat-Moleur F, Drouet C,
Robert C, Guillermet C, et al. In situ apoptotic cell labeling by the TUNEL method: improvement and evaluation
on cell preparations. Journal of Histochemistry & Cytochemistry 1996;44:959-968.
24. He J, Gu D, Wu X, Reynolds K, Duan X, Yao C, et al. Major
causes of death among men and women in China. New
England Journal of Medicine 2005;353:1124-1134.
25. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Mortality by cause for eight
regions of the world: Global Burden of Disease Study.
The Lancet 1997;349:1269-1276.
26. Murray CJL, Lopez AD. Alternative projections of mortality and disability by cause 1990-2020: Global Burden
of Disease Study. The Lancet 1997;349:1498-1504.
27. AANS. Cerebrovascular Disease. American Association
of Neurological Surgeons; 2005.
28. Liu G, Wang T, Wang T, Song J, Zhou Z. Effects of
apoptosis-related proteins caspase-3, Bax and Bcl-2 on
cerebral ischemia rats. Biomedical Reports 2013;
1:861-867.
29. Parr AM, Tator CH, Keating A. Bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stromal cells for the repair of central nervous system injury. Bone marrow transplantation 2007;
40:609-619.
30. Injection composition containing oxiracetam and preparation method and application thereof. Google Patents; 2013.
31. Lindvall O, Kokaia Z. Stem cell research in stroke: how
far from the clinic? Stroke 2011;42:2369-2375.

