11 Y. Katayama et al. (eds.), Brain Edema XV, Acta Neurochirurgica Supplement, Vol. 118,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-7091-1434-6_2, © Springer-Verlag Wien 2013
  Abstract    We have examined the time course of brain edema 
and the blood–brain barrier opening in rat after basal ganglia 
ischemia induced by photothrombotic occlusion of the small 
vessels within the caudate–putamen. Male SD rats were 
anesthetized, and Rose Bengal dye was intravenously 
injected. The left caudo-putamen was exposed to cold white 
light for 5–10 min via a stereotaxically implanted optic  fiber. 
Ischemic brain edema and the blood–brain barrier, as well as 
the histological changes, were assessed at various times during
the following 6 weeks. Local cerebral blood  flow was 
measured 90 min after photothrombosis by quantitative autoradiography.
A round infarct with thrombosed parenchymal 
vessels surrounded by a layer of selective neuronal death was 
formed within the caudo-putamen. The ischemic lesion 
turned into a lacune over a period of 6 weeks. A central zone 
of markedly reduced blood  flow and a surrounding oligemic 
zone were observed 90 min after light exposure. Early blood–
brain barrier opening with edema was observed as early as 
4 h after photothrombosis, peaked at day 1, and disappeared 
at 7 days after photothrombosis. In a model of lacunar infarction
, we observed an early and transient brain edema and 
blood–brain opening after onset of ischemia.  
  Keywords    Photothrombosis   •   Caudo-putamen   •   Histology  
 Cerebral  blood   flow   •   Blood–brain  barrier  and  brain  edema      
   Introduction 
 Small infarctions in deep brain structures are typically 
caused by occlusion of small parenchymal arteries and are 
referred to as lacunes. Stroke-prone spontaneous hypertensive
(SHRSP) rat has been shown to develop small infarcts in 
the basal ganglia, but the unpredictable onset, size, and 
 location of the ischemic lesions in this model make it dif ficult 
to use in mechanistic and therapeutic studies  [  3 ,   13  ] . 
Photothrombosis has been widely used to induce ischemia 
in the cortex, but not deep brain structures  [  1, 11  ] .  We  have 
developed an animal model of photothrombotic ischemia 
within the caudo-putamen in rat, and examined the time 
course of brain edema and blood–brain barrier opening 
after basal ganglia photothrombosis  [  5  ] .  
   Materials  and  Methods 
 Male SD rats were anesthetized, and Rose Bengal dye 
(20 mg/kg) was intravenously injected. The left caudoputamen
was exposed to cold white light for 5–10 min 
via a stereotaxically implanted optic  fiber (0.5 mm diameter
, Eska CK-20; Mitsubishi Rayon, Tokyo, Japan; 
Fig.  1a, b )   [  5, 9  ] . For histopathology, rats were reanesthetized
with 4 % iso flurane and transcardially perfused
with 4 % paraformaldehyde in 0.1 mol/l 
phosphate- buffered saline at various times from 4 h to 
6 weeks following photothrombosis. The  fixed brains 
were removed and kept in 4 % paraformaldehyde for 6 h. 
A coronal slab of brain tissue containing the center of the 
lesion was cut, embedded in paraf fin, sectioned, and prepared
for hematoxylin and eosin staining. Electron microscopy
was also performed on tissue from the 4 h group. The 
rats underwent transcardiac perfusion with 4 % glutaraldehyde.
Specimens containing the photothrombosis-induced 
lesion were excised, embedded in epon, and prepared for 
      Brain  Edema  and  Blood–Brain  Barrier  Opening 
After  Photothrombotic  Ischemia  in  Rat         
     Toshihiko    Kuroiwa,           Guohua    Xi,        Ya    Hua,        Tavarekere    N.    Nagaraja,        Joseph    D.    Fenstermacher,  and        Richard    F.    Keep       
    T.    Kuroiwa ,   MD   (*)
     Laboratory  of  Clinical  Medicine , 
 Namegata District General Hospital ,
  98-8  Inouefujii ,   Namegata,  Ibaraki ,   311-3516 ,   Japan  
   Department  of  Neurosurgery ,   University  of  Michigan ,
  Ann  Arbor ,   MI ,   USA    
e-mail:   tkuroiwa-nsu@umin.ac.jp  
     G.    Xi ,   MD  ,      Y.    Hua ,   MD    and      R.  F.    Keep  
     Department  of  Neurosurgery ,   University  of  Michigan  Medical  School ,
  Ann  Arbor ,   MI ,   USA  
      T.  N.    Nagaraja    and      J.  D.    Fenstermacher  
     Department  of  Anesthesiology ,   Henry  Ford  Health  System ,
  Detroit ,   MI ,   USA    
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1628151584)
12 T. Kuroiwa et al.
a
c
b
  Fig.  1     (  a ) A stereotaxic device with a polymethylmethacrylate optic 
 fiber coated with polyethylene measuring 0.5 mm in diameter (Eska 
CK-20, Mitsubishi Rayon, Tokyo, Japan) ( b ) Optic  fiber with sharp 
beveled edge connected to a light source (bar = 0.5 mm) ( c )  Typical 
TTC-stained coronal section of brain at the level of the optic  fiber 1 day 
after photothrombosis (bar = 1.0 mm). A clearly demarcated ( white ) 
lesion indicative of infarction is seen in the center of the caudo-putamen 
around the end of the needle track. In this animal, Evans Blue was 
injected i.v. before sacri fice and an area of  blue  staining is seen (indicating
blood–brain barrier leakage to Evans Blue-tagged albumin) within 
the  2,3,5-triphenyl  tetrazolium  chloride  (TTC)-demarcated  lesion       
(8.0.0.2542,251195865 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
13 Brain Edema and Blood–Brain Barrier Opening After Photothrombotic Ischemia in Rat
ultrastructural examination. For the assessment of brain 
edema and blood–brain barrier permeability, animals 
were anesthetized and injected with Evans Blue solution. 
After 1 h, brains were removed and cut coronally on a 
brain-slicing matrix at the level of optic  fiber implantation.
Tissue samples of the photothrombotic lesion and 
corresponding site in the contralateral caudate were 
excised and dropped into a kerosene/monobromobenzene 
gradient column for speci fic gravity measurement, and 
the water content was calculated  [  2, 7  ] .  An  adjacent  section
was stained with 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolium chloride 
(TTC) to visualize the area of infarction and Evans Blue 
leakage (Fig.  1c )   [  6  ] . Local cerebral blood  flow was measured
90 min after photothrombosis by quantitative autoradiography
 [  8  ] . Ultrastructural assessment of blood–brain 
barrier change was performed in the 4 h group. One milliliter
of saline with 25 mg horseradish peroxide (HRP; 
Sigma Type II) was injected i.v. into the animals 30 min 
before the animals were perfused with the  fixative. 
Fixed brains were processed for enzyme histochemical 
reactions   [  10  ]  .    
   Results 
 A round infarct with thrombosed parenchymal vessels surrounded
by a layer of selective neuronal death was formed 
within the caudo-putamen around the tip of the optic  fiber 
(Fig.  2a ). The ischemic lesion turned into a cystic cavity 
(lacune) over a period of 6 weeks. Four hours after photothrombosis
, the histology of the periphery of the lesion was 
abnormal with pyknotic and eosinophilic neurons and numerous
microvacuoles. The latter structures are swollen astrocytic
and neuronal processes within the neuropil. Platelet 
thrombus formation within parenchymal small vessels, dark 
neurons, and hydropic swelling of astrocytes and oligodendrocytes
were evident at this time (Fig.  2b, c ). Multiple HRP 
vesicles were present in the endothelia of small vessels in 
the lesion in the 4 h group (Fig.  2d, e ). By day 1, neuronal 
destruction and neuropilar microvacuolation became more 
evident in the center of the lesion. At the lesion periphery, 
marked neutrophil in filtration was seen 3 days after photothrombosis
, whereas macrophage in filtration peaked at 
  Fig.  2     (  a ) Typical lesion 1 day after photothrombosis (10 min exposure
; Luxol Fast Blue and Eosin staining; scale bar = 1.0 mm). There is 
a round lesion in the center of the caudo-putamen. The area of central 
infarction was surrounded by a thin layer of selective neuronal death. 
( b ) Typical electron micrograph of a small microvessel within the 
periphery at 4 h after light exposure. The vessel is  filled with platelets 
and is surrounded by swollen perivascular cells, mostly astrocytic 
 end-feet  (bar = 10   m m).  ( c ) An example of a triangulated ischemic neuron
within the ischemic periphery (bar = 10  m m). The neuron is surrounded
by several swollen perineuronal astrocytic processes. ( d ) 
Horseradish peroxide (HRP) vesicles detected in the endothelium of 
microvessels in the ischemic region, indicating increased blood–brain 
barrier permeability (bar = 1  m m).  ( e ) Higher magni fication of the capillary
endothelium with HRP vesicles (bar = 0.1  m m )        
a b
( 8.0.0.2542.2047307621 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
14 T. Kuroiwa et al.
2 weeks after photothrombosis. Reactive astrocytosis and 
new capillary formation were also evident in the lesion 
periphery at 2 weeks. A small cyst with a thin layer of gliosis 
was observed 6 weeks after light exposure. The color-coded 
maps of lCBF at 1.5 h after photothrombosis indicated a 
large portion of the ipsilateral caudo-putamen with very low 
 flow (approximately 10–15 ml/100 g/min) compared with 
contralateral (approximately 80 ml/100 g/min). Evans Blue 
leakage was observed at 1.5 h in 3 out of 6 animals, 4 h in 6 
out of 6 animals, 1 day in 6 out of 6 animals, 4 days in 4 out 
of 6, 7 days in 1 out of 6 animals after photothrombosis, but 
not at all at 6 weeks. Brain edema was detectable by 1.5 h, 
peaked at 1 day, and was resolved by 6 weeks (Fig.  3 ) .     
   Conclusion 
 Watson et al. developed a method of inducing photothrombotic
infarction in the cerebral cortex that has the advantage
of precise control of the size and location of the 
infarct   [  11  ] . Current study aimed to establish a reproducible
model of a deep small infarction in the caudo- putamen 
using a stereotaxically implanted optic  fiber. Polymethylmethacrylate
optic  fibers are suitable for cold lighting
because they transmit very little infrared light. 
Histological examination early after light exposure after 
Rose Bengal dye infusion showed an almost spherical 
infarct around the tip of the  fiber optic surrounded by a 
peripheral area of selective neuronal death and ischemic 
edema. Thrombotic occlusion of small parenchymal vessels
was found in the center and periphery of the lesion, 
and lCBF was decreased by about 85 % in the lesion 
 center. This is, thus, a model of deep, localized brain ischemia
that induces subsequent infarction. Blood–brain 
barrier opening takes place shortly after lesioning in this 
model. Early BBB opening was found in an air embolus 
model of ischemia  [  12  ] . In both models, occlusion of 
small parenchymal vessels is probably an important factor 
in early BBB opening, which is different from the delayed 
BBB opening that often occurs after large artery occlusion
  [  4  ] . In summary, an animal model of photothrombotic 
caudo-putamen infarction with histological changes similar
to those found in lacunar infarcts has been developed. 
84
80
Lt
Rt
M±SEM
*
*
*
*
%
76
B
BBB
1.5h 4h 1day 4day 1week 6week
− +/− + + + +/ − − 
  Fig.  3     Time course of tissue water content and blood–brain barrier 
permeability change after photothrombosis. Water content (%, vertical 
axis) was measured in the left and right caudate. * P  < 0.05  versus  contralateral.
Evans Blue leakage was observed at 1.5 h, 4 h, 1 day, 4 days, 
and 7 days after photothrombosis, but not at 6 weeks. Brain edema was 
detectable by 1.5 h, peaked at 1 day, and was resolved by 6 weeks       
c d e
Fig. 2 (continued)
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
15 Brain Edema and Blood–Brain Barrier Opening After Photothrombotic Ischemia in Rat
Opening of the BBB and ischemic edema were found at 
an early stage after onset. This model can be employed to 
test differences in the effects of potential therapeutic 
agents between large and small vessels (lacunar) ischemia 
or among sites of ischemic injury.      
  Con flict  of  Interest   We declare that we have no con flict of interest   .  
   References    
    1.    Boquillon M, Boquillon JP, Bralet J (1992) Photochemically 
induced, graded cerebral infarction in the mouse by laser irradiation 
evolution of brain edema. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods 27:1–6  
    2.    Fujiwara K, Nitsch C, Suzuki R, Klatzo I (1981) Factors in the 
reproducibility of the gravimetric method for evaluation of edematous
changes in the brain. Neurol Res 3:345–361  
     3.    Hossmann KA (2005) Experimental models of focal cerebral ischemia.
In: Kalimo H (ed) Pathology & genetics of cerebrovascular 
diseases. ISN Neuropath Press, Basel, pp 227–235  
     4.     Ito U, Go KG, Walker JT Jr, Spatz M, Klatzo I (1976) Experimental 
cerebral ischemia in Mongolian gerbils III. Behaviour of the bloodbrain
barrier. Acta Neuropathol 34:1–6  
     5.     Kuroiwa T, Xi G, Hua Y, Nagaraja TN, Fenstermacher JD, Keep RF 
(2009) Development of a rat model of photothrombotic ischemia 
and infarction within the caudoputamen. Stroke 40:
248–253  
     6.     Lippold  HJ  (1982)  Quantitative  succinic  dehydrogenases  histochemistry.
A comparison of different tetrazolium salts. 
Histochemistry 76:381–405  
     7.     Marmarou A, Tanaka K, Shulman K (1982) An improved gravimetric
measure of cerebral edema. J Neurosurg 56:246–253  
     8.    Obrenovitch TP, Clayton CB, Strong AJ (1987) A double-radionuclide
autoradiographic method using N-isopropyl-iodoamphetamine 
for sequential measurements of local cerebral blood  flow. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab 7:356–365  
     9.    Paxinos G, Watson C (1986) The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates
, 2nd edn. Academic, San Diego  
    10.    Reese TS, Karnovsky MJ (1967) Fine structural localization of a 
blood-brain barrier to exogenous peroxidase. J Cell Biol 34:
207–217  
    11.    Watson BD, Dietrich WD, Busto R, Wachtel MS, Ginsberg MD 
(1985) Induction of reproducible brain infarction by photochemically
initiated thrombosis. Ann Neurol 17:497–504  
    12.    Wolman M, Klatzo I, Chui E, Wilmes F, Nishimoto K, Fujiwara K, 
Spatz M (1981) Evaluation of the dye-protein tracers in pathophysiology
of the blood-brain barrier. Acta Neuropathol 54:55–61  
    13.     Yamori Y, Horie R, Handa H, Sato M, Fukase M (1976) Pathogenetic 
similarity of strokes in stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive 
rats  and  humans.  Stroke  7:46–53      
(8.0.0.2542.318980011 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
