Future prospects for contact factors as therapeutic targets
David Gailani1
1Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
Anticoagulants currently used in clinical practice to treat or prevent thromboembolic disease are effective, but place
patients at increased risk for serious bleeding because they interfere with plasma enzymes (thrombin and factor Xa)
that are essential for hemostasis. In the past 10 years, work with genetically altered mice and studies in baboons and
rabbits have demonstrated that the plasma contact proteases factor XI, factor XII, and prekallikrein contribute to the
formation of occlusive thrombi despite having limited roles in hemostasis. In the case of factor XI, epidemiologic data
from human populations indicate that elevated levels of this protein increase risk for stroke and venous thromboembolism
and may also influence risk for myocardial infarction. These findings suggest that inhibiting contact activation may
produce an antithrombotic effect without significantly compromising hemostasis. This chapter reviews strategies that
are being developed for therapeutic targeting of factor XI and factor XII and their performances in preclinical and early
human trials.
Learning Objective
● To understand that the proteases of the plasma contact system
play a limited role in hemostasis, but appear to make
significant contributions to thrombosis; therefore, targeting of
contact activation may produce an antithrombotic effect that
is not accompanied by a drug-induced defect in hemostasis
Introduction
In the traditional coagulation cascade (Figure 1A), thrombin
formation is initiated by a process called contact activation, which is
triggered when plasma is exposed to certain types of surfaces
(usually those with a negative charge).1,2 Contact activation involves
reciprocal conversion of the protease precursors factor XII
(fXII) and prekallikrein (PK) to their active forms (fXIIa and
-kallikrein) in the presence of the cofactor high-molecular-weight
kininogen (HK). FXIIa then converts factor XI (fXI) to its active
form (fXIa), setting off a series of enzymatic reactions that
culminate in thrombin generation. Contact activation initiates
clotting in the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) assay
used widely in clinical practice to assess the integrity of the blood
coagulation mechanism. Therefore, plasmas lacking fXII, fXI, PK,
or HK have very long aPTTs.2 Despite this, individuals deficient in
fXII, PK, or HK do not have a demonstrable bleeding disorder even
when challenged with surgery.1,2 Patients with fXI deficiency can
bleed excessively when surgery or trauma involves certain tissues,
but spontaneous bleeding is rare and symptoms are considerably
less severe than with deficiency of factor IX (the substrate for fXIa
in the coagulation cascade).2-4 A conclusion that can be drawn from
the clinical observations is that clot formation at a wound site does
not behave like the chain of reactions depicted in Figure 1A, in
which the absence of any link would be expected to disable the
entire mechanism. Work over the past 40 years has clarified the
processes responsible for initiation and propagation of a clot at a site
of injury. Our current understanding of the main reactions involved
in thrombin generation at a wound site are summarized in Figure
1B.5 In this scheme, fXI serves a relatively small role in hemostasis,
whereas the process of contact activation is no longer considered an
integral component of the hemostasic mechanism. However, as
discussed by Key and by van Montfoort and Meijers in separate
chapters in this publication, data from human population studies,
supported by numerous studies with animal models (summarized in
Table 1), make a strong case for a role for fXI in thromboembolic
disorders. Work with the animal models also suggests that fXII, PK,
and HK contribute to thrombosis (Table 1). These exciting observations
are the driving force behind efforts to develop strategies that
target components of contact activation for therapeutic purposes.
Rationale for therapeutic targeting of contact
proteases
The importance of the protease thrombin in thromboembolic disease
has been established and it follows that inhibition of thrombin
production or thrombin activity will limit or prevent thrombus
formation and growth. For more than 60 years, 2 approaches have
been used to manipulate thrombin to treat or to prevent thromboembolic
disease. One approach is based on inhibiting the enzymatic
activity of thrombin or factor Xa (the protease directly responsible
for converting prothrombin to thrombin; Figure 1B). This can be
achieved indirectly using unfractionated heparin, low-molecularweight
heparin, or heparin-related compounds to enhance protease
inhibition by the plasma serine protease inhibitor antithrombin.6
More recently, small-molecule inhibitors that target the active sites
of thrombin or factor Xa directly have been used toward the same
end.7 An alternative approach involves reducing synthesis of
functional prothrombin and factor X, the zymogen precursors of
thrombin and factor Xa, respectively, by administration of vitamin
K antagonists such as warfarin.8 The strategy of targeting thrombin
and fXa activity or production to achieve an antithrombotic effect is
based on the reasonable premise that thrombosis represents dysregulation
of processes normally involved in hemostasis. Certainly, from
the standpoint of efficacy, this strategy has an impressive track
record. However, because of the importance of thrombin and factor
Xa to hemostasis, patients on anticoagulation therapy are at
increased risk for severe bleeding. In clinical trials, the newer oral
direct thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors were associated with
similar numbers of bleeding episodes compared with warfarin or
low-molecular-weight heparin, with the exception of the factor Xa
inhibitor apixaban, which appeared safer than warfarin in phase 3
trials. Therefore, life-threatening bleeding complications continue
COMEBACK KID:T HE CONTACT PATHWAY AND FACTOR XI
52 American Society of Hematology
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1745315797)
to be a problem, even with newer therapies, because they interfere
with key components of a vital host-defense mechanism.
The normal hemostatic response to injury observed in humans
lacking fXII, PK, or HK and the relatively mild bleeding associated
with fXI deficiency led to the conclusion that the contact system
plays, at most, a minor role in coagulation in mammals. However,
this notion is being reconsidered because a growing body of
evidence supports a substantive role for the contact factors in
thrombus formation in a variety of pathologic conditions. As
discussed by Key in this publication, higher plasma fXI levels in
humans increase the risk for stroke9 and venous thromboembolism10
and may also affect risk for myocardial infarction.11 Consistent with
this, as reviewed by van Montfoort and Meijers in this publication,
mice lacking fXI, fXII, or PK have an impressive resistance to
injury-induced arterial and venous thrombosis despite lacking an
obvious hemostatic abnormality (Table 1).12-14 Intravascular thrombi
are unstable in these mice, preventing clots from achieving a size
sufficient to occlude a vessel. Data from ex vivo studies of human
blood under flow support the impression that growth of an
intraluminal thrombus requires fXIa and fXIIa activity15,16 either
within the clot or on its surface. In this regard, intraluminal thrombi
appear to differ from hemostatic clots that form within the walls of
injured blood vessels. Therefore, contact activation appears to
contribute to clot formation in vivo, but is only required for the
growth of pathologic occlusive clots. If this hypothesis is correct, it
raises the prospect that inhibiting contact activation or components
of contact activation could produce an antithrombotic effect that
would be associated with little or no antihemostatic (anticoagulant)
effect. Based on the intriguing epidemiologic and preclinical data, a
variety of strategies are under development for specifically targeting
zymogen fXI and fXII and their active protease forms, fXIa and
fXIIa, for therapeutic purposes. These approaches are reviewed in
the following sections and are summarized in Table 2.
Inhibiting fXI and fXII with monoclonal antibodies in a
primate thrombosis model
Although data from both human population studies and animal
models support the premise that fXI contributes to thrombosis, the
data for fXII present a more confusing picture. Specifically,
although fXII clearly serves an important role in thrombus formation
in a variety of rodent models12-14 and in rabbit models of
artificial surface-induced thrombosis,17,18 epidemiologic data suggest
that there is actually an inverse relationship between plasma
fXII levels and risk of myocardial infarction and death from cardiac
disease in humans.11,19 Although the reasons for this apparent
discrepancy are not clear, the data raise concerns that fXII may not
contribute to thrombus formation in the same manner, or to the same
extent, in rodents and primates. This issue has been addressed
recently by a series of studies examining the consequences of fXI
and fXII inhibition in a baboon thrombosis model.
In 2003, Gruber and Hanson reported that olive baboons (Papio
anubis) treated with a polyclonal antibody to human fXI were
resistant to occlusive thrombus formation induced by insertion of
Dacron- or tissue factor (TF)-coated Teflon grafts into the circulation.20 Several monoclonal antibodies that block different steps in
the contact activation process have subsequently been tested in a
version of this model that involves placing collagen-coated grafts
into temporary femoral arteriovenous shunts.12,15,16 Accumulation
of 111In-labeled platelets and 125I-labeled fibrin within and downstream
of the graft can be followed to determine the effects of
antibodies on the rate and extent of thrombus formation. The most
impressive results to date were obtained with the antihuman fXI IgG
O1A6 (also called aXIMAb).15 O1A6 binds to the third “apple”
(A3) domain of fXI/fXIa (Figure 2). The A3 domain contains a
binding site for the fXIa substrate factor IX (indicated in red in
Figure 2),21 and O1A6 prevents factor IX from binding to this site.
In baboons, a single 2 mg/kg subcutaneous dose of O1A6 reduced
Figure 1. Models of thrombin generation. (A) Contact activation-initiated thrombin generation. In the cascade/waterfall hypothesis of
coagulation, thrombin generation is initiated by the process contact activation (gray oval). Contact activation involves reciprocal activation of the
protease precursors fXII and PK on a surface (typically a negatively charged surface). HK serves as a cofactor for the reaction by facilitating PK
binding to the surface. FXIIa then activates fXI, in a reaction that also requires HK, setting off the series of calcium-dependent proteolytic
reactions that culminates in thrombin generation. (B) TF-initiated thrombin generation. In this more current scheme, thrombin generation is
initiated by factor VIIa in plasma binding to TF, a membrane protein expressed on the surface of cells beneath the blood vessel endothelium. The
factor VIIa/TF complex activates factor X to factor Xa and factor IX to factor IXa. Factor Xa converts prothrombin to thrombin in the presence of
factor Va and factor IXa sustains the process by activating additional factor X in the presence of factor VIIIa. The reactions indicated by the black
arrows form the core of the thrombin-generation mechanism in vertebrate animals. Mammals have fXIa, which provides another mechanism for
fIX activation (red arrow). Although fXI is activated by fXIIa during contact activation, this reaction is not shown in this scheme because it does not
appear to be required for hemostasis. FXI can be activated by thrombin generated early in the coagulation process (gray arrows), explaining the
lack of a bleeding disorder in people lacking fXII. In (A) and (B), the precursors (zymogens) of trypsin-like enzymes are indicated in black
lettering, with active forms indicated by a lowercase “a.” Protein cofactors are indicated by Roman numerals in yellow ovals.
Hematology 2014 53
( 8.0.0.2542.16988187 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
plasma fXI activity to nearly undetectable levels for 10 days. During
this time, the concentration of plasma fXI antigen increased,
indicating that O1A6 produced its effect by blocking fXI activity,
not by inducing rapid fXI clearance from plasma. Platelet accumulation
within collagen-coated grafts was markedly reduced in O1A6-
treated animals compared with controls. Platelet adhesion to the
collagen-coated surface was actually unaffected by the antibody, but
subsequent platelet aggregation was blunted, preventing graft
occlusion. Similar to what was observed in mice lacking fXI or fXII,
platelet-rich aggregates were unstable in the presence of O1A6 and
fragmented in the flowing blood. Thrombus instability may well
have been due, at least partly, to a significant reduction in local
thrombin generation because plasma levels of thrombin-antithrombin
complex (TAT, a marker of thrombin generation) were reduced
by90% immediately downstream from the graft. Consistent with
this, fibrin deposition in the graft was reduced by80% compared
with controls. O1A6 was considerably more effective at inhibiting
thrombus growth than high-dose aspirin in this model and at least as
effective as unfractionated and low-molecular-weight heparin.
O1A6-treated baboons did not have any manifestations of abnormal
hemostasis.
The monoclonal IgG 14E11 was raised in fXI-deficient mice and
binds to the A2 domain (Figure 2) of fXI and fXIa from multiple
species, including humans and baboons.12 In plasma, 14E11 effectively
interferes with fXI activation by fXIIa, but not fXI activation
by thrombin. It also has little effect on fXIa activation of factor IX.
Therefore, 14E11 appears to specifically inhibit contact activationmediated
fXI activation. In baboons, 14E11 reduced fibrin deposition
within grafts by40%, but platelet accumulation was largely
unchanged and the effect on TAT generation was more modest than
with O1A6. However, the antibody significantly reduced platelet
accumulation and thrombus growth downstream of the graft,
consistent with a significant antithrombotic effect. Similar results to
those obtained with 14E11 were reported earlier this year in the
baboon model for the antihuman fXII antibody 15H8.16 15H8 is a
strong inhibitor of activation of fXII to fXIIa, but has little
inhibitory effect on fXIIa itself.
Taken as a whole, the data support a role for both fXI and fXII in
thrombus formation in primates, but suggest that inhibiting fXIa
may be a more effective antithrombotic strategy than inhibiting fXI
activation by fXIIa or fXII activation. O1A6, 14E11, and 15H8 had
comparable effects on the aPTTs of treated baboons. This demonstrates
that it is not the degree of prolongation of the aPTT that is
indicative of the antithrombotic effect as much as the step in the
process that is being inhibited. The findings are consistent with the
data for human populations, which make a stronger case for a role
for fXI in thrombosis than for fXII. Perhaps there is a contribution to
fXI activation through a fXIIa-independent mechanism during
Table 1. Preclinical data supporting a role for the plasma contact system in thrombosis
Species Contact factor Thrombosis type Reference Study finding
Mouse Factor XI Arterial Rosen et al39 fXI-deficient mice are resistant to FeCl3-induced thrombosis of the carotid artery
Wang et al40 fXI deficiency protects mice from arterial thrombosis similar to fIX deficiency
Kleinschnitz et al41 fXI deficiency is protective in a model of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
Cheng et al12 Deficiency of fXI and fXII produce similar antithrombotic phenotypes in mice
Zhang et al22 Decreasing fXI with ASOs reduces arterial thrombus formation
Leung et al42 Inhibiting fXI with an antibody reduces cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
Wu et al43 fXIa inhibitor protease nexin 2 inhibits arterial thrombosis
Van Montfoort et al44 fXI deficiency regulates thrombus formation on ruptured atherosclerotic plaques
Venous Wang et al45 fXI-deficient mice are resistant to FeCl3-induced inferior vena cava thrombosis
Cheng et al12 fXI-deficient mice are resistant to formation of TF-induced pulmonary emboli
Zhang et al22 Decreasing fXI with ASOs reduces size of venous thrombi
Wong et al28 Small-molecule inhibitor to fXIa prevents venous thrombosis
van Montfoort et al46 Anti-factor XI antibodies reduce venous thrombus formation
Factor XII Arterial Renné et al47 fXII-deficient mice are resistant to FeCl3-induced mesenteric artery thrombosis
Kleinschnitz et al41 fXII deficiency is protective in a model of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
Müller et al13 Polyphosphate induces thrombosis in a fXII dependent manner
Cheng et al12 fXII-deficient mice are resistant to FeCl3-induced carotid artery thrombosis
Hagedorn et al32 fXIIa inhibitor infestin-4 blocks arterial thrombus formation
Revenko et al14 Reducing fXII with ASOs inhibits arterial thrombus formation
Venous Renné et al47 fXII-deficient mice are resistant to collagen-epinephrine-induced pulmonary emboli
Revenko et al14 Reducing fXII with ASOs inhibits stasis-induced vena cava thrombus formation
Prekallikrein Arterial Revenko et al14 Decreasing PK with ASOs inhibited arterial thrombus formation
Bird et al48 PK deficiency inhibits FeCl3-induced arterial thrombus formation
Venous Revenko et al14 Decreasing PK with ASOs inhibits stasis-induced venous thrombus formation
Bird et al48 PK deficiency inhibits venous thrombus formation induced by oxidative damage
HK Arterial Merkulov et al49 HK deficiency inhibits laser-induced arterial thrombus formation
Langhauser et al50 Arterial thrombosis was reduced in HK knockout mice
Rat Factor XII A–V Shunt Xu et al33 fXIIa inhibitor infestin-4 reduces thrombus formation
Rabbit Factor XI Arterial Yamashita51 Inhibiting fXIa reduces thrombus propagation in an iliac artery injury model
Wong et al28 Small-molecule inhibitor to fXIa reduces arterial thrombus growth
Venous Minnema et al52 Inhibiting fXI with IgG enhances fibrinolysis of injury-induced venous thrombi
Takahashi et al53 Inhibiting fXIa reduces thrombus growth in jugular vein injury and stasis models
Wong et al28 Small-molecule inhibitor to fXIa reduces venous thrombus growth
Yau et al17 Decreasing fXI with ASOs inhibits catheter-induced venous thrombus formation
Factor XII Venous Yau et al17 Decreasing fXII with ASOs inhibits catheter-induced venous thrombus formation
Larsson et al18 Anti-fXIIa IgG prevents thrombus formation in an extracorporeal circuit
A–V Shunt Xu et al33 fXIIa inhibitor infestin-4 reduces thrombus formation
Baboon Factor XI A–V Shunt Gruber & Hanson20 Inhibiting fXI with polyclonal IgG inhibits collagen or TF-induced thrombosis
Tucker et al15 Inhibiting fXI with monoclonal IgG inhibits collagen-induced thrombosis
Cheng et al12 Blocking fXI activation by fXIIa inhibits collagen-induced thrombosis
Crosby et al24 Decreasing fXI with ASOs inhibits collagen-induced thrombosis
Factor XII A–V Shunt Matafonov et al16 Blocking fXII activation with monoclonal IgG inhibits collagen-induced thrombosis
A–V indicates arterial-venous.
54 American Society of Hematology
( 8.0.0.2542.1977200080 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
thrombosis in baboons, such as the thrombin-mediated feedback
reaction represented by the gray arrows in Figure 1B. It is important
to recognize, however, that the results of the baboon studies could
be explained by differences in how effectively each antibody
inhibits its specific target reaction and the results should not be
interpreted as definitively demonstrating that fXI is a better
antithrombotic target than is fXII.
Reducing plasma fXI levels with antisense
oligonucleotides
The plasma levels of fXI, fXII, or PK can be significantly reduced in
mice by subcutaneous administration of antisense-oligonucleotides
(ASOs) specific for the mRNA of the protein of interest.14,22 Like
their congenitally deficient counterparts, ASO-treated mice demonstrate
a marked resistance to injury-induced arterial and venous
thrombosis.14,22 Deoxyribonucleotide-based ASOs bind to a target
mRNA through complementary base pairing,22 leading to selective
mRNA degradation by cellular nucleases and, consequently, reduced
synthesis of the protein encoded by the mRNA. ASOs
administered by subcutaneous injection are taken up avidly by
hepatocytes, facilitating targeting of proteins such as coagulation
factors that are synthesized in the liver. ASOs complementary to
mouse fXI mRNA have been prepared that are20 nucleotides in
length, with phosphorothionate incorporated into the backbone and
2-O-methoxyethyl modifications in the 5 nucleotides at each end.22
Such “second-generation” ASOs have relatively long tissue elimination
half-lives and can be administered at intervals of several days to
a week. Administration of 50 mg/kg of an anti-fXI ASO subcutaneously
twice a week for 3 weeks to adult mice resulted in 90%
reduction of plasma fXI protein and activity. The treated mice are as
resistant to arterial and venous thrombosis as mice treated with
warfarin or heparin. A dose escalation study revealed that an
antithrombotic effect becomes evident when the plasma fXI level is
reduced to20% of the normal level.
More recently, ASO technology has been studied in primates. A
dose escalation trial (4-40 mg/kg/wk) of the anti-fXI ASO ISIS
416858 in cynomolgus monkeys produced a dose-dependent reduction
in plasma fXI, with higher doses producing an 80% reduction
after 4 weeks of treatment.23 As expected, the aPTT was moderately
increased by this therapy, but the PT and platelet count remained
normal and there was no evidence of a hemostatic deficit in response
to tail amputation or gum or skin laceration. In the baboon
arteriovenous shunt thrombosis model described in the previous
section, reducing fXI by as little as 50% had some antithrombotic
effect, with a greater effect occurring when the plasma level was
reduced to 20% of normal,24 consistent with results from the
studies with mice.22
Results of a phase 1 study examining the effects of the antihuman
fXI ASO ISIS-FXIRx on healthy volunteers were reported at the
annual meeting of the American Society of Hematology in 2011.25
Reductions of plasma fXI antigen and activity of 80% were
consistently achieved with repeated 200 or 300 mg doses of ASO,
with some individuals experiencing 95% reduction. The most
common adverse effects were mild irritation and inflammation at
ASO injection sites. There were no cases of excessive bleeding,
significant hematologic or electrolyte abnormalities, or liver or
kidney dysfunction. Salomon et al reported that patients with severe
fXI deficiency requiring orthopedic procedures often experience
little excessive bleeding, even in the absence of factor replacement.4
A multicenter phase 2 trial comparing ISIS-FXIRx with lowmolecular-weight
heparin for deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis in
patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty is currently under way.
This study will provide us with information on the effects of
reduced fXI in a clinical situation associated with a high incidence
of procedure-associated deep vein thrombosis and, as importantly,
on the effects of fXI reduction on perioperative bleeding.
Table 2. Compounds that target fXI/fXIa and fXII/fXIIa
Target Inhibitor type Compound Mechanism of action Reference
fXI/fXIa Monoclonal IgG O1A6 (aXIMAb) Binds to Apple 3 domain of fXI inhibiting activation. Binds to A3
domain of fXIa inhibiting activation of fIX
Tucker et al15
14E11 Binds to Apple 2 domain of fXI inhibiting its activation by fXIIa
(contact activation)
Cheng et al12
ASO Anti-fXI ASO ASOs are available for inhibiting production of fXI in mice, rabbits,
cynamolgus monkeys and olive baboons
Zhang et al22
Yau et al17
Younis et al23
Crosby et al24
ISIS-FXIRx ASO to human fXI mRNA has been tested in normal healthy
volunteers, and is undergoing evaluation as prophylaxis in total
knee replacement
Liu et al25
Active site inhibitors Aryl boronic acid derivative Irreversible inhibitor of fXIa active site Lazarova et al54
Ketoarginine Peptidomimetics Irreversible inhibitor of fXIa active site. Reduced thrombus size in a
rat venous thrombosis model
Deng et al27
4-carboxy-2-azetidinone
compound (BMS-262084)
Irreversible inhibitor of fXIa active site produced a dose-dependent
effect on arterial and venous thrombus formation in rabbits
Wong et al28
Tetrahydroquinalone derivative Reversible inhibitor of fXIa produced an antithrombotic effect in a
rabbit A–V shunt model without affecting hemostasis
Quan et al29
Allosteric inhibitors Sulfated Pentagalloylglucoside Binds to charged residues on the fXI/fXIa catalytic domain leading
to changes in active site conformation
Al-Horani et al30
Karuturi et al31
Natural inhibitors Protease Nexin 2 Kunitz-domain The Kunitz-type inhibitory domain from protease nexin 2 inhibits
fXIa by binding to the protease active site
Wu et al43
Clavatadine A Bromine containing compound from marine sponge Suberea
clavata is probably an active site inhibitor of fXIa
Buchanan et al55
Desmolaris Kunitz-type inhibitor of fXIa active site from vampire bat saliva Ma et al56
fXII/fXIIa Monoclonal antibody 3F7 IgG targets the active site of fXIIa and prevents thrombus formation
in an extracorporeal circuit in rabbits
Larsson et al18
15H8 IgG binds to the heavy chain of fXII, inhibiting its activation
probably by preventing fXII from binding to charged surfaces
Matafonov et al16
ASO Anti-fXII ASO ASOs are available for inhibiting fXII production in mice and rabbits Revenko et al14
Yau et al17
Small-molecule Bicyclic Peptide 3 Binds to fXII and prevents activation Baeriswyl et al57
RNA aptamer R4cfXII-1 Binds fXII inhibiting activation, and fXIIa inhibiting fXI activation Woodruff et al58
Natural Inhibitors Infestin-4 Active site inhibitor of fXIIa from Triatoma infestan attached to
albumin. Inhibits thrombosis in rodents
Hagedorn et al32
Xu et al33
Hematology 2014 55
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1019400398)
Targeting fXII to prevent thrombus formation on
artificial surfaces
Although contact factors, fXI in particular, may contribute to
venous and arterial thrombosis in humans, the factor VIIa/TF
complex (Figure 1B) may be a more important trigger of thrombus
formation in these disorders.5,26 However, there are clinical situations
in which it seems reasonable to postulate that contact
activation may be the predominant initiator of abnormal coagulation.
The propensity for the contact system to become activated
when blood interacts with artificial surfaces may trigger blood
coagulation and inflammation during cardiopulmonary bypass or
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) or in patients with
ventricular assist devices used as bridges to heart transplantation or
chronic indwelling catheters for venous access. Two studies published
earlier this year make a strong case for a fXII-initiated
process contributing to thrombosis induced by artificial surfaces.
Yau et al17 studied the effects of ASO-induced factor VII, fXI, fXII,
or HK reduction on thrombus formation induced by placement of
polyurethane catheters into the jugular veins of rabbits. Reductions
of 90% of the targeted protein were achieved with all ASOs.
ASOs targeting fXII and fXI prolonged the time to thrombus
formation more than 2-fold, whereas those reducing fVII and HK
had little effect. The negative results with HK knockdown may
suggest that the process is somewhat different from the contact
activation that triggers clotting in the aPTT assay (which is highly
dependent on HK). However, the small amount of residual HK in
the animals in this study may have been sufficient to support classic
contact activation.
Larsson et al18 recently demonstrated that a recombinant human
antibody, designated 3F7, that targets the active site of fXIIa was as
effective as heparin in preventing thrombus formation in rabbits
connected to a pediatric ECMO circuit. Unlike heparin, 3F7 did not
compromise hemostasis. Many ECMO patients are infants who
have more unpredictable responses to heparin than do adults or
older children. Preventing thrombosis while avoiding bleeding can
be difficult to achieve using heparin in this patient population. The
study by Larrson et al suggests that interrupting contact activation
may be a suitable substitute for heparin in ECMO and perhaps other
clinical situations requiring extracorporeal circuits that would not be
associated with the hemostatic defect that accompanies heparin
therapy. During contact activation, fXIIa converts PK to the
kininogenase-kallikrein, which cleaves HK to liberate the potent
vasoactive peptide bradykinin.1 This process likely contributes to
inflammation during procedures involving extracorporeal circuits.
Inhibition of fXIIa, may have an advantage over inhibition of fXIa
in this setting because it would more effectively blunt the contact
activation-driven inflammatory responses.
Small-molecule inhibitors targeting fXIa
Several programs are under way to develop small-molecule inhibitors
of fXIa that can be administered by parenteral or oral routes.
Figure 2. Human fXI. This schematic diagram shows the primary amino acid sequence, general domain structure, and the disulfide bonds (cysteine
residues shown as the letter C in black circles) for a human fXI subunit. Each subunit is comprised of 4 apple domains (A1 through A4) and a C-terminal
trypsin-like catalytic domain. The mature molecule in plasma is a dimer of 2 of these subunits connected through a hydrophobic interface on the A4
domains, with the cysteines at position 321 in each subunit forming an interchain-disulfide bond. Conversion of fXI to fXIa involves proteolytic cleavage
of the bond after arginine 369 (R369, indicated by the black arrow). This cleavage can be produced by fXIIa or thrombin. Amino acids thought to be
required for fIX binding to the fXIa A3 domain are indicated in red and residues that comprise the heparin binding site on the catalytic domain are shown
in blue. The position of the active site serine residue (S557) is indicated in yellow. (Used with permission from McMullen et al.59)
56 American Society of Hematology
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1087184544)
The strategy used in developing the thrombin inhibitors argatroban
and dabigatran etexilate and the fXa inhibitors rivaroxaban, apixaban
, and edoxaban involves targeting the enzyme active site with a
drug.7 The active sites of coagulation factors are located on catalytic
domains that are homologs of the digestive enzyme trypsin (Figure
2).5 Conversion of the inactive (zymogen) precursor of a clotting
factor to the active protease involves structural changes that result in
the enzyme active site adopting an active conformation. Because of
the high degree of homology between members of the trypsin
family, achieving potent and specific active site inhibition can be
difficult. The results of studies with a series of ketoarginine-based
peptidomimetics that irreversibly inhibit the fXIa active site illustrate
this challenge.27 One compound with an IC
50
for fXIa of 6 nM
demonstrated an impressive several-hundred-fold better specificity
for fXIa than for thrombin or factor Xa. However, the specificity for
fXIa was only 2-fold better than for -kallikrein (a homolog of
fXIa) or for trypsin.
BMS-262084 is a 4-carboxy-2-azetidinone-based compound that
irreversibly inhibits fXIa by forming a covalent bond with the active
site serine residue (Ser557, indicated in yellow in Figure 2).28 This
compound produces a dose-dependent antithrombotic effect in
rabbit arterial and venous thrombosis models. At a relatively high
dose (10 mg/kg/h), the compound increased the cuticle bleeding
time by 1.5-fold. It is not known if the increased bleeding was
specifically due to the loss of fXIa activity or to an off-target effect.
Recently, tetrahydroquinalone derivatives that are reversible smallmolecule
fXIa inhibitors were reported.29 A compound with a Ki of
0.2 nM for fXIa demonstrated 1000-fold selectivity over other
plasma proteases, except -kallikrein (23-fold) and activated protein
C (365-fold) and produced a dose-dependent antithrombotic
effect in a rabbit arteriovenous shunt thrombosis model without
compromising hemostasis.
Hypothetically, for some coagulation proteases, it may be easier to
achieve a higher specificity by targeting an area of the enzyme other
than the active site. Inhibitors that work through allosteric mechanisms
would typically bind to a target enzyme at a site (often
referred to as exosites) remote from the active site. Inhibition is
produced by induction of conformational changes that compromise
protease activity. Investigators at Virginia Commonwealth University
reported the characterization of a sulfated pentagalloylglucoside
(SPGG) that targets fXIa and allosterically inhibits its activation of
factor IX.30 SPGG and other negatively charged sulfated allosteric
modulators developed by this group31 are designed to dock initially
through the positively charged residues of a polyanion (heparin)-
binding site on the fXIa catalytic domain (indicated in blue in Figure
2). Subsequent interactions with other components of the catalytic
domain near this binding site are then thought to produce the
allosteric inhibitory effect. SPGG appears to be at least 200-fold
more selective for fXIa than other clotting factors and effectively
prevents factor IX activation by fXIa at submicromolar concentrations.
The mechanism of action of this molecule may serve as a
model for the development of more potent and specific fXIa
inhibitors.
Inhibition of fXIIa with a chimeric protein based on
infestin-4
Infestin-4 is a reversible fXIIa active site inhibitor found in the
midgut of the blood-sucking insect Triatoma infestan.32 A fusion
protein of infestin-4 attached to recombinant human albumin
(rHA-Infestin-4) effectively prolonged the aPTT of plasma from
mice, rats, rabbits, and humans and is at least 100-fold more
selective for fXIIa than for thrombin, kallikrein, and factors VIIa,
IXa, Xa, and XIa.32 rHA-Infestin-4 effectively prevented arterial
thrombus formation in mice and rats while having no effect on
bleeding in a tail bleeding assay. The compound also had an
impressive protective effect in mice during cerebral ischemiareperfusion
injury and reduced thrombus size in rat and rabbit
arteriovenous shunt thrombosis models. At higher doses of rHAInfestin-4
, the cuticle bleeding time in rats and rabbits was
prolonged 2-fold, possibly because of a modest off-target effect
on factor Xa.33 Despite this, infestin-4 can serve as a model for the
development of even more specific fXIIa inhibitors.
Conclusions and future directions
Observations in the clinic and work with laboratory animals have
established a central role for fVIIa/TF-initiated thrombin generation
(Figure 1B) in limiting bleeding at a site of blood vessel injury.5,26 In
comparison, fXI serves a relatively minor role in this process,2-4
whereas fXII, PK, and HK are not required at all.1,2 The counterintuitive
discoveries that mice deficient in a contact protease and
baboons treated with anti-fXI antibodies are as resistant (or more
resistant) to experimentally induced thrombosis as normal animals
treated with full-dose heparin has led us to reevaluate our understanding
of the pathogenesis of thrombotic disease. Specifically, the
findings present a challenge to the notion that thrombosis simply
represents hemostasis in the wrong place and suggest that it may be
possible to dissociate antithrombotic and anticoagulant effects to
produce drugs that can treat or prevent thromboembolism without
placing a patient at risk of severe bleeding. Although the efficacies
of fXI and fXII inhibitors have yet to be compared with current
therapies, available data suggest scenarios in which such inhibitors
may be useful. Data from human populations suggest that targeting
fXI or fXIa could have a role in primary or secondary prevention of
stroke9 or venous thrombosis.10 Inhibiting fXIa may be particularly
useful in patients with high-risk conditions such atrial fibrillation,
who are not good candidates for warfarin therapy due to comorbidities
such as recent intracranial bleeding. Inhibition of fXIa may also
be useful for short-term prophylaxis after neurosurgery and other
procedures in which anticoagulant-induced bleeding carries an
unacceptable risk. Data from a currently running phase 2 trial
testing anti-fXI ASOs as prophylaxis to prevent venous thromboembolism
with knee replacement surgery will give us our first
indications of the efficacy and safety of targeting fXI as an
antithrombotic strategy in humans.
Given the propensity for the contact system to activate on foreign
surfaces, treatments targeting fXIa or fXIIa may be particularly
useful in situations in which blood comes into contact with artificial
components of extracorporeal circuits or indwelling devices. There
is a need for alternatives to warfarin for patients with mechanical
heart valves. The new oral thrombin and factor Xa inhibitors are not
approved for use in these patients, and a phase 2 study (REALIGN
)34 comparing dabigatran with warfarin after mechanical
heart valve placement was terminated early because of significantly
greater incidences of thrombotic and bleeding episodes in the
dabigatran arm. The reasons behind the suboptimal performance of
dabigatran in this trial have not been established, but variations in
plasma drug levels (and particularly subtherapeutic trough levels)
and inflammation in the postoperative period have been implicated
in contributing to a prothrombotic state.35 An advantage of a therapy
targeting fXIa or fXIIa is that it would have a small (or no) impact
on bleeding risk. Therefore, the problem of a supratherapeutic
plasma level of drug would not be a consideration if the drug is
suitably specific for its target. Compounds with long half-lives
Hematology 2014 57
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
could be used to safely maintain near complete inhibition of the
target protease with little variation across time. Furthermore, in
clinical settings such as cardiac surgery, contact activation induced
by the extracorporeal oxygenator could be blunted with a fXIIa
inhibitor (and perhaps a fXIa inhibitor), reducing the perioperative
inflammatory response and its contribution to postoperative thrombotic
risk.
It seems clear that increased bleeding places limits on the strategy of
combining currently available anticoagulants and/or antiplatelet
agents to enhance an antithrombotic effect. In the ATLAS ACS–
TIMI 46 trial,36 rivaroxaban was compared with placebo in patients
on standard therapy (usually aspirin and a thienopyridine) with
recent acute coronary syndrome. Superimposing rivaroxaban on
standard therapy significantly reduced death from cardiovascular
disease, myocardial infarction, and stroke compared with standard
therapy alone, but significantly increased the rate of major bleeding.
A therapeutic benefit coupled with increased bleeding was also
observed in the TRACER37 and TRA 2P-TIMI 50 trials,38 in which
the protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) inhibitor vorapaxar was
added to standard therapy (aspirin and a thienopyridine) in patients
with acute coronary syndrome or as secondary prevention in
patients with atherosclerotic disease, respectively. It is tempting to
speculate that adding an inhibitor of fXIa or fXIIa to standard
antiplatelet therapy might enhance antithrombotic efficacy in a
manner similar to rivaroxaban or vorapaxar, but without the
increased incidence of bleeding. It is also possible that the beneficial
effects of such inhibitors could be used to reduce the doses of
conventional anticoagulants or antiplatelet agents, lowering the
baseline bleeding risk associated with the use of these drugs.
Much work remains to be done to establish the types of thromboembolic
disorders in humans that involve the contact factors and to
establish the effectiveness of strategies targeting these proteases
relative to conventional anticoagulation therapy. If effective, however
, such drugs could increase the number of patients who are
eligible for antithrombotic therapy and widen the spectrum of
clinical conditions in which antithrombotic therapy can be safely
administered.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to acknowledge the support of the National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute and the American Heart Association.
Disclosures
Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The author is on advisory committees
for Aronora and Isis; has received research funding from
Instrument Laboratory; has consulted for Aronora, Bayer, Bristol-
Myers Squibb, Dyax, Isis, Merck, and Novartis; and holds patents
with or receives royalties from Bayer. Off-label drug use: None
disclosed.
Correspondence
David Gailani, MD, Hematology/Oncology Division, Vanderbilt
University, 777 Preston Research Building, 2220 Pierce Ave.,
Nashville, TN 37232; Phone: (615)936-1505; Fax: (615)936-3853;
e-mail: dave.gailani@vanderbilt.edu.
References
1. Renne ´ T, Schmaier AH, Nickel KF, Blomba ¨ck M, Maas C. In vivo roles
of factor XII. Blood. 2012;120(22):4296-4303.
2. Gailani D, Neff AT. Rare coagulation factor deficiencies. In: Hoffman
R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds.
Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice, Ed 6. New York: Saunders-
Elsevier; 2010:1939-1952.
3. Duga S, Salomon O. Congenital factor XI deficiency: an update. Semin
Thromb Hemost. 2013;39(6):621-631.
4. Salomon O, Steinberg DM, Seligsohn U. Variable bleeding manifestations
characterize different types of surgery in patients with severe
factor XI deficiency enabling parsimonious use of replacement therapy.
Haemophilia. 2006;12(5):490-493.
5. Weitz JI. Overview of hemostasis. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein
LE, Heslop HE, Weitz JI, Anastasi J, eds. Hematology: Basic Principles
and Practice, Ed 6. New York: Saunders-Elsevier; 2010:1174-1783.
6. Samama MM, Walenga JW, Kalodiki E, Fareed J. Pharmacology and
model of action of heparin and glycosaminoglycans. In: Marder VJ,
Aird WC, Bennett JS, Schulman S and White GC, eds. Hemostasis and
thrombosis: Basic principles and practice. Ed 6. New York: Saunders-
Elsevier; 2013:1258-1266.
7. Broussalis E, Anna W, Trinka E, Mutzenbach S, Killer M. Latest
developments in anticoagulant drug discovery. Drug Discov Today.
2014;19(7):921-935.
8. Shah N, Ortel TL, Schulman S. Vitamin K antagonists: biochemistry,
pharmacology and managemen. In: Marder VJ, Aird WC, Bennett JS,
Schulman S and White GC, eds. Hemostasis and thrombosis: Basic
principles and practice. Ed 6. New York: Saunders-Elsevier; 2013:1267-
1280.
9. Yang DT, Flanders MM, Kim H, Rodgers GM. Elevated factor XI
activity levels are associated with an increased odds ratio for cerebrovascular
events. Am J Clin Path. 2006;126(3):411-415.
10. Meijers JC, Tekelenburg WL, Bouma BN, Bertina RM, Rosendaal FR.
High levels of coagulation factor XI as a risk factor for venous
thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(10):696-701.
11. Doggen CJ, Rosendaal FR, Meijers JC. Levels of intrinsic coagulation
factors and the risk of myocardial infarction among men: Opposite and
synergistic effects of factors XI and XII. Blood. 2006;108(13):4045-
4051.
12. Cheng Q, Tucker EI, Pine MS, et al. A role for factor XIIa-mediated
factor XI activation in thrombus formation in vivo. Blood. 2010;116(19):
3981-3989.
13. Mu ¨ller F, Mutch NJ, Schenk WA, et al. Platelet polyphosphates are
proinflammatory and procoagulant mediators in vivo. Cell. 2009;139(6):
1143-1156.
14. Revenko AS, Gao D, Crosby JR, et al. Selective depletion of plasma
prekallikrein or coagulation factor XII inhibits thrombosis in mice
without increased bleeding. Blood. 2011;188(19):5302-5311.
15. Tucker EI, Marzec UM, White TC, et al. Prevention of vascular graft
occlusion and thrombus-associated thrombin generation by inhibition of
factor XI. Blood. 2009;113(4):936-944.
16. Matafonov A, Leung PY, Gailani AE, et al. Factor XII inhibition
reduces thrombus formation in a primate thrombosis model. Blood.
2014;123(11):1739-1746.
17. Yau JW, Liao P, Fredenburgh JC, et al. Selective depletion of factor XI
or factor XII with antisense oligonucleotides attenuates catheter thrombosis
in rabbits. Blood. 2014;123(13):2102-2107.
18. Larsson M, Rayzman V, Nolte MW, et al. A factor XIIa inhibitory
antibody provides thromboprotection in extracorporeal circulation without
increasing bleeding risk. Sci Transl Med. 2014;6(222):222ra17.
19. Endler G, Marsik C, Jilma B, Schickbauer T, Quehenberger P,
Mannhalter C. Evidence of a U-shaped association between factor XII
activity and overall survival. J Thromb Haemost. 2007;5(6):1143-1148.
20. Gruber A, Hanson SR. Factor XI-dependence of surface- and tissue
factor-initiated thrombus propagation in primates. Blood. 2003;102(3):
953-955.
21. Geng Y, Verhamme IM, Sun MF, Bajaj SP, Emsley J, Gailani D.
Analysis of the factor XI variant Arg184Gly suggests a structural basis
for factor IX binding to factor XIa. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11(7):1374-
1384.
22. Zhang H, Lo ¨wenberg EC, Crosby JR, et al. Inhibition of the intrinsic
coagulation pathway factor XI by antisense oligonucleotides: a novel
58 American Society of Hematology
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
antithrombotic strategy with lowered bleeding risk. Blood. 2010;116(22):
4684-4692.
23. Younis HS, Crosby J, Huh JI, et al. Antisense inhibition of coagulation
factor XI prolongs APTT without increased bleeding risk in cynomolgus
monkeys. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2401-2408.
24. Crosby JR, Marzec U, Revenko AS, et al. Antithrombotic effect of
antisense factor XI oligonucleotide treatment in primates. Arterioscler
Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013;33(7):1670-1678.
25. Liu Q, Bethune C, Dessouki E, Grundy J, Monia BP, Bhanot S.
ISIS-FXIRx, a novel and specific antisense inhibitor of factor XI, caused
significant reduction in FXI antigen and activity and increased aPTT
without causing bleeding in healthy volunteers [abstract]. Blood (ASH
Annual Meeting Abstracts). 2011;118(21):209.
26. Owens AP 3rd, Mackman N. Tissue factor and thrombosis: The clot
starts here. Thromb Haemost. 2010;104(3):432-439.
27. Deng H, Bannister TD, Jin L, et al. Synthesis, SAR exploration, and
X-ray crystal structures of factor XIa inhibitors containing an alphaketothiazole
arginine. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006;16(11):3049-3054.
28. Wong PC, Crain EJ, Watson CA, Schumacher WA. A small-molecule
factor XIa inhibitor produces antithrombotic efficacy with minimal
bleeding time prolongation in rabbits. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2011;
32(2):129-137.
29. Quan ML, Wong PC, Wang C, et al. Tetrahydroquinoline derivatives as
potent and selective factor XIa inhibitors. J Med Chem. 2014;57(3):955-
969.
30. Al-Horani RA, Ponnusamy P, Mehta AY, Gailani D, Desai UR. Sulfated
pentagalloylglucoside is a potent, allosteric, and selective inhibitor of
factor XIa. J Med Chem. 2013;56(3):867-878.
31. Karuturi R, Al-Horani RA, Mehta SC, Gailani D, Desai UR. Discovery
of allosteric modulators of factor XIa by targeting hydrophobic domains
adjacent to its heparin-binding site. J Med Chem. 2013;56(6):2415-
2428.
32. Hagedorn I, Schmidbauer S, Pleines I, et al. Factor XIIa inhibitor
recombinant human albumin Infestin-4 abolishes occlusive arterial
thrombus formation without affecting bleeding. Circulation. 2010;
121(13):1510-1517.
33. Xu Y, Cai TQ, Castriota G, et al. Factor XIIa inhibition by Infestin-4: in
vitro model of action and in vivo antithrombotic benefit. Thromb
Haemost. 2014;111(4):694-704.
34. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Brueckmann M, et al. Dabigatran versus
warfarin in patients with mechanical heart valves. N Engl J Med.
2013;369:1206-1214.
35. Hylek EM. Dabigatran and mechanical heart valves–not as easy as we
hoped. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1264-1266.
36. Mega JL, Braunwald E, Wiviott SD, et al; ATLAS ACS 2–TIMI 51
Investigators. Rivaroxaban in patients with a recent acute coronary
syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:9-19.
37. Tricoci P, Huang Z, Held C, et al; TRACER Investigators. Thrombinreceptor
antagonist vorapaxar in acute coronary syndromes. N Engl
J Med. 2012;366:20-33.
38. Morrow DA, Braunwald E, Bonaca MP, et al; TRA 2P–TIMI 50
Steering Committee and Investigators. Vorapaxar in the secondary
prevention of atherothrombotic events. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1404-
1413.
39. Rosen ED, Gailani D, Castellino FJ. FXI is essential for thrombus
formation following FeCl3-induced injury of the carotid artery in the
mouse. Thromb Haemost. 2002;87(4):774-776.
40. Wang X, Cheng Q, Xu L, et al. Effects of factor IX or factor XI
deficiency on ferric chloride-induced carotid artery occlusion in mice. J
Thromb Haemost. 2005;3(4):695-702.
41. Kleinschnitz C, Stoll G, Bendszus M, et al. Targeting coagulation factor
XII provides protection from pathological thrombosis in cerebral
ischemia without interfering with hemostasis. J Exp Med. 2006;203(3):
513-518.
42. Leung PY, Hurst S, Berny-Lang MA, et al. Inhibition of factor
XII-mediated activation of factor XI provides protection against experimental
acute ischemic stroke in mice. Transl Stroke Res. 2012;3(3):381-
389.
43. Wu W, Li H, Navaneetham D, Reichenbach ZW, Tuma RF, Walsh PN.
The kunitz protease inhibitor domain of protease nexin-2 inhibits factor
XIa and murine carotid artery and middle cerebral artery thrombosis.
Blood. 2012;120(3):671-677.
44. van Montfoort ML, Kuijpers MJ, Knaup VL, et al. Factor XI regulates
pathological thrombus formation on acutely ruptured atherosclerotic
plaques. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34(8):1668-1673.
45. Wang X, Smith PL, Hsu MY, et al. Effects of factor XI deficiency on
ferric chloride-induced vena cava thrombosis in mice. J Thromb
Haemost. 2006;4(9):1982-1988.
46. van Montfoort ML, Knaup VL, Marquart JA, et al. Two novel inhibitory
anti-human factor XI antibodies prevent cessation of blood flow in a
murine venous thrombosis model. Thromb Haemost. 2013;110(5):1065-
1073.
47. Renne ´ T, Pozgajova ´ M, Gru ¨ner S, et al. Defective thrombus formation
in mice lacking coagulation factor XII. J Exp Med. 2005;202(2):271-
281.
48. Bird JE, Smith PL, Wang X, et al. Effects of plasma kallikrein
deficiency on haemostasis and thrombosis in mice: murine ortholog of
the Fletcher trait. Thromb Haemost. 2012;107(6):1141-1150.
49. Merkulov S, Zhang WM, Komar AA, et al. Deletion of murine
kininogen gene 1 (mKng1) causes loss of plasma kininogen and delays
thrombosis. Blood. 2008;111(3):1274-1281.
50. Langhauser F, Go ¨b E, Kraft P, et al. Kininogen deficiency protects from
ischemic neurodegeneration in mice by reducing thrombosis, bloodbrain
barrier damage, and inflammation. Blood. 2012;120(19):4082-
4092.
51. Yamashita A, Nishihira K, Kitazawa T, et al. Factor XI contributes to
thrombus propagation on injured neointima of the rabbit iliac artery. J
Thromb Haemost. 2006;4(7):1496-1501.
52. Minnema MC, Friederich PW, Levi M, et al. Enhancement of rabbit
jugular vein thrombolysis by neutralization of factor XI. In vivo
evidence for a role of factor XI as an anti-fibrinolytic factor. J Clin
Invest. 1998;101(1):10-14.
53. Takahashi M, Yamashita A, Moriguchi-Goto S, et al. Inhibition of
factor XI reduces thrombus formation in rabbit jugular vein under
endothelial denudation and/or blood stasis. Thromb Res. 2010;125(5):
464-470.
54. Lazarova TI, Jin L, Rynkiewicz M, et al. Synthesis and in vitro
biological evaluation of aryl boronic acids as potential inhibitors of
factor XIa. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2006;16(19):5022-5027.
55. Buchanan MS, Carroll AR, Wessling D, et al. Clavatadine A, a natural
product with selective recognition and irreversible inhibition of factor
XIa. J Med Chem. 2008;51(12):3583-3587.
56. Ma D, Mizurini DM, Assumpc ¸a ˜o TC, et al. Desmolaris, a novel factor
XIa anticoagulant from the salivary gland of the vampire bat (Desmodus
rotundus) inhibits inflammation and thrombosis in vivo. Blood. 2013;
122(25):4094-4106.
57. Baeriswyl V, Calzavarini S, Gerschheimer C, Diderich P, Angelillo-
Scherrer A, Heinis C. Development of a selective peptide macrocycle
inhibitor of coagulation factor XII toward the generation of a safe
antithrombotic therapy. J Med Chem. 2013;56(9):3742-3746.
58. Woodruff RS, Xu Y, Layzer J, Wu W, Ogletree ML, Sullenger BA.
Inhibiting the intrinsic pathway of coagulation with a factor XII-
targeting RNA aptamer. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11(7):1364-1373.
59. McMullen BA, Fujikawa K, Davie EW. Location of the disulfide bonds
in human coagulation factor XI: the presence of tandem apple domains.
Biochemistry. 1991;30(8):2056-2060.
Hematology 2014 59
( 8.0.0.2542.1738224864 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
