[Link]
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
Aging exacerbates hypertension-induced cerebral
microhemorrhages in mice: role of resveratrol treatment in
vasoprotection
Peter Toth,1,2* Stefano Tarantini,1,3* Zsolt Springo,1,2
Zsuzsanna Tucsek,1 Tripti Gautam,1 Cory B. Giles,1,4,5
Jonathan D. Wren,1,4,5 Akos Koller,2 William E. Sonntag,1,6
Anna Csiszar1,2,3,6 and Zoltan Ungvari1,2,3,6
1Reynolds Oklahoma Center on Aging, Department of Geriatric Medicine,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 975 NE 10th Street,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA
2Department of Pathophysiology and Gerontology and Szentagothai
Research Center, University of Pecs, Szigeti Street 12, 7624, Pecs, Hungary
3Department of Physiology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
975 NE 10th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA
4Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Arthritis & Clinical Immunology
Research Program, 825 Northeast 13th Street, Oklahoma City, OK, USA
5Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, 975 NE 10th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA
6The Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, 975 NE 10th Street, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA
Summary
Recent studies demonstrate that aging exacerbates hypertensioninduced
cognitive decline, but the specific age-related mechanisms
remain elusive. Cerebral microhemorrhages (CMHs) are
associated with rupture of small intracerebral vessels and are
thought to progressively impair neuronal function. To determine
whether aging exacerbates hypertension-induced CMHs young
(3 months) and aged (24 months) mice were treated with angiotensin
II plus L-NAME. We found that the same level of
hypertension leads to significantly earlier onset and increased
incidence of CMHs in aged mice than in young mice, as shown by
neurological examination, gait analysis, and histological assessment
of CMHs in serial brain sections. Hypertension-induced
cerebrovascular oxidative stress and redox-sensitive activation of
matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) were increased in aging.
Treatment of aged mice with resveratrol significantly attenuated
hypertension-induced oxidative stress, inhibited vascular MMP
activation, significantly delayed the onset, and reduced the
incidence of CMHs. Collectively, aging promotes CMHs in mice
likely by exacerbating hypertension-induced oxidative stress and
MMP activation. Therapeutic strategies that reduce microvascular
oxidative stress and MMP activation may be useful for the
prevention of CMHs, protecting neurocognitive function in highrisk
elderly patients.
Key words: arteriole; dementia; microbleed; NADPH oxidase;
oxidative stress; cognitive impairment.
Introduction
Hypertension is one of the most prevalent diseases of aging. ~80% of
elderly patients (≥65 years of age) have systolic hypertension, which has
deleterious effects on the cerebral circulation and the brain. There is
strong clinical evidence that in the elderly hypertension leads to neural
injury and impairs neuronal function, promoting the development of
vascular cognitive impairment (VCI) (Gorelick et al., 2011) and gait
dysfunction (de Laat et al., 2011). Experimental studies extend the
clinical findings demonstrating that similar levels of hypertension result in
more significant cognitive decline in aged mice, as compared to young
mice (Csiszar et al., 2013; Toth et al., 2013b). The negative impact of
hypertension on CNS function is due to pathological alterations of both
the large cerebral arteries and the cerebral microvessels. While the
deleterious effects of hypertension of large vessel atherosclerosis and
development of debilitating strokes are well documented (Rajan et al.,
2014), the microvascular mechanisms by which aging exacerbates
hypertension-induced neuronal dysfunction are less understood.
Recent studies suggest that in addition to causing blood–brain barrier
disruption, microvascular rarefaction and neurovascular uncoupling (Kazamaet al., 2004; Girouardet al., 2007; Tothet al., 2013b) hypertension
also promotes cerebral microhemorrhages (Wakisaka et al., 2010a,b)
(CMHs;<5 mm in diameter). Cerebral microhemorrhages, also known as
cerebral microbleeds, are associated with rupture of small intracerebral
vessels and are thought to progressively impair neuronal function (Poels
et al., 2012; Lei et al., 2013). Recent evidence suggests that CMHs also
contribute to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Yates et al.,
2011) and may explain the increased risk and severity of AD in
hypertension (Guo et al., 2001). Moreover, the presence of CMHs is an
independent risk factor for subsequent large-sized hemorrhages (Bokura
et al., 2011). The pathogenesis of CMHs was shown to involve weakening
of the vessel wall by oxidative stress-dependent activation of matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) (Wakisakaet al., 2010a,b).Despite the clinical
importance of CMHs (Fisher et al., 2010), the causal link among aging,
hypertension, and CMH incidence and age-related changes in redoxregulated
vascular MMP activation are not well understood and there are
no effective treatments available for prevention.
This study was designed to test the hypothesis that aging promotes
the development of CMHs by exacerbating hypertension-induced
oxidative stress and redox-sensitive activation of MMPs in the cerebrovasculature.
A prediction based on this hypothesis is that pharmacological
treatments that attenuate vascular oxidative stress should prevent/
delay development of CMHs in aging. To test our hypotheses, we
induced hypertension in young and aged mice (by treatment with
angiotensin II (Ang II)) and L-NAME (Nx-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester
hydrochloride, inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase) and compared the
Correspondence
Zoltan Ungvari MD, PhD, Reynolds Oklahoma Center on Aging, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 975 NE 10th Street, BRC 1311, Oklahoma City,
73104 OK, USA. Tel.: +1 (405) 271 7611; fax: +1 (405) 271 2298;
e-mail: zoltan-ungvari@ouhsc.edu
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Accepted for publication 17 December 2014
400 ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use,
distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Aging Cell (2015) 14, pp400–408 Doi:10.1111/acel.12315
Aging Cell
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1645971562)
incidence, size, and localization of CMHs. To elucidate the mechanisms
contributing to age-related changes in CMH incidence, hypertensioninduced
vascular ROS production and MMP activation were assessed.
We also tested the protective effects of treatment with resveratrol,
which is known to significantly attenuate vascular oxidative stress in
aging (Pearson et al., 2008; Ungvari et al., 2009, 2010; Csiszar et al.,
2012).
Results
Aging exacerbates hypertension-induced spontaneous CMHs
in mice: prevention by resveratrol treatment
Blood pressure was significantly increased in both young and aged mice
treated with Ang II plus L-NAME, as shown in Fig. 1A. Resveratrol
treatment did not significantly affect blood pressure (Fig. 1A). We found
that during the experimental period, 26% of hypertensive young mice
showed clinically manifest signs of intracerebral hemorrhage (as assessed
by neurological examination). In contrast, 93% of hypertensive aged
mice developed signs of intracerebral hemorrhage during the experimental
period, which manifested significantly earlier than those in
young mice (average time to occurrence: 4.0 0.3 and 7.2 0.2 days
postinduction of hypertension; P < 0.01; Fig. 1B). Resveratrol treatment
significantly decreased the incidence of clinically manifest intracerebral
hemorrhages in aged hypertensive mice (to 30%) and delayed their
occurrence (average time to occurrence: 5 0.5 days postinduction of
hypertension; P < 0.01 vs. untreated). The difference between the
cumulative incidence curves is statistically highly significant (P < 0.0001
hypertensive aged vs. hypertensive young mice, P < 0.001 hypertensive
aged vs. resveratrol-treated hypertensive aged mice; Mantel–Cox logrank
test).
Histological analysis confirmed that all mice with signs of intracerebral
hemorrhage developed multiple CMHs that were distributed widely in
the brain (Fig. 1J) and varied in appearance (representative images of
confluent and patchy CMHs are shown in Fig. 1D–F). When the cerebral
vessels associated with the CMHs were clearly distinguishable, their
internal diameter was found to be in the range of ~10–20 lm (Fig. 1C).
No normotensive mice developed neurological signs of hemorrhages or
histologically detectable CMHs (data not shown). In hypertensive young
mice showing signs of intracerebral hemorrhage, only a few CMHs were
found, whereas the same level of hypertension in aged mice resulted in a
significantly increased number of CMHs (Fig. 1G). Resveratrol treatment
not only delayed the occurrence of signs of intracerebral hemorrhage
but also significantly reduced the number of CMHs in the brain of
hypertensive aged mice (Fig. 1B,G). The volume distribution of CMHs is
shown in Fig. 1I. Aging predominantly increased smaller CMHs. As
shown in Fig. 1J, in hypertensive aged mice, there were more CMHs
predominantly in cerebral cortex and brainstem than in hypertensive
young mice. The number of CMHs in the thalamus also tended to
increase in hypertensive aged mice, although the difference did not
reach statistical significance. Resveratrol treatment in hypertensive aged
mice significantly reduced the number of CMHs in cerebral cortex,
thalamus, and brainstem (Fig. 1J).
Increased incidence of CMHs is associated with early gait
dysfunction in hypertensive aged mice: prevention by
resveratrol treatment
Figure 2A shows that early and progressive dysfunction of gait coordination
in hypertensive aged mice can be detected before the onset of
signs of intracerebral hemorrhage detectable by standardized neurological
examination. Decline in the regularity index between the day before
induction of hypertension and the day before the onset of clinically
detectable hemorrhage in hypertensive aged mice was significant
(Fig. 2A, inset), validating the concept that description of motor function
status (including deficit in interlimb coordination and temporal asymmetry
) by computerized gait analysis can predict the occurrence of
CMHs. For cross-sectional studies, a cohort of animals, which had not yet
shown clinical signs of hemorrhage, was sacrificed on day 5 postinduction
of hypertension. We found that the regularity index was similar in
normotensive young and aged mice, whereas aging exacerbated
hypertension-induced decline in gait function (Fig. 2).
Aging exacerbates hypertension-induced vascular oxidative
stress: prevention by resveratrol treatment
We performed an implicit relationship analysis of entities (relevant
vascular pathologies, genes, etc.) within the published literature to
identify potential pressure-induced factors involved in cerebrovascular
fragility and development of CMHs in aging using the IRIDESCENT text
mining package (Wren & Garner, 2004). This analysis confirmed the
conclusions based on the results of previous experimental studies in
mouse models of intracerebral hemorrhage (Wakisaka et al., 2010a,b),
identifying oxidative stress and MMP activation as important factors
potentially associated with CMHs in aging. Because previous studies
showed that high intraluminal pressure, via increased wall tensiondependent
cellular stretch, is the primary stimulus for increased vascular
ROS production in hypertension (Ungvari et al., 2003), we compared
pressure-induced production of ROS in cerebral arteries isolated from
young and aged mice. We used the redox-sensitive dye dihydroethidium
(DHE) to examine pressure-induced production of O
2
. in mouse
cerebral arteries. We found that nuclear DHE fluorescence (Fig. 3A,B)
was significantly stronger in arteries exposed to high pressure as
compared to vessels of the same animals exposed to 60 mmHg,
indicating that high pressure increases ROS production in the cerebral
arteries. Our recent studies demonstrate that increased ROS production
within the smooth muscle cells contributes significantly to high pressureinduced
vascular oxidative stress in aging (Springo et al., 2014).
Comparison of vessels isolated from aged mice to vessels isolated from
young mice showed that aging significantly increases high pressureinduced
ROS production in cerebral arteries (Fig. 3A,B). High pressureinduced
vascular ROS production was significantly attenuated by the coadministration
of the NADPH oxidase inhibitor apocynin and the
mitochondrial ROS scavenger mitoTEMPO (Fig. 3A,B). 3-nitrotyrosine
(3-NT) content in the cerebral cortex was significantly elevated in
hypertensive aged mice (Fig. 3C) consistent with the exacerbation of
hypertension-induced oxidative/nitrosative stress in the aged brain.
Resveratrol treatment significantly reduced 3-NT content in the cortex of
hypertensive aged mice (Fig. 3C). These results support the concept that
antioxidative effects of resveratrol play a central role in its microvascular
protective effects in aging.
NADPH oxidases are important sources of ROS in the cerebral
vasculature, whose increased expression and activity contribute to
hypertension-induced vascular oxidative stress (Girouard et al., 2006)
(Fig. 3A,B). We found that in isolated cerebral vessels (Fig. 3D–F) and
cortical samples (data not shown) of hypertensive aged mice, mRNA
expression of the NADPH oxidase subunits Nox2, Nox4, and Ncf1 was
upregulated compared to hypertensive young mice. Treatment of aged
mice with resveratrol resulted in significant downregulation of these
NADPH oxidase subunits (Fig. 3D–F).
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 401
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(8.0.0.2542,1039543771 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
Aging exacerbates hypertension-induced MMP activation:
prevention by resveratrol treatment
Redox-sensitive activation of MMPs is thought to play a central role in
the pathogenesis of CMHs (Wakisaka et al., 2010a,b). Because previous
studies showed that high intraluminal pressure is the primary stimulus for
upregulation of vascular MMPs (Lehoux et al., 2004), we compared
pressure-induced MMP activation in cerebral arteries isolated from
young and aged mice using the MMPsense 645 FAST substrate. We
found that in young vessels, high pressure did not have any significant
(A) (B) (C)
(D)
(H)
(J) (I)
(E) (F)
(G)
Fig. 1 Aging exacerbates hypertension (HT)-induced spontaneous cerebral microhemorrhages (CMHs) in mice: prevention by resveratrol treatment. Shown are (A) the
effect of treatment with angiotensin II plus L-NAME (HT groups) on systolic blood pressure and (B) the incidence of neurological signs of intracerebral hemorrhage in young
(3 months, n = 20), aged (24 months, n = 20), and resveratrol-treated aged (n = 20) C57BL/6 mice. Data are mean  SEM (n = 20 for each group). *P < 0.05 vs. Young,
#P < 0.05 vs. Aged. (C): Representative image of a CMH stained by diaminobenzidine (scale bar = 200 lm). Black arrow points to a cerebral intraparenchymal arteriole in
close proximity to the hemorrhage. (D–F): Representative images of patchy CMHs of different sizes (scale bar = 100 lm). (G): Total number of CMHs throughout the entire
brain of young, aged, and resveratrol-treated aged mice. Data are mean  SEM. *P < 0.05 vs. Young, #P < 0.05 vs. Aged (n = 20 in each group). Panel H illustrates the
reconstruction of the volume of a confluent CMH (see Methods). (I): The distribution of CMHs by size and by location (J) in each experimental group. Note that aging
increases the number of small CMHs predominantly in the cortex and brain stem, whereas resveratrol treatment in aged mice significantly reduces CMH incidence. Data are
mean  SEM. *P < 0.05 vs. Young, #P < 0.05 vs. Aged (n = 20 in each group).
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 402
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
effect on MMP activity (Fig. 4A,B). In contrast, MMP activity was
substantially increased in high pressure-exposed arteries of aged mice as
compared to vessels of the same animals exposed to 60 mmHg (Fig. 4A,
B) indicating that aging exacerbates high pressure-induced MMP
activation in cerebral vessels (Fig. 4B). High pressure-induced vascular
MMP activation was significantly attenuated by the co-administration of
the NADPH oxidase inhibitor apocynin and the mitochondrial ROS
scavenger mitoTEMPO (Fig. 4B).
To substantiate our findings, vascular MMP activity was also
compared in hypertensive young and aged mice byin vivoadministration
(B) (A)
Fig. 2 Increased incidence of cerebral microhemorrhages (CMHs) is associated with early gait dysfunction in hypertensive aged mice: prevention by resveratrol treatment.
Panel A shows that dysfunction of gait coordination (indicated by changes in the regulatory index) is manifested before the onset of signs of intracerebral hemorrhage
detectable by standard neurological examination. Regularity index is a measure of interpaw coordination. In healthy, fully coordinated animals, its value is 100%. Inset:
significant decline in the regularity index between the day before induction of hypertension and the day before the onset of clinically detectable hemorrhage (S-1) in
hypertensive aged mice. Data are mean  SEM.*P < 0.05 vs. Day baseline. (n = 20). B: Data from cross-sectional studies. Shown are changes in regularity index induced by
treatment with angiotensin II plus L-NAME (HT groups) in young (3 months, n = 20), aged (24 months, n = 20), and resveratrol-treated aged (n = 20) C57BL/6 mice on day
5 postinduction of hypertension. Note that aging exacerbates hypertension-induced decline in the regulatory, which is reversed by resveratrol treatment. Data are
mean  SEM. *P < 0.05 vs. Young, #P < 0.05 vs. aged, &P < 0.05 vs. Young HT, $P < 0.05 vs. Aged HT (n = 20 in each group).
(A)
(C) (D) (E) (F)
(B)
Fig. 3 Aging exacerbates hypertension-induced vascular oxidative stress. A: Representative confocal images showing stronger dihydroethidium (DHE) staining (red
fluorescence) indicating increased O
2
. production in high pressure-exposed MCAs isolated from aged mice as compared to MCAs isolated from young mice. MCAs were
pressurized at 60 and 160 mmHg for 6 h. Note that high pressure-induced oxidative stress in aged MCAs was significantly attenuated by the NADPH oxidase inhibitor
apocynin and the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant mitoTEMPO. Green autofluorescence is shown for orientation purposes (original magnification: 209, scale bar:
100 lm). Bar graphs (B) are summary data. Data are means SEM (n = 6 in each group). *P < 0.05. vs. Young (160 mmHg),#P < 0.05 vs. Aged (160 mmHg). C: Cortical
3-nitrotyrosine content in hypertensive (HT) young, aged, and resveratrol-treated aged mice (n = 6 in each group). Data are mean  SEM. *P < 0.05 vs. Young HT,
#P < 0.05 vs. Aged HT. D, E, and F show hypertension-induced mRNA expression of NADPH oxidase subunits Nox2, Nox4, and Ncf1 in cerebral arteries of young, aged, and
resveratrol-treated aged mice. Data are mean  SEM (n = 6 in each group). *P < 0.05 vs. Young HT, #P < 0.05 vs. Aged HT.
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 403
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
of the MMPsense 645 FAST substrate. Activity of MMP-9 was barely
detectable by confocal microscopy in normotensive young mice and was
not increased significantly by hypertension. Representative images,
shown in Fig. 4C, illustrate that in hypertensive aged mice, there was
strong MMP activity (indicated by the presence of the fluorescent
product of the MMPsense 645 FAST substrate) localized mainly to the
media of small intracerebral arteries (identified by the intraluminal FITC-
dextran fluorescence). No significant MMP 645 FAST fluorescence was
observed in the brain parenchyma. For quantification purposes, a plate
reader-based method was used. We found that in young mice,
hypertension did not have any significant effect on MMP activity
(Fig. 4D). In contrast, MMP activity was substantially increased in
hypertensive aged mice, which was inhibited by resveratrol treatment
(Fig. 4D).
Discussion
This is the first study to demonstrate that in aged mice, the same level of
hypertension leads to significantly earlier onset and increased incidence
of intracerebral hemorrhages, as compared to young mice (Fig. 1).
Importantly, aging predominantly increased the incidence of small
CMHs, suggesting that aging renders small cerebral vessels significantly
more vulnerable to high pressure-induced rupture. These results are in
agreement with the available clinical evidence suggesting that hypertension
almost exclusively increases CMHs at an old age (Romero et al.,
2014). In humans, CMHs are an important mechanism for cognitive
impairment (Seo et al., 2007) and their increased prevalence and
incidence in aging are consistent with the documented age-related
exacerbation of hypertension-induced cognitive decline in humans and
laboratory animals (Csiszar et al., 2013; Toth et al., 2013b).
There are many similarities between CMHs observed in mice and
humans, including the relative size of the bleedings, the clinical
symptoms, and the progressive nature of the pathological process. Of
note, in the mouse model, CMHs were observed frequently in the cortex
(Fig. 1J), whereas in humans, CMHs are often located in basal ganglia or
subcortical white matter. The causes responsible for anatomic predilections
for CMHs are presently not well understood and likely involve
differences in the branching patterns of the cerebral arteries and
pressure distribution along the microvascular network.
As small numbers of CMHs are likely difficult to detect with classical
neurological examination until their aggregate volume reaches a critical
level, we established a novel method to detect subtle neuronal
dysfunction by analyzing gait function of mice. We found that in
hypertensive aged mice, impaired gait function was manifested before
other neurological assessments became positive and that it was a
sensitive predictor of CMHs, which manifested significantly earlier than
(A) (B)
(D) (C)
Fig. 4 Aging exacerbates hypertension-induced redox-sensitive matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) activation. Representative compressed Z stacks of confocal images of
MCAs showing stronger MMPsense 645 FAST fluorescence (red) in high pressure-exposed MCAs isolated from aged mice as compared to MCAs isolated from young mice,
indicating increased MMP activation. MCAs were pressurized at 60 and 160 mmHg for 6 h. MMPsense 645 FAST becomes fluorescent upon cleavage by activated MMPs.
Note that high pressure-induced MMP activation in aged MCAs was significantly attenuated by the NADPH oxidase inhibitor apocynin and the mitochondria-targeted
antioxidant mitoTEMPO (original magnification: 209, scale bar: 100 lm). Bar graphs (B) are summary data. Data are means SEM (n = 6 in each group). *P < 0.05. vs.
Young (160 mmHg), #P < 0.05 vs. Aged (160 mmHg). (C) Representative confocal image of the cross section of a cerebral intraparenchymal arteriole from an aged
hypertensive mouse injected with the MMPsense 645 FAST substrate (scale bar: 50 lm). Note the strong red fluorescence in the vascular wall indicating increased MMP
activity. Intraluminal FITC-dextran is shown for orientation purposes. L (lumen), M (media), B (brain parenchyma). (D): Hypertension-induced MMP activation assessed using
the MMPsense 645 FAST fluorescent method, in young, aged, and resveratrol-treated aged mice (n = 6 in each group). Data are mean  SEM. *P < 0.05 vs. Young HT,
#P < 0.05 vs. Aged HT.
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 404
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
in young mice (Fig. 2). Importantly, CMHs have been shown to be
associated with gait dysfunction in humans, as well (Choi et al., 2012).
The age-related mechanisms responsible for increased susceptibility
of the cerebral circulation to hypertension-induced rupture are likely
multifaceted. Previous studies suggest a central role for oxidative stress
and redox-sensitive activation of MMPs in the pathogenesis of CMHs,
which are known to degrade components of the basal lamina and
extracellular matrix, weakening the vascular wall (Wakisaka et al., 2008,
2010a). Although age-related exacerbation of hypertension-induced
cerebrovascular ROS production (Fig. 3) and MMP activation (Fig. 4)
likely importantly contributed to the increased fragility of aged cerebral
arteries, further studies are evidently needed to establish a direct causal
link between MMP activation and the development of CMHs in the aged
brain. Increased MMP activation is likely a downstream consequence of
increased hypertension-induced oxidative stress (Wakisaka et al.,
2010b), as it can be significantly attenuated by combined inhibition of
NOX oxidases and mitochondrial ROS generation (Fig 4A,B). Future
studies should determine whether inhibition of ROS synthesis by these
sources by genetic or pharmacological means can prevent development
of CMHs in aging.
Because high pressure itself appears to be the main stimulus for
increased vascular ROS production (Fig. 3A,B) and MMP activation
(Fig. 4A,B) in aging, it is likely that penetration of increased arterial
pressure to the vulnerable distal portion of the cerebral microcirculation
is a key factor in the development of CMHs in aging. In that regard, it is
significant that hypertension in aging is associated with autoregulatory
dysfunction and impaired myogenic adaptation of the cerebral resistance
arteries to high pressure (Toth et al., 2013a,b), which likely allows
sudden increases in blood pressure (e.g., during Valsalva maneuver) to
cause damage to the thin-walled vessels in the brain. This effect is likely
exacerbated by deficiency of NO, which amplifies the effect of
angiotensin II and significantly increases the stiffness of the conduit
arteries (Hu et al., 1997; Gao et al., 2014) impairing Windkessel
function (normally large arteries arising from the heart function as an
elastic reservoir: by distending during systole and recoiling during
diastole, they dampen the fluctuation in blood pressure). This leads to
increasing pulse pressure and promotes penetration of the pressure
wave into the cerebral microcirculation (Tarumi et al., 2014). This
mechanism also provides a likely explanation for the observation that
aging predominantly increases the incidence of smaller CMHs.
Based on the documented association between oxidative stress and
CMHs (Wakisaka et al., 2010b), it is predicted that interventional
strategies that attenuate vascular ROS production should prevent CMHs
in aged hypertensive mice. To test this hypothesis, we assessed the effect
of resveratrol, which was previously shown to significantly attenuate
vascular oxidative stress and MMP activity in animal models of aging
(Pearson et al., 2008; Kaneko et al., 2011; Csiszar et al., 2012; Toth
et al., 2014). In support of our hypothesis, we found that resveratrol
treatment prevented/delayed the development of hypertension-induced
CMHs in aged mice (Fig 1), which was associated with preserved gait
function (Fig. 2). We attribute the protective effects of resveratrol to its
ability to attenuate hypertension-induced oxidative stress (Fig. 3) and,
consequentially, MMP activation (Fig. 4) in aged mice.
The cellular mechanisms by which resveratrol attenuates hypertension-induced
vascular oxidative stress in aging are likely multifaceted.
Hypertension in aging both upregulates NOX oxidases (Fig. 3D–F) and
increases mitochondrial ROS production (Dikalov & Ungvari, 2013). Thus,
it is significant that resveratrol treatment results in a significant
downregulation of NOX oxidases contributing to both cytoplasmic and
mitochondrial oxidative stress (Nox1 and Nox4, respectively; Fig. 3D,E)
(Pearson et al., 2008; Dai et al., 2012; Toth et al., 2014). In addition,
resveratrol was shown to effectively inhibit NOX activation (Zarzuelo
et al., 2013), attenuate mitochondrial ROS production (Ungvari et al.,
2009; Csiszar et al., 2012), and activate Nrf2-dependent antioxidant
mechanisms (Ungvari et al., 2010), which may also contribute to its
antioxidative effects in aged hypertensive mice. Our findings have
important clinical relevance. In humans, resveratrol is well-tolerated with
no reports of significant toxicity (Baur et al., 2012). Although the
bioavailability of resveratrol in parenchymal tissues is relatively low, the
vasculature, which is in direct contact with blood, is considered an ideal
target for circulating resveratrol and its active metabolites (Baur et al.,
2012). It is likely that protective effects of resveratrol against CMHs,
combined with its documented efficacy to improve neurovascular
coupling (Toth et al., 2014) and cerebromicrovascular density (Oomen
et al., 2009), will exert beneficial neurocognitive effects in aging,
especially when hypertension is also present. Further studies are
warranted to test this possibility.
In conclusion, the results of this study show that aging exacerbates
hypertension-induced CMHs in a mouse model that recapitulates
cerebromicrovascular alterations present in elderly humans. When
viewed within the broader context of prior studies, the findings
presented herein suggest that aging exacerbates hypertension-induced
production of ROS and activation of MMPs in the wall of cerebral vessels,
which likely renders them more vulnerable to high pressure-induced
rupture. Further, this is the first study to demonstrate that accumulation
of CMHs in aged mice is associated with impaired gait function, which
may be used to assess treatment efficiency. A third interesting aspect of
this study is that resveratrol treatment confers significant protective
effects against the development of CMHs in the animal model of aging
used. This observation suggests the interesting possibility that it may be
possible to develop therapeutic strategies that specifically disrupt
pressure-induced ROS production and MMP activation for prevention
of CMHs in a high-risk elderly population. As CMHs affect ~ 36% of
older individuals, future preclinical and translational studies are warranted
to address this important question.
Experimental procedures
All procedures were approved by and followed the guidelines of the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of OUHSC in accordance
with the ARRIVE guidelines.
Animals
Young (3 months, n = 40) and aged (24 months, n = 80) male C57BL/6
mice were purchased from the aging colony maintained by the National
Institute on Aging at Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA, USA).
Animals were housed under specific pathogen-free barrier conditions in
the Rodent Barrier Facility at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center under a controlled photoperiod (12 h light; 12 h dark) with
unlimited access to water.
Induction of spontaneous intracerebral microhemorrhages
and resveratrol treatment
To study spontaneous intracerebral microhemorrhages, we have used a
mouse model previously characterized by the Heistad laboratory
(Wakisaka et al., 2010a,b): mice with hypertension induced by combined
treatment with angiotensin II (Ang II) andx-nitro-L-arginine methyl
ester (L-NAME). As aging is associated with increased activity of the
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 405
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1990252520)
vascular renin–angiotensin system and Ang II-dependent hypertension is
common among older individuals (Wang et al., 2010), Ang II-dependent
hypertension is a clinically highly relevant model to study age-dependent
cerebrovascular alterations (Toth et al., 2013b). In brief, mice in each
age cohort were assigned to two groups: control animals receiving
vehicle and animals receiving Ang II (1000 ng min1 kg1 in sterile
saline, via subcutaneously implanted osmotic minipumps (Toth et al.,
2013a,b) plus the NO synthase inhibitor L-NAME (100 mg kg1 day1,
in drinking water). Alzet mini-osmotic pumps (Durect Co, Cupertino, CA,
USA) were filled either with saline vehicle or solutions of Ang II (Sigma
Chemical Co., St. Louis, Missouri, USA) and were placed into the
subcutaneous space of ketamine/xylazine anesthetized mice through a
small incision in the back of the neck that was closed with surgical
sutures. All incision sites healed rapidly without the need for any
medication.
In a subgroup of aged mice, treatment with resveratrol (200 mg
kg1 day1, p.o.) (Toth et al., 2014) was started 10 days prior to
induction of hypertension with Ang II plus L-NAME and was continued
throughout the whole experimental period. Blood pressure of the
animals was recorded before the treatment and every second day during
the treatment period by the tail cuff method, as described (Toth et al.,
2013a,b). The first cohort of animals was closely monitored, and mice
were sacrificed upon the occurrence of clinical signs of intracerebral
hemorrhages. For cross-sectional studies, a second cohort of animals
was sacrificed on day 5 postinduction of hypertension.
Standardized neurological examination of mice
To assess the occurrence of clinically manifest intracerebral hemorrhages
, neurological examination was carried out twice a day including
assessment of animals’ spontaneous activity, symmetry in the movement
of the four limbs, forelimb outstretching, climbing ability, body
proprioception, and response to vibrissae touch. Each examined animal
was provided with a daily score calculated by the summation of all six
individual test scores. The minimum neurological score was 3 and the
maximum 18. When a consistent decline in the neurological score was
observed or at day 10th of the study, mice were euthanized by CO
2
asphyxiation.
Analysis of gait function
Gait coordination was examined by the CatWalk System (Noldus
Information Technology Inc. Leesburg, VA, USA). Using the CatWalk
system, the detection of paw prints’ size, pressure, and pattern during
volunteer running on an illuminated glass walkway by a camera placed
under the glass surface provides an automated computerized way to
assess gait function and the spatial and temporal aspects of interlimb
coordination (Hamers et al., 2006). Briefly, animals were trained to
cross the walkway and then, in a dark room, had 3 consecutive runs
every day in the instrument throughout the experimental period. Data
were averaged across 3 runs in which the animal maintained a
constant speed across the walkway. After manual identification and
labeling of each footprint, the regularity index was calculated. The
regularity index (%) is a fractional measure of interpaw coordination,
which expresses the number of normal step sequence patterns relative
to the total number of paw placements. The formula of regularity
index is as follows: NSSPx4/PP9 100 (%), where NSSP represents the
number of normal step sequence patterns and PP the total number of
paw placements. In healthy, fully coordinated animals, its value is
100%.
Histological analysis of intracerebral hemorrhages
MicewereeuthanizedandtranscardiallyperfusedwithheparinizedPBSfor
5 min anddecapitated.Subsequently,thebrainswereisolatedand fixedin
10% formalin at room temperature for 1 day. The next day, the brains
were placed in fresh 10% formalin (at 4 °C, for 2 days), then in 70%
ethanol (at 4 °C, for 2 days), followed by embedding in paraffin. The
brains were serially sectioned at 8 lm thickness yielding approximately
1500 sections per brain. The first two sections of every five section were
stained with hematoxylin to reveal the brain structure and diaminobenzidine
(DAB) to highlight the presence of hemorrhages. DAB turns into dark
brown when it undergoes a reaction with peroxidases present in red blood
cells therefore allowing precise detection of extravasated blood cells in the
parenchyma of the brain. All stained sections were screened, and images
were acquired in the evidence of a positive DAB reaction. Digital images
were analyzed with IMAGEJ software (NIH) to identify the location and
quantify the number and size of hemorrhages. The size of hemorrhages
was estimated as follows: (area (mm2) of CMHs on each section
)9 (259 103 (mm): distance between successive sections).
Implicit relationship analysis
To predictfactors associated with vascular fragility and CMHs, we used the
IRIDESCENT (Wren & Garner, 2004) text mining package. IRIDESCENT’s
2014 database contains 615 553 recognized terms and phrases obtained
from public databases (OMIM, Entrez Gene, Gene Ontology, ChemID,
FDA approved drugs, and Disease Ontology terms). IRIDESCENT processed
over 24 million MEDLINE records to identify co-occurrences of these terms
within PubMed titles and abstracts. This creates a network of concepts,
weighted by their frequency of co-occurrence. Concepts such as ‘vascular
fragility’, which includes synonymous concepts such as ‘microhemorrhages
’, can then be analyzed for other concepts that share a statistically
significant number of co-occurring concepts in the literature. This enables
related concepts to be ranked on the basis of the number and weight of
the relationships they share within the literature, whether or not any
published literature exists documenting a connection between the two
(i.e., they are implicit rather than explicit relationships).
Detection of high pressure-induced production of ROS in
isolated cerebral arteries
Two segments of the middle cerebral arteries were isolated from the
brains of young and aged mice, as reported (Toth et al., 2013a,b). The
vessels were mounted onto two glass micropipettes in an organ chamber
in oxygenated (21% O
2
,5%CO
2
, 75% N
2
) Krebs’ buffer (composed of
(in mmol L1): 110.0 NaCl, 5.0 KCl, 2.5 CaCl
2
, 1.0 MgSO
4
, 1.0 KH
2
PO
4
,
5.5 glucose, and 24.0 NaHCO
3
,pH~7.4; at 37 °C) and pressurized to
10 mmHg. Inflow and outflow pressures were controlled and measured
by a pressure servo-control system (Living Systems Instrumentation,
Burlington, VE, USA). The absence of leaks was verified by observing no
changes in intraluminal pressure over 3 min upon turning off the
pressure servo-control system. Then, vessels from the same animals were
pressurized to 60 or 160 mmHg (normal pressure and high pressure
group, respectively) for 4 h. To characterize high pressure-induced
vascular ROS production, at the end of the incubation period, the vessels
were loaded with the redox-sensitive dye DHE (Invitrogen, Carlsbad CA,
USA; 39 106 mol L1; for 30 min) as previously reported (Ungvari
et al., 2003). After loading, the chamber was washed out five times with
warm Krebs buffer, and the vessels were allowed to equilibrate for
another 20 min. In additional experiments, the effect of the NADPH
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 406
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(8.0.0.2542,1100236984 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
oxidase inhibitor apocynin (39 106 mol L1; Cayman Chemicals, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA) and the mitochondria-targeted antioxidant MitoTEMPO
(106 mol L1; Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) on high pressureinduced
ROS production in aged vessels was determined. After the
experimental period, confocal images of the wall of the pressurized
vessels were captured using a Leica SP2 confocal laser scanning
microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). Average
nuclear DHE fluorescence intensities were assessed using the METAMORPH
software (Molecular Devices LLC, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), and values for
each animal in each group were averaged.
Assessment of markers of hypertension-induced oxidative
stress
As a marker of hypertension-induced oxidative/nitrosative stress, 3-NT (a
marker for peroxynitrite action) was assessed in homogenates of cortical
samples using the OxiSelect Protein Nitrotyrosine ELISA Kits (Cell Biolabs,
San Diego, CA, USA), as reported (Toth et al., 2014).
Detection of high pressure-induced activation of MMPs in
isolated cerebral arteries
In separate experiments, pressure-induced MMP activity was measured
in cannulated segments of the middle cerebral arteries. The arteries from
young and aged animals were pressurized to 60 or 160 mmHg in the
presence of MMPsense 645 FAST substrate (PerkinElmer Inc, Boston MA,
USA; 3 lmol L1; at 37 °C, for 6 h, in the dark). This substrate is
normally optically inert. Once it is cleaved, its subunits become excitable
at 649 nm and emit a red signal that can be measured as an indicator of
activity of MMP 2, 3, 7, 9, 12 and 13. After the incubation period, the
vessels were thoroughly rinsed, placed on a glass slide, and imaged with
a Leica SP2 upright confocal microscope. In additional experiments, the
effect of apocynin and mitoTEMPO on high pressure-induced MMP
activation in aged vessels was determined. The detected fluorescence
intensity emitted at 666 nm was measured, corrected for the background
, and normalized to vessel surface area using the METAMORPH
software (Molecular Devices LLC).
Detection of hypertension-induced MMP activation in the
cerebral vessels in situ
Mice from each experimental group were temporarily anesthetized with
ketamine/xylazine and injected retro-orbitally with a 100 lL dose of
40 nmol L1 MMPsense 645 FAST substrate. After 12 h of circulation of
the substrate, animals were transcardially perfused with PBS containing
19heparin and FITC-dextran (to highlight the vascular lumen). Then, the
mice were decapitated and the brains were removed and cut in half.
From the left hemisphere, the frontal cortex containing the photoactive
substrate was isolated and homogenized. To quantify MMP activity, the
background corrected fluorescence (Ex: 649 nm, Em: 666 nm) was
measured spectrophotofluorometrically using a microplate reader and
normalized to tissue weight. The right hemisphere was embedded in
OCT media, and cryosectioned and confocal images of brain areas
containing cross sections of penetrating small arteries were captured.
Quantitative real-time RT–PCR
A quantitative real-time RT–PCR technique was used to analyze mRNA
expression for following genes in cortical samples of mice from each
experimental group: Nox1, Nox2, Nox4, and Ncf1 (p47phox) using a
Strategene MX3000 platform, as previously reported (Toth et al., 2014).
In brief, total RNA was isolated with a Mini RNA Isolation Kit (Zymo
Research, Orange, CA, USA) and was reverse transcribed using
Superscript III RT (Invitrogen). Amplification efficiencies were determined
using a dilution series of a standard vascular sample. Quantification was
performed using the efficiency-corrected DDCq method. The relative
quantities of the reference genes Hprt, Ywhaz, B2 m, and Actb were
determined, and a normalization factor was calculated based on the
geometric mean for internal normalization. Fidelity of the PCR reaction
was determined by melting temperature analysis and visualization of the
product on a 2% agarose gel.
Statistical analysis
Analysis of variance followed by Bonferroni test was used for comparison
of multiple groups. Cumulative incidence of signs of hemorrhage
was evaluated using a Kaplan–Meier test, and the difference among
groups was analyzed by log-rank test (Mantel–Cox). A P value <0.05
was considered statistically significant. Data are expressed as
mean SEM.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by grants from the American Heart Association
(to PT, ST, ZT, AC, and ZU), the National Center for Complementary and
Alternative Medicine (R01-AT006526 to ZU), the National Institute on
Aging (R01-AG038747 to WES, R01-NS056218 to AC and WES, and
1R01AG047879-01 to AC), the Ellison Medical Foundation (to WES), the
Hungarian National Science Research Fund (OTKA) K 108444 and grants:
Developing Competitiveness of Universities in the South Transdanubian
Region, ‘Identification of new biomarkers.’, SROP-4.2.2.A-11/1/KONV-
2012–0017 and ‘Complex examination of neuropeptide.’ SROP-4.2.2.A-
11/1/KONV-2012-0024 to AK and the Arkansas Claude Pepper Older
Americans Independence Center at University of Arkansas Medical
Center (to AC; P30 AG028718).
Funding
No funding information provided.
Conflict of interest
None declared.
Author contribution
PT, ST, AC, CG, JW, AK, WES, and ZU designed research; PT, ST, ZS, AC,
TG, ZT, and CG performed experiments; PT, ST, ZS, AC, CG, JW, and ZU
analyzed data; PT, AC, ST, and ZU wrote the paper.
References
Baur JA, Ungvari Z, Minor RK, Le Couteur DG, de Cabo R (2012) Are sirtuins viable
targets for improving healthspan and lifespan? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 11, 443–
461.
Bokura H, Saika R, Yamaguchi T, Nagai A, Oguro H, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi S
(2011) Microbleeds are associated with subsequent hemorrhagic and ischemic
stroke in healthy elderly individuals. Stroke 42, 1867–1871.
Choi P, Ren M, Phan TG, Callisaya M, Ly JV, Beare R, Chong W, Srikanth V (2012)
Silent infarcts and cerebral microbleeds modify the associations of white matter
lesions with gait and postural stability: population-based study.Stroke43, 1505–
1510.
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 407
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(8.0.0.2542.912965230 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
Csiszar A, Sosnowska D, Wang M, Lakatta EG, Sonntag WE, Ungvari Z (2012) Ageassociated
proinflammatory secretory phenotype in vascular smooth muscle cells
from the non-human primate Macaca mulatta: reversal by resveratrol treatment.
J. Gerontol. A Biol. Sci. Med. Sci. 67, 811–820.
Csiszar A, Tucsek Z, Toth P, Sosnowska D, Gautam T, Koller A, Deak F, Sonntag
WE, Ungvari Z (2013) Synergistic effects of hypertension and aging on cognitive
function and hippocampal expression of genes involved in beta-amyloid
generation and Alzheimer’s disease. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 305,
H1120–H1130.
Dai DF, Rabinovitch PS, Ungvari Z (2012) Mitochondria and cardiovascular aging.
Circ. Res. 110, 1109–1124.
Dikalov SI, Ungvari Z (2013) Role of mitochondrial oxidative stress in hypertension.
Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 305, H1417–H1427.
Fisher M, French S, Ji P, Kim RC (2010) Cerebral microbleeds in the elderly: a
pathological analysis. Stroke 41, 2782–2785.
Gao YZ, Saphirstein RJ, Yamin R, Suki B, Morgan KG (2014) Aging impairs smooth
muscle-mediated regulation of aortic stiffness: a defect in shock absorption
function? Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 307, H1252–H1261.
Girouard H, Park L, Anrather J, Zhou P, Iadecola C (2006) Angiotensin II attenuates
endothelium-dependent responses in the cerebral microcirculation through nox-
2-derived radicals. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 26, 826–832.
Girouard H, Park L, Anrather J, Zhou P, Iadecola C (2007) Cerebrovascular
nitrosative stress mediates neurovascular and endothelial dysfunction induced by
angiotensin II. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 27, 303–309.
Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, Decarli C, Greenberg SM, Iadecola C, Launer LJ,
Laurent S, Lopez OL, Nyenhuis D, Petersen RC, Schneider JA, Tzourio C, Arnett
DK, Bennett DA, Chui HC, Higashida RT, Lindquist R, Nilsson PM, Roman GC,
Sellke FW, Seshadri S, American Heart Association Stroke Council CoE,
Prevention CoCNCoCR, Intervention, Council on Cardiovascular S, Anesthesia
(2011) Vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a
statement for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/
american stroke association. Stroke 42, 2672–2713.
Guo Z, Qiu C, Viitanen M, Fastbom J, Winblad B, Fratiglioni L (2001) Blood pressure
and dementia in persons 75+ years old: 3-year follow-up results from the
Kungsholmen Project. J. Alzheimers Dis. 3, 585–591.
Hamers FP, Koopmans GC, Joosten EA (2006) CatWalk-assisted gait analysis in the
assessment of spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 23, 537–548.
Hu CT, Chang KC, Wu CY, Chen HI (1997) Acute effects of nitric oxide blockade
with L-NAME on arterial haemodynamics in the rat.Br. J. Pharmacol.122, 1237–
1243.
Kaneko H, Anzai T, Morisawa M, Kohno T, Nagai T, Anzai A, Takahashi T, Shimoda
M, Sasaki A, Maekawa Y, Yoshimura K, Aoki H, Tsubota K, Yoshikawa T, Okada
Y, Ogawa S, Fukuda K (2011) Resveratrol prevents the development of
abdominal aortic aneurysm through attenuation of inflammation, oxidative
stress, and neovascularization. Atherosclerosis 217, 350–357.
Kazama K, Anrather J, Zhou P, Girouard H, Frys K, Milner TA, Iadecola C (2004)
Angiotensin II impairs neurovascular coupling in neocortex through NADPH
oxidase-derived radicals. Circ. Res. 95, 1019–1026.
de Laat KF, van den Berg HA, van Norden AG, Gons RA, Olde Rikkert MG, de
Leeuw FE (2011) Microbleeds are independently related to gait disturbances in
elderly individuals with cerebral small vessel disease. Stroke 42, 494–497.
Lehoux S, Lemarie CA, Esposito B, Lijnen HR, Tedgui A (2004) Pressure-induced
matrix metalloproteinase-9 contributes to early hypertensive remodeling. Circulation 109, 1041–1047.
Lei C, Lin S, Tao W, Hao Z, Liu M, Wu B (2013) Association between cerebral
microbleeds and cognitive function: a systematic review. J. Neurol. Neurosurg.
Psychiatry 84, 693–697.
Oomen CA, Farkas E, Roman V, van der Beek EM, Luiten PG, Meerlo P (2009)
Resveratrol preserves cerebrovascular density and cognitive function in aging
mice. Front. Aging Neurosci. 1,4.
Pearson KJ, Baur JA, Lewis KN, Peshkin L, Price NL, Labinskyy N, Swindell WR,
Kamara D, Minor RK, Perez E, Jamieson HA, Zhang Y, Dunn SR, Sharma K,
Pleshko N, Woollett LA, Csiszar A, Ikeno Y, Le Couteur D, Elliott PJ, Becker KG,
Navas P, Ingram DK, Wolf NS, Ungvari Z, Sinclair DA, de Cabo R (2008)
Resveratrol delays age-related deterioration and mimics transcriptional aspects
of dietary restriction without extending life span. Cell Metab. 8, 157–168.
Poels MM, Ikram MA, van der Lugt A, Hofman A, Niessen WJ, Krestin GP, Breteler
MM, Vernooij MW (2012) Cerebral microbleeds are associated with worse
cognitive function: the Rotterdam Scan Study. Neurology 78, 326–333.
Rajan KB, Aggarwal NT, Wilson RS, Everson-Rose SA, Evans DA (2014) Association
of cognitive functioning, incident stroke, and mortality in older adults.Stroke45,
2563–2567.
Romero JR, Preis SR, Beiser A, DeCarli C, Viswanathan A, Martinez-Ramirez S, Kase
CS, Wolf PA, Seshadri S (2014) Risk factors, stroke prevention treatments, and
prevalence of cerebral microbleeds in the Framingham Heart Study. Stroke 45,
1492–1494.
Seo SW, Hwa Lee B, Kim EJ, Chin J, Sun Cho Y, Yoon U, Na DL (2007) Clinical
significance of microbleeds in subcortical vascular dementia. Stroke 38, 1949–
1951.
Springo Z, Tarantini S, Toth P, Tucsek Z, Tarantini S, Koller A, Sonntag WE, Csiszar
A, Ungvari Z (2015) Aging exacerbates pressure-induced mitochondrial oxidative
stress in mouse cerebral arteries. J. Gerontol. Biol. Med. Sci., in press.
Tarumi T, Ayaz Khan M, Liu J, Tseng BY, Parker R, Riley J, Tinajero C, Zhang R
(2014) Cerebral hemodynamics in normal aging: central artery stiffness, wave
reflection, and pressure pulsatility. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 34, 971–978.
Toth P, Csiszar A, Tucsek Z, Sosnowska D, Gautam T, Koller A, Schwartzman ML,
Sonntag WE, Ungvari Z (2013a) Role of 20-HETE, TRPC channels, and BKCa in
dysregulation of pressure-induced Ca2+ signaling and myogenic constriction of
cerebral arteries in aged hypertensive mice. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol.
305, H1698–H1708.
Toth P, Tucsek Z, Sosnowska D, Gautam T, Mitschelen M, Tarantini S, Deak F,
Koller A, Sonntag WE, Csiszar A, Ungvari Z (2013b) Age-related autoregulatory
dysfunction and cerebromicrovascular injury in mice with angiotensin II-induced
hypertension. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33, 1732–1742.
Toth P, Tarantini S, Tucsek Z, Ashpole NM, Sosnowska D, Gautam T, Ballabh P,
Koller A, Sonntag WE, Csiszar A, Ungvari Z (2014) Resveratrol treatment rescues
neurovascular coupling in aged mice: role of improved cerebromicrovascular
endothelial function and downregulation of NADPH oxidase. Am. J. Physiol.
Heart Circ. Physiol. 306, H299–H308.
Ungvari Z, Csiszar A, Huang A, Kaminski PM, Wolin MS, Koller A (2003) High
pressure induces superoxide production in isolated arteries via protein kinase C-
dependent activation of NAD(P)H oxidase. Circulation 108, 1253–1258.
Ungvari Z, Labinskyy N, Mukhopadhyay P, Pinto JT, Bagi Z, Ballabh P, Zhang C,
Pacher P, Csiszar A (2009) Resveratrol attenuates mitochondrial oxidative stress
in coronary arterial endothelial cells. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 297,
H1876–H1881.
Ungvari Z, Bagi Z, Feher A, Recchia FA, Sonntag WE, Pearson K, de Cabo R, Csiszar
A (2010) Resveratrol confers endothelial protection via activation of the
antioxidant transcription factor Nrf2. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 299,
H18–H24.
Wakisaka Y, Miller JD, Chu Y, Baumbach GL, Wilson S, Faraci FM, Sigmund CD,
Heistad DD (2008) Oxidative stress through activation of NAD(P)H oxidase in
hypertensive mice with spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 28, 1175–1185.
Wakisaka Y, Chu Y, Miller JD, Rosenberg GA, Heistad DD (2010a) Critical role for
copper/zinc-superoxide dismutase in preventing spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage
during acute and chronic hypertension in mice. Stroke41, 790–797.
Wakisaka Y, Chu Y, Miller JD, Rosenberg GA, Heistad DD (2010b) Spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage during acute and chronic hypertension in mice. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30,56 –69.
Wang M, Khazan B, Lakatta EG (2010) Central arterial aging and angiotensin II
signaling. Curr Hypertens Rev 6, 266–281.
Wren JD, Garner HR (2004) Shared relationship analysis: ranking set cohesion and
commonalities within a literature-derived relationship network. Bioinformatics
20, 191–198.
Yates PA, Sirisriro R, Villemagne VL, Farquharson S, Masters CL, Rowe CC (2011)
Cerebral microhemorrhage and brain beta-amyloid in aging and Alzheimer
disease. Neurology 77,48 –54.
Zarzuelo MJ, Lopez-Sepulveda R, Sanchez M, Romero M, Gomez-Guzman M,
Ungvary Z, Perez-Vizcaino F, Jimenez R, Duarte J (2013) SIRT1 inhibits NADPH
oxidase activation and protects endothelial function in the rat aorta: implications
for vascular aging. Biochem. Pharmacol. 85, 1288–1296.
Cerebral microhemorrhages in aging, P. Toth et al. 408
ª 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
