Article

Supply-Demand Mismatch Transients in Susceptible
Peri-infarct Hot Zones Explain the Origins of
Spreading Injury Depolarizations
Highlights

Authors

d

Sensory stimuli, episodic hypoxia, or hypotension trigger
peri-infarct depolarizations

Daniel von Bornstädt, Thijs Houben, ...,
, Cenk Ayata
Sava Sakadzic

d

Mechanism involves transient worsening in O2 supplydemand mismatch in penumbra

Correspondence

In light of the data, clinical management of brain injury may
need to be revisited

In Brief

d

cayata@partners.org

Peri-infarct depolarizations (PIDs) worsen
tissue outcome in stroke. Von Bornstädt
et al. show that somatosensory
activation, and episodic hypoxemia or
hypotension all trigger PIDs by worsening
the oxygen supply-demand mismatch.
Therefore, minimizing sensory
stimulation and hypoxic or hypotensive
transients may be beneficial in acute
brain injury.

von Bornstädt et al., 2015, Neuron 85, 1117–1131
March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.007

Neuron

Article
Supply-Demand Mismatch Transients
in Susceptible Peri-infarct Hot Zones Explain
the Origins of Spreading Injury Depolarizations
Daniel von Bornstädt,1,2,6 Thijs Houben,1,3 Jessica L. Seidel,1 Yi Zheng,1 Ergin Dilekoz,1,4 Tao Qin,1 Nora Sandow,5,6
Sreekanth Kura,7 Katharina Eikermann-Haerter,1 Matthias Endres,2,6,8,9 David A. Boas,7 Michael A. Moskowitz,1
,7 and Cenk Ayata1,12,*
Eng H. Lo,10 Jens P. Dreier,2,6,11 Johannes Woitzik,5,6 Sava Sakad
zic
1Neurovascular Research Laboratory, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 149 13th Street,
6408, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
2Department of Neurology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
3Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2300 RC Leiden, the Netherlands
4Department of Pharmacology, Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Besevler Campus, 06560 Ankara, Turkey
5Department of Neurosurgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany
6Center for Stroke Research, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
7Optics Division, MHG/MIT/HMS Athinoula A Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 149 13th Street, 6408, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
8German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE)
9German Centre for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK)
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
10Neuroprotection Research Laboratory, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 149 13th
Street, 6408, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA
11Department of Experimental Neurology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany
12Stroke Service and Neuroscience Intensive Care Unit, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA
*Correspondence: cayata@partners.org
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.007

SUMMARY
INTRODUCTION

Peri-infarct depolarizations (PIDs) are seemingly
spontaneous spreading depression-like waves
that negatively impact tissue outcome in both experimental and human stroke. Factors triggering
PIDs are unknown. Here, we show that somatosensory activation of peri-infarct cortex triggers
PIDs when the activated cortex is within a critical
range of ischemia. We show that the mechanism
involves increased oxygen utilization within the
activated cortex, worsening the supply-demand
mismatch. We support the concept by clinical
data showing that mismatch predisposes stroke
patients to PIDs as well. Conversely, transient
worsening of mismatch by episodic hypoxemia
or hypotension also reproducibly triggers PIDs.
Therefore, PIDs are triggered upon supply-demand
mismatch transients in metastable peri-infarct
hot zones due to increased demand or reduced
supply. Based on the data, we propose that minimizing sensory stimulation and hypoxic or hypotensive transients in stroke and brain injury would
reduce PID incidence and their adverse impact on
outcome.

Peri-infarct spreading depolarization waves (PIDs) akin to
spreading depression frequently occur in ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke and after head trauma in both animal and human
brains (Dohmen et al., 2008; Nedergaard and Astrup, 1986; Nedergaard and Hansen, 1993). It is well established that PIDs
worsen tissue outcome by increasing metabolic demand and
reducing blood flow (mismatch) in already ischemic but viable
penumbra at risk for infarction (Dohmen et al., 2008; Dreier,
2011; Dreier et al., 2006; Eikermann-Haerter et al., 2012; Hartings et al., 2009). Each PID wave expands the infarct core into
the penumbra in a stepwise fashion (Nakamura et al., 2010;
Shin et al., 2006). Clinically, clusters of PIDs have been associated with neurological deterioration in patients (Dreier et al.,
2006). Therefore, PIDs may be a therapeutic target in stroke
and other brain injury states (Lauritzen et al., 2011; Leng et al.,
2011).
Although the electrophysiological characteristics and metabolic and hemodynamic consequences of PIDs have been well
described, triggering factors are unknown. Indeed, PIDs spontaneously originate within the ischemic penumbra in ostensibly
random fashion. In peri-infarct tissue, transmembrane ionic
gradients are preserved, but critically reduced cerebral blood
flow (CBF) and oxygenation and mildly elevated extracellular
potassium concentrations render the tissue highly susceptible
Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1117

Figure 1. Somatosensory Stimulation Triggers PIDs in Stroke
(A) Laser speckle imaging field was positioned over the right hemisphere as shown overlaid on a mouse skull (left). Distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
induced a focal reduction in cerebral blood flow (CBF) in dorsolateral cortex (middle). Blue pixels indicate regions with less than 30% residual CBF after MCAO.
We detected PIDs using the propagating large-amplitude CBF transients on high spatiotemporal resolution full-field images (Movies S1, S2, S3, and S4), as
shown in the representative CBF tracing (right) from ischemic penumbra (yellow square). Global CBF fluctuations also occurred (*), often linked to systemic
transients; these were distinguished from PIDs by lack of propagation on movies.
(B) In control (i.e., non-stimulated) animals, PIDs spontaneously occurred in apparently random fashion throughout the MCAO (green circles). Each horizontal line
represents one animal, and the start and end of each line indicate the time span of imaging.
(C) Light tactile stimulation of the contralesional forepaw and shoulder (red and orange, respectively) triggered a PID within 5 min (yellow circles) with high
incidence (p < 0.001 versus spontaneous PID rate). Inset shows the latency between forepaw or shoulder stimulation onset and PID onset. In contrast, contralesional whisker pad or hindpaw stimulation (light and dark blue, respectively), and ipsilesional stimulation to activate the non-ischemic contralesional
hemisphere (black) did not differ from the spontaneous PID rate in non-stimulated mice. Importantly, somatosensory stimulation did not alter systemic blood
(legend continued on next page)

1118 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

to anoxic depolarization. Such conditions predict metastable
hot zones, tenuously maintaining their membrane potential at
steady-state ischemia. To explain the origins of PID occurrence,
we hypothesized that any sudden worsening in metabolic supply-demand mismatch may transiently tip the balance toward
anoxic depolarization in these hot zones, triggering a PID.
Supply-demand mismatch can be worsened either by decreasing the supply or by increasing the demand for O2. Functional activation of the cortex is one way to stimulate cortical
metabolism and increase O2 demand. We therefore reasoned
that transient cortical activation by tactile somatosensory
stimulation might trigger PIDs and tested this in a pure cortical
distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (dMCAO) model in mice.
We monitored and detected PIDs in real-time using their characteristic propagation patterns on continuous laser speckle perfusion imaging as a sensitive and specific surrogate (EikermannHaerter et al., 2012; Nakamura et al., 2010; Shin et al., 2006,
2007; Strong et al., 2006, 2007; Yuzawa et al., 2012).
RESULTS
Somatosensory Stimulation Triggers PIDs
Transtemporal dMCAO induced a characteristic perfusion deficit
over the dorsolateral cortex (Figure 1B), which partially overlaps
with the primary somatosensory cortex (see below). PIDs (circles) were clearly identified as CBF transients propagating
across the imaging field (Movies S1, S2, S3, and S4). Because
of the apparently random occurrence of spontaneous PIDs,
a probabilistic approach was required to statistically test the
impact of interventions on PID rate (i.e., chance of PID occurrence, incidence). In non-stimulated mice (n = 21), PIDs spontaneously erupted at a rate of 1.6 ± 0.3/hr after dMCAO, distributed
relatively evenly throughout the recording period without a
particular temporal predilection (n = 33 PIDs; Figure 1B, green
circles). The average spontaneous PID incidence was 12%
(8%–16%; 95% CI) within any 5 min period in unstimulated
mice (Figure 1D, green bars). In a separate cohort, we applied
light tactile stimulation manually for 5 min using a cotton tip
applicator over four different anatomical parts (Figure S1, tactile
stimulation sites, related to Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7); stimulation was terminated if a PID occurred sooner (Figure 1C, yellow
circles). Stimulation of the contralesional forepaw to activate
the ischemic hemisphere triggered a PID more than 60% of
the time (Figure 1C, red lines; Figure 1D, red bar). This was 5fold higher than the average spontaneous PID occurrence
rate in any 5 min epoch (Figure 1D, dark green bar). Stimulation
of the upper forelimb and shoulder area (hereon referred to
as ‘‘shoulder’’ in the figures) was equally effective (Figure 1C,

orange lines; Figure 1D, orange bar). The average latency between forepaw or shoulder stimulation onset and PID onset
was only 2.8 ± 0.3 min (Figure 1C, inset). In contrast, PID incidence during whisker pad or hindpaw stimulation was much
lower and did not statistically differ from non-stimulated mice
(Figure 1C, blue lines; Figure 1D, blue bars). The PID occurrence
rate during ipsilesional stimulation to activate the non-ischemic
hemisphere was virtually identical to non-stimulated mice and
thus completely ineffective (Figure 1C, black lines; Figure 1D,
black bar). Electrophysiological recordings in a separate cohort
directly confirmed that CBF transients detected by laser speckle
were indeed associated with extracellular slow potential shifts
characteristic of PIDs (Figure S2, electrophysiological confirmation, related to Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6).
These data showed that tactile somatosensory stimulation
during stroke significantly increases the rate of PID occurrence
temporally coupled to the stimulus. The data also suggested
that PIDs are not triggered simply by a generalized arousal
response to light tactile stimulation, because stimulation of the
ipsilesional side to activate the non-ischemic hemisphere did
not trigger PIDs more than what would be expected from spontaneously occurring PIDs. Indeed, contralesional forepaw and
shoulder stimulations were much more effective in triggering
PIDs compared with whisker pad or hindpaw stimulations, suggesting that the location of cortical representation is important.
Somatosensory Stimulation-Induced PIDs Show Spatial
Specificity
When we examined the spatial origin and propagation patterns
of spontaneous or induced PIDs, we noted two different patterns
(Figure 2A). While more than 80% of all spontaneous and forepaw stimulation-induced PIDs originated from outside the imaging field (Movies S1 and S2), shoulder and upper forelimb
stimulation gave rise to PIDs that originated from within the imaging field more than 80% of the time (Figure 2B; Movie S3). To
better define the spatial relationship of PID origins to primary
somatosensory representations, we electrophysiologically mapped cortical somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs) upon
stimulation of the four body parts referenced to bregma (Figure S1, SSEP mapping, related to Figures 2 and 3). The sites of
PID origin during shoulder and upper forelimb stimulation were
within the stimulated primary somatosensory cortex (S1) (Figure 2C). In other words, light tactile shoulder and upper forelimb
stimulation triggered PIDs within its cortical representation in S1.
A spontaneous or forepaw-induced PID seldom originated within
the imaging field (Figure 2B). Although we do not know the exact
origin of forepaw-induced PIDs (precluded by the optical imaging technique), it is likely to be the secondary somatosensory

pressure (DBP = 1 ± 1 mmHg). Tactile stimulation sites are shown in Figure S1. Electrophysiological confirmation of extracellular slow potential shifts characteristic of PIDs is shown in Figure S2. Entire timelines from all experiments can be found in Figure S4. Data are represented as box-whisker plot (line, median; +,
mean; box, 25%–75% range; whiskers, min-max).
(D) Because tactile stimulation was delivered for 5 min, we quantified the spontaneous PID occurrence rate in non-stimulated mice as average PID incidence
within each 5 min period (i.e., the chance that a PID will occur within any 5 min period). Spontaneous PIDs occurred throughout the MCAO at an average 5 min
incidence of 12% (dark green) without a strong temporal predilection (light green). Contralesional forepaw or shoulder stimulation dramatically increased PID
incidence during the 5 min stimulation period (p < 0.001 versus spontaneous PID rate; c2 test). In contrast, contralesional whisker pad or hindpaw stimulations, or
ipsilesional stimulation (seven forepaw, four shoulder, three hindpaw), did not differ from the spontaneous PID rate in non-stimulated mice. 95% confidence
intervals are indicated above the bars.

Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1119

Figure 2. Somatosensory Stimulation Triggers PIDs within an Activated Hot Zone at a Narrow Critical Range of Ischemia
(A) The location of the perfusion defect (blue) after MCAO in relation to the primary somatosensory cortex (S1), and PID origin and propagation patterns. Because
of the dorsal cortical position of the imaging field (gray shaded area), lateral boundary of the perfusion defect and temporal cortex were poorly visualized. PIDs
originated either outside the imaging field (pattern I) or within (pattern II). PIDs originating outside the imaging field often emerged anteriorly and propagated along
the medial border of the perfusion defect (pattern I; Movie S1); the mirror wave propagating posteriorly along the lateral border probably collided with and was
annihilated by the wave propagating along the medial border and, therefore, it was often not directly visualized (dashed lines; see Movie S2). PIDs that originated
within the imaging field (pattern II) usually did so within the S1 cortex and propagated centrifugally (solid green lines; Movies S3 and S4).
(B) Spontaneous PIDs, and PIDs that coincided with forepaw, whisker, hindpaw, or ipsilesional stimulation predominantly originated outside the imaging field
(pattern I), while shoulder (and upper forelimb) stimulation gave rise to PIDs almost exclusively from a medial focus (pattern II; p < 0.001; c2 test).
(C) Laser speckle contrast image showing the locations of primary (S1) forepaw (Fp, red), shoulder (Sh, orange), whisker (Wh, light blue), and hindpaw (Hp, dark
blue) sensory cortices mapped using evoked potentials (referenced to bregma; see Figure S1 for details). Shoulder and upper forearm stimulation-induced PIDs
(yellow circles) that originated within the imaging field (n = 15) did so exclusively within their S1 representations (shoulder, see Figure S1, orange outlined region).
In nine additional attempts, shoulder stimulation was continued for up to 20 min until a PID occurred. In five of these, a PID occurred (56%), four of which also
originated from within the stimulated S1. Hence, altogether a total of 19 PIDs originated within the shoulder and upper forearm S1 during shoulder and upper
forearm stimulation. Data are represented as mean ± SE.
(D) Residual CBF values within the stimulated whisker (Wh), forepaw (Fp), shoulder (Sh), and hindpaw (Hp) S1 cortex are shown as a measure of ischemic severity
at the onset of stimulation. Only shoulder and upper forearm stimulation triggered PIDs within its S1. We divided the shoulder stimulation attempts based on
(legend continued on next page)

1120 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

cortex (S2) located anterolateral to the ischemic cortex outside
the imaging field (Ullmann et al., 2013; Woolsey and Van der
Loos, 1970).
Among the stimulated body parts, the whisker pad has the
largest cortical representation (i.e., barrel cortex). Because
whisker stimulation did not trigger PIDs more than the spontaneous occurrence, the size of the cortical representation was
not a determining factor. Rather, the location of cortical representation with respect to the perfusion defect appeared to be
important. Whisker barrel cortex was clearly within the severely
ischemic core, and thus unlikely to be activated by tactile stimulation (Figure 2C). We confirmed this by showing that whisker
SSEPs were completely abolished upon dMCAO (Figure S3,
whisker, forepaw and shoulder SSEPs before and after dMCAO,
related to Figures 2 and 3). Conversely, hindpaw S1 was often
outside the perfusion defect and only mildly ischemic, and
therefore, less prone to anoxic depolarization upon transient
worsening of supply-demand mismatch. To determine whether
a critical range of ischemia in activated cortex was required
to predispose tissue to somatosensory-evoked PIDs, we measured residual CBF within each S1 representation during
respective tactile stimulations. Only shoulder stimulation triggered a PID within its representation in S1. We found that PIDs
were triggered from shoulder and upper forelimb S1 when residual CBF within the stimulated cortex was approximately 30%
(27%–32%; 95% CI) (Figure 2D). Shoulder stimulation failed to
trigger a PID when residual CBF was lower or higher than this
narrow range, suggesting that hot zones susceptible to PID induction upon tactile stimulation were within a critical range of
ischemic severity. Residual CBF within forepaw, whisker, and
hindpaw S1 were all either below or above this range, explaining
why stimulation did not trigger a PID in their respective S1
cortices (Figure 2D).
Changes in Perfusion Defect Dynamically Shift
the Hot Zone
We reasoned that if residual CBF defines the hot zones, then we
might be able to convert a previously quiet cortical region (i.e.,
one that did not develop a PID upon stimulation) into a hot
zone by artificially bringing the residual CBF in that region within
the critical range (30%). The perfusion defect in focal cerebral
ischemia is indeed dynamic and shows a tight relationship to
systemic blood pressure (BP). We, therefore, induced hypotension (60 mmHg; Table S1) in a separate cohort of mice during
dMCAO. Hypotension decreased the residual CBF within the
hindpaw S1 to the range identified as the hot zone above.
Remarkably, tactile stimulation of the hindpaw, which did not
trigger any PIDs in normotensive mice, now triggered a PID
nearly 60% of the time in hypotensive mice (Figures 3A and
3B; Movie S4), and all but one PID originated from within the
hindpaw S1 (Figure 3C). The residual CBF within the hindpaw
S1 was 31% (26%–37%; 95% CI) when a PID originated from

the S1 (Figure 3D). In fact, shoulder stimulation no longer triggered a PID in hypotensive mice more than the spontaneous
rate, and the few PIDs that coincided with shoulder stimulation
did not originate from shoulder S1. This was presumably
because the residual CBF within shoulder S1 has dropped below
the critical range in most animals (Figure 3D). These data suggest
that the location of hot zone is indeed determined by residual
perfusion, and as such, can be highly dynamic over time.
Increased O2 Extraction Precedes the PID Onset in
Stimulated Cortex
We next sought to confirm that tactile stimulation increases
oxygen extraction to worsen the supply-demand mismatch as
a prelude to PID induction. Using multispectral reflectance
imaging, we measured cortical oxyhemoglobin (oxyHb) concentrations and hemoglobin oxygen saturation (satHb) within
the shoulder S1 hot zones from which PIDs originated during
light tactile stimulation. Upon dMCAO, oxyHb concentrations
abruptly decreased to 51% ± 3% (±SEM) of pre-ischemic baseline within shoulder and upper forelimb S1. Tactile stimulation of
the shoulder further decreased oxyHb and satHb by another
35%–40% from the pre-stimulus level prior to triggering a PID
within the same region (Figures 4A and 4B). In contrast, tactile
stimulation did not change oxyHb or satHb in other comparably hypoxic penumbral regions of interest that were outside
the shoulder S1 and thus not activated (oxyHb 48% ± 6% of
pre-ischemic baseline). These data suggest that shoulder stimulation increased O2 extraction specifically within its cortical
representation and that the additional metabolic burden triggered anoxic depolarization in this critically hypoperfused hot
zone. It is important to note that in non-ischemic brain, oxyHb
levels increase rather than decrease upon functional activation
as a result of hyperemia (Dunn et al., 2005). Therefore, activation-induced decrease in oxyHb reflects already maximally
dilated vessels and O2 extraction, or impaired neurovascular
coupling, so that any further increase in O2 demand could not
be matched.
Normobaric Hyperoxia Prevents Somatosensory
Stimulation-Induced PIDs
If somatosensory activation of the cortex increased the O2
demand in ischemic penumbra, and worsened the supply-demand mismatch to trigger a PID, we reasoned that improving
oxygenation within the peri-infarct hot zone should diminish local
pO2 drop during cortical activation and reduce the PIDs triggered by sensory stimulation. We, therefore, induced normobaric hyperoxia (NBO; 100% O2 inhalation; arterial pO2 468 ±
39 mmHg), shown previously to significantly increase O2 delivery
to penumbra and rapidly suppress spontaneous PIDs (Shin et al.,
2007), and delivered tactile forepaw stimulation as above.
Consistent with our hypothesis, NBO nearly abolished forepaw
stimulation-induced PIDs (Figures 4C and 4D).

whether a PID was triggered within the activated S1 (filled bar) or not (empty bars). We further subdivided the latter into two groups based on residual CBF above
or below the mean residual CBF in the PID (+) group. PIDs were triggered only when residual CBF in activated S1 was within a narrow range (p < 0.001 versus all
other groups; one-way ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparisons test). Surface artifacts precluded CBF quantification in one shoulder and one
forepaw attempt. Data are represented as box-whisker plot (line, median; +, mean; box, 25%–75% range; whiskers, min-max).

Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1121

Figure 3. Systemic Hypotension Dynamically Shifts the Hot Zone within which Tactile Stimulation Triggers PIDs
(A) In hypotensive mice that did not receive tactile stimulation (i.e., controls), the spontaneous PID rate after dMCAO did not differ from the normotensive group
shown in Figure 1. In contrast to normotensive mice, however, light tactile stimulation of the contralesional hindpaw (dark blue) triggered PIDs within 5 min (yellow
circles) with high incidence, while shoulder and upper forelimb stimulation (orange) did not consistently trigger a PID over the spontaneous rate.
(B) PID occurrence rates (i.e., the chance that a PID will occur within a 5 min period) are shown in non-stimulated (i.e., spontaneous PIDs) and stimulated mice after
dMCAO. Spontaneous PIDs occurred throughout the dMCAO at a rate of 15% (dark green). Contralesional hindpaw stimulation significantly increased PID
incidence during the 5 min stimulation period (p = 0.001 versus spontaneous PID rate; c2 test). 95% confidence intervals are also shown.
(C) All but one hindpaw stimulation-induced PIDs originated from the hindpaw S1, shown superimposed on the S1 map (see Figures 2 and S1 for details).
(D) Residual CBF values within the stimulated shoulder (Sh) and hindpaw (Hp) S1 cortex are shown as a measure of ischemic severity at the onset of stimulation.
We divided the shoulder stimulation attempts based on whether a PID was triggered within the activated S1 (filled bar) or not (empty bars). We further subdivided
the latter into two groups based on residual CBF above or below the mean residual CBF in the PID (+) group. PIDs were triggered only when residual CBF in
activated S1 was within a narrow range (p < 0.001 versus all other Hp groups; one-way ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak’s multiple comparisons test).

Cortical Neuronal Activation Is Required for
Somatosensory Stimulation to Trigger PIDs
To confirm that sensory stimulation-induced PIDs were indeed
triggered by local cortical neuronal activation, we topically
applied tetrodotoxin (TTX, 1 mM) to the shoulder S1 through a
small craniotomy. TTX abolished somatosensory-evoked potentials within 15 min (Figures 5A and 5B). In the dMCAO group with
saline applied over the craniotomy, shoulder stimulation triggered PIDs 67% of the time, all of which originated from within
the shoulder S1 (Figures 5C and 5D). TTX markedly suppressed
shoulder stimulation-induced PIDs to the spontaneous rate
observed in non-stimulated mice (17%; Figures 5C and 5D).
Moreover, both PIDs in the TTX group originated laterally, rather
than within the shoulder S1, suggesting that these were spontaneous PIDs unrelated to the stimulation and that TTX did not
directly inhibit spontaneous PIDs or their propagation into S1.
Since topical TTX application is not a clinically feasible intervention, we also tested whether pharmacological agents in clinical
use can suppress somatosensory stimulation-induced PIDs.
For this, we treated mice systemically with ketamine, a dissocia1122 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

tive anesthetic and glutamate receptor antagonist readily available for use in the intensive care unit and known to suppress
spontaneous PIDs in patients with brain injury (Hertle et al.,
2012; Sakowitz et al., 2009). Ketamine (120 mg/kg, intraperitoneal, 10 min before MCAO) completely prevented PID occurrence during forelimb stimulation (Figures 5C and 5D). In
separate experiments, we also showed that ketamine did not
depress somatosensory-evoked potentials (data not shown) as
reported previously (Kayama and Iwama, 1972).
Transient Dips in O2 Supply Also Trigger PIDs at a
High Rate
Because sensory stimulation-induced PIDs were associated
with a significant drop in regional oxyHb within the activated
cortex as a prelude to the PID, we hypothesized that other
mechanisms that cause transient supply-demand mismatch,
such as systemic hypoxia or hypotension, may also trigger
PIDs. To test this, we induced brief episodes (5 min or less) of
hypoxia by reducing the fraction of oxygen in inspired air. Transient hypoxia was highly effective, triggering PIDs in 63% of all

Figure 4. Somatosensory Stimulation Triggers PIDs by Worsening the Supply-Demand Mismatch in Activated Cortex
(A) Representative tracings obtained by multispectral reflectance imaging show that tactile stimulation of the shoulder area (horizontal orange bar) decreases
oxyHb concentration within the stimulated S1 (red) but not outside (blue). A PID originated within the activated S1 (arrow, yellow circle). Gray shades indicate the
approximate time segments (pre-stimulation baseline and pre-PID, respectively) averaged to calculate the oxygenation changes (DoxyHb and DsatHb) shown in
Figure 4B.
(B) Average oxyHb and satHb changes during tactile stimulation of the shoulder area are shown as box-whisker plots (line, median; +, mean; box, 25%–75%
range; whiskers, min-max range) from within the stimulated S1 (red) and from comparably hypoxic penumbra outside the stimulated S1 (blue). Tactile shoulder
stimulation decreased oxyHb and satHb by approximately 35%–40% in activated S1, whereas no net change occurred in penumbra outside this region (p < 0.01;
paired t test).
(C) Light tactile stimulation of the contralesional forepaw (red lines) for 5 min often induced a PID during the stimulation (yellow circles). In three experiments, we
instituted normobaric hyperoxia (light blue shade) during the second half of the experiment and repeated the forepaw stimulation. In one experiment each, we
either did not institute hyperoxia (time control) or instituted it during the entire experiment. Importantly, in this experimental cohort, normoxic ventilation was
carried out with 70%N2/30%O2 mixture; hyperoxia was instituted by switching the gas mixture to 100% O2. By doing this, we avoided the confounding effects of
changes in N2O concentrations when switching from normoxia to NBO and showed that stimulation-induced PID triggering was not influenced by N2O in other
cohorts.
(D) Contralesional forepaw stimulation triggered a PID half of the time under normoxic conditions. Hyperoxia markedly reduced the PID occurrence rate during
forepaw stimulation (p < 0.05; c2 test). 95% confidence intervals are indicated above the bars.

attempts (Figures 6A, 6B, and 6C). Transient hypotension,
induced for 5 min or less by controlled blood withdrawal and
reinfusion, was even more effective in triggering PIDs (75% of
all hypotensive episodes; Figures 6B and 6C). The latency between hypoxia or hypotension onset and PID initiation was
approximately 2 min (Figure 6B, insets). Binary logistic regression analysis revealed that the final arterial pO2 during the hypoxic transient alone was predictive of PID occurrence (p = 0.002;
R2 = 0.86). A PID occurred 90% of the time if arterial pO2 dropped below 90 mmHg (p = 0.003 versus pO2 > 90 mmHg). Neither
baseline pO2 nor the magnitude of pO2 drop showed a significant association with PID occurrence (Figure 6D). A similar analysis also showed that BP either at baseline (p = 0.004) or during
the hypotensive transient could predict PID occurrence (p <
0.001; R2 = 0.70). However, only the final BP during the hypotensive transient made a significant contribution to this prediction
(p = 0.037, Wald criterion). Indeed, a PID occurred 90% of the
time if mean arterial BP dropped below 70 mmHg (p < 0.001
versus BP > 70 mmHg). Importantly, topical TTX application

did not block hypotensive PIDs (n = 2 attempts in 2 mice), further
confirming that TTX did not directly inhibit PIDs and that hypotensive PIDs did not require cortical neuronal activation. As
with somatosensory stimulation, we confirmed the electrophysiological identity of PIDs in a separate cohort during hypotensive
transients (Figure S2, electrophysiological confirmation, related
to Figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6).
After showing that hypoxic or hypotensive transients could
trigger PIDs, we next turned our attention back to the animals
without any intervention (i.e., no somatosensory stimulation, or
hypoxic or hypotensive transients), and examined whether spontaneous BP fluctuations could predict the apparently random
spontaneous PID occurrence in this cohort. Data showed that
systemic BP dropped by approximately 10% during the 2 min
preceding a spontaneous PID (p < 0.001; n = 33 PIDs; Figure 6E).
This was consistent with the 2 min latency to PID onset during
induced hypotension (Figure 6B, insets). These data suggest
that spontaneous BP fluctuations can indeed be the trigger for
a subset of apparently spontaneous PIDs.
Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1123

Figure 5. Topical Tetrodotoxin Application Diminishes Functional Activation of the Cortex and Prevents Shoulder Stimulation-Induced PIDs
(A) Somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs) were recorded using glass micropipettes from barrel cortex during electrical stimulation of whisker pad in a
separate group of normal (i.e., non-ischemic) mice to confirm the efficacy of selected concentration of tetrodotoxin (TTX) (1 mM) to suppress SSEPs. Topical
application of TTX progressively abolished whisker barrel SSEPs within 15 min, as shown in this representative experiment. Average SSEP tracings from successive 2 min periods are shown in different colors. Barrel cortex was chosen because of its large size.
(B) Average SSEP amplitude is shown as a function of time after topical TTX application (n = 5). Data are represented as mean ± SE.
(C) Light tactile stimulation of the contralesional shoulder for 5 min (orange lines) induced a PID at a high rate during the stimulation (yellow circles) in the presence
of a small cranial window and topical vehicle application (n = 4 mice). Topical TTX application markedly diminished PID induction rate during shoulder stimulation
(n = 6 mice). The two PIDs that occurred during shoulder stimulation under TTX originated outside the shoulder S1 and thus were most likely spontaneous.
Systemic ketamine (120 mg/kg, intraperitoneal, 10 min prior to stimulation) treatment completely prevented PID occurrence during shoulder stimulation (n = 3
mice). Isoflurane concentration was reduced to 0.3% after ketamine administration.
(D) Contralesional shoulder stimulation triggered a PID nearly 80% of the time in the presence of an open cranial window over shoulder S1 and topical vehicle
application. Topical TTX markedly reduced and systemic ketamine completely prevented PID occurrence during shoulder stimulation (p < 0.05; c2 test). 95%
confidence intervals are indicated above the bars.

Supply-Demand Mismatch Predisposes to PID
Occurrence in Human Stroke
To obtain evidence for supply-demand mismatch as a predisposing factor for PIDs in human brain, we examined the relationship between tissue pO2 and PID occurrence in seven stroke
patients who have had a craniectomy as part of their clinical
management (Figure 6F). Electrocorticogram using implanted
intracranial electrodes detected a total of 157 PIDs during a 5day monitoring period after hemicraniectomy (median 11, range
8–57 PIDs). Tissue pO2 values were available during 131 PIDs.
Continuous monitoring often revealed a reduction in tissue pO2
shortly before a PID occurrence (Figure 6G). Compared with
baseline tissue pO2 in the absence of a PID (n = 162 measurements; see Experimental Procedures), average tissue pO2
immediately preceding a PID was significantly lower (31.4 ±
16.3 versus 21.4 ± 6.3 mmHg, p = 0.03; Wilcoxon signed-rank
1124 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

test, Figure 6H). In contrast, there was no difference between
baseline and pre-PID segments in terms of mean arterial pressure (85.2 ± 10.1 versus 87.4 ± 10.1 mmHg) or intracranial pressure (11.0 ± 4.9 versus 15.1 ± 4.6 mmHg). These data suggest
that O2 supply-demand mismatch predisposes to PID occurrence in ischemic human brain as well.
Somatosensory Stimulation Increases Cumulative PID
Frequency and Worsens Tissue Outcome
Lastly, to test whether increased frequency of PIDs triggered
by tactile stimulation indeed worsens the stroke outcome, we
examined tissue perfusion and infarct volume. PIDs have previously been shown to worsen tissue perfusion through vasoconstrictive (i.e., inverse) neurovascular coupling and expand the
infarct volume (Dreier et al., 2002; Hossmann, 1996; Kumagai
et al., 2011; Shin et al., 2006). Tactile forepaw and shoulder

stimulations starting 10 min after MCAO onset significantly increased the average cumulative PID frequency (2.6 ± 0.3/hr)
compared to spontaneous PIDs in non-stimulated mice (1.6 ±
0.3/hr; p = 0.02; Figure 7A). In accordance with the increased
PID rate, the area of perfusion defect progressively expanded
starting 10 min after MCAO in the stimulated cohort and was
almost doubled at 60 min (Figures 7B and 7C). Moreover, infarct
volumes were significantly larger in the forepaw- and shoulderstimulated group 24 hr after 1 hr transient MCAO (Figure 7D);
the difference persisted at 72 hr when examined using routine
histology (Figure 7E). In contrast, whisker stimulation, which
did not increase PID frequency, did not have any effect on infarct
volume. These data indicate that the increase in PID occurrence
upon tactile stimulation is capable of worsening the tissue
outcome in stroke. Interestingly, Luckl et al. previously noted
that continuous 2 hr forepaw stimulation during acute focal cerebral ischemia was associated with 2-fold higher PID frequencies
in rats, but the increase in infarct volume in their study failed to
reach statistical significance (Luckl et al., 2010). Nevertheless,
their findings show that the phenomenon is not species
dependent.
Conversely, Lay et al. found that mechanical stimulation of a
single whisker for 1 s every 20 s during the first 2 hr of permanent
dMCAO in rats abolished the infarct. However, stimulation was
unlikely to trigger PIDs in their study because of its brief duration
and single whisker stimulation, and because stimulated S1 was
within their infarct core (Lay et al., 2010). In subsequent studies,
the same group showed similarly improved outcomes after entire
whisker pad stimulation irrespective of stimulus durations (Davis
et al., 2011). Therefore, our data appeared to contradict their
findings. To resolve the discrepancy, we studied an additional
cohort after permanent dMCAO and followed their stimulation
protocol, but once again did not observe an effect on infarct volume at 24 hr (Figure S5, infarct volumes, related to Figure 7). The
sources of this discordance are unclear at this time, but may be
species dependent.
DISCUSSION
Altogether, these data provide compelling evidence for the existence of metastable hot zones within the peri-infarct tissue
where any further worsening of supply-demand mismatch precipitates anoxic depolarization and triggers a PID with adverse
consequences on ischemic tissue outcome (Figure 8). Such
hot zones lie within a narrow critical range of hypoperfusion,
sufficiently ischemic to render the tissue susceptible, but not
ischemic enough to abolish neurotransmission (i.e., electrophysiological penumbra) or to directly precipitate anoxic depolarization (i.e., core). The penumbra is, by definition, electrophysiologically silent and, therefore, susceptible to reduced supply only
(i.e., hypoxic or hypotensive transients). The presence and distribution of hot zones are predicted to be highly dynamic and variable both spatially and temporally, based on the artery that is
occluded and the fluctuations in the perfusion defect. To add
to the complexity, whether a PID is triggered by a given mode
of sensory stimulation would depend on the existence of a
susceptible hot zone within the activated brain regions, cortical
or subcortical. Therefore, the efficacy of specific sensory stimuli

in triggering PIDs in our study cannot be extrapolated directly to
other stroke models or species.
Nevertheless, the proof-of-principle presented herein probably applies to most if not all strokes caused by large-artery occlusions. This is because rodent dMCAO model yields infarcts
that can be considered medium sized when scaled to human
brain. In principle, factors modulating the O2 supply and demand
create spatiotemporally highly dynamic ripples of oxygenation in
peri-infarct tissue, which are capable of triggering a PID when
regional pO2 dips below the depolarization threshold within a
hot zone. Such ripples may be more frequent and larger in
magnitude, and cortical somatosensory activation is predicted
to be stronger in awake patients compared with experimental
animals kept under steady anesthesia, as in our study. Data
from the human cohort also provided evidence for worse supply-demand mismatch predisposing to PIDs in stroke patients.
It should be noted that although this was a critically ill cohort,
with large infarcts requiring craniotomies (thereby allowing invasive measurements), the principle applies to milder strokes as
well, because in hyperacute stroke there is always a penumbra
that is viable but at risk for infarction, and PIDs will harm penumbra regardless of the infarct size. However, considering the
extreme variability in the size, location, severity, and mechanism
of human stroke, as well as the variability in intrinsic tissue susceptibility to ischemic depolarizations (Eikermann-Haerter et al.,
2012), it would be a challenge to predict the type of sensory stimulation that could trigger a PID in any given patient, including
tactile, auditory, or visual. In this regard, hypoxic and hypotensive transients, which are exceedingly common in stroke patients, are likely to be more potent and predictable PID triggers.
Needless to say, the larger the perfusion defect, the larger the
perimeter and the hot zone area, the higher the risk of triggering
a PID. This principle is well demonstrated in infarcts of various
sizes, where small perfusion defects upon distal arterial occlusions generally trigger fewer PIDs compared with larger infarcts
upon proximal arterial occlusions (Eikermann-Haerter et al.,
2012). The principle also applies to other forms of brain injury,
such as subarachnoid hemorrhage, where large artery vasospasm or microvascular dysfunction can create moderately
ischemic metastable hot zones from which spreading depolarizations can be triggered during supply-demand mismatch
transients.
In light of these findings, certain clinical measures seem prudent to diminish the risk of PID occurrence in stroke patients.
For example, simply minimizing somatosensory stimulation in
acute stroke, particularly on the side with the deficits, may be
a potential precautionary measure in the early stage when PIDs
are known to occur most frequently. Clinically available PID inhibitors (e.g., ketamine) should be tested for their efficacy in
acute stroke, their sedative effects notwithstanding. Moreover,
NBO is highly effective in abruptly suppressing spontaneous as
well as somatosensory-induced PID occurrence (Shin et al.,
2007). The mechanism appears to involve increased regional
O2 availability in penumbra thereby preventing the ripples of
oxygenation from dipping below the depolarization threshold.
Along the same lines, higher glucose availability may render
hot zones less susceptible to depolarization (Hoffmann et al.,
2013), as PID occurrence is inversely related to blood glucose
Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1125

Figure 6. Hypoxic and Hypotensive Transients Consistently Trigger PIDs
(A) Representative CBF tracing showing five PIDs (yellow circles) triggered by transient hypoxic episodes induced by reducing the fraction of O2 in ventilation gas
mixture (blue lines). No spontaneous PID occurred in this experiment.
(B) Summary timeline of transient hypoxia (blue lines) and hypotension (purple lines) experiments. Each horizontal line represents one animal, and the start and
end of each line indicate the time span of imaging for up to 95 min. Insets show the latency between hypoxia or hypotension onset and PID onset. Data are
represented as mean ± SE.
(C) Hypoxia (blue bar) or hypotension (purple bar) triggered PIDs at a markedly higher rate than spontaneous occurrence (green bar, data from control experiments in Figure 1D shown here for comparison; p < 0.05; c2 test). 95% confidence intervals are indicated above the bars.
(legend continued on next page)

1126 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

(Nedergaard and Astrup, 1986; Strong et al., 2000). This is an
important consideration for the optimal target range for blood
glucose in clinical trials of tight euglycemic control in acute
stroke. A similar argument can be made for improving collateral
perfusion by permissive or induced hypertension (Shin et al.,
2008), to reduce the number and size of susceptible hot zones,
and to minimize inadvertent hypotensive transients from bringing
tissue pO2 below the depolarization threshold. Therefore, preemptive measures to prevent increased tissue demand, as well
as transient hypoxia, hypotension, and hypoglycemia could be
effective in reducing PID occurrence and their adverse impact
on cerebral perfusion and metabolism as well as tissue outcome.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Experimental Animals
All experimental procedures were carried out in accordance with the Guide for
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (NIH Publication No. 85-23, 1996) and
were approved by the institutional review board (MGH Subcommittee on
Research Animal Care [SRAC]). Male C57BL6J mice were used in all experiments (6–8 weeks old, 22–28 g; Charles River Laboratories).
Systemic Physiologic Monitoring
All mice were intubated, paralyzed (0.25 mg/ml Rocuronium), and mechanically ventilated (SAR-830 ventilator, CWE), except when tissue outcome was
assessed. Arterial pH, pO2, pCO2, and blood pressure were measured via a
femoral artery catheter (Table S1; PowerLab, ADInstruments) under isoflurane
anesthesia (2.5% induction, 1.5% maintenance, in 70% N2O and 30% O2).
Rectal temperature was monitored and maintained at 37 C via a servocontrolled heating pad (FHC).
Distal Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
Mice were placed on a stereotaxic frame (Stoelting), scalp reflected via a
midline incision, and intact skull overlying the right hemisphere was covered
with a thin layer of mineral oil to prevent drying and enhance transparency.
A temporal bone burr hole (2 mm diameter) was drilled above the zygomatic
arch, and middle cerebral artery was occluded just distal to the inferior cerebral vein using a microvascular clip as described in detail previously (Ayata
et al., 2004; Eikermann-Haerter et al., 2012; Shin et al., 2006). Absence of a
mechanical CSD induction during drilling was confirmed by laser speckle flowmetry monitoring (see below).
Laser Speckle Imaging
Cortical perfusion was imaged during distal middle cerebral artery occlusion
(dMCAO) using laser speckle flowmetry through intact skull. Laser speckle imaging of CBF was performed using a near infrared laser diode (785 nm, 75 mW)

and a CCD camera (Cohu 4600, 640 3 480 pixels). For laser speckle flowmetry,
raw speckle frames were continuously acquired at 2.5 Hz, and multispectral
reflectance image frames at the filter wheel rotation frequency of 1.6 Hz.
Multispectral Reflectance and Laser Speckle Imaging
Multimodal optical imaging was performed as described in detail previously
(Dunn et al., 2003, 2005). Light for multispectral reflectance imaging was provided by a tungsten halogen fiber-optic bundle (Techniquip R150; Capra Optical). Before illuminating the sample, light was guided through a filter wheel
with six 10-nm-wide bandpass filters (560 to 610 nm) and the diffuse reflectance images were captured by a second CCD camera (Coolsnap fx; Roper
Scientific; 1,300 3 1,030 pixels with 3 3 3 binning, resulting in 434 3 343 image
size for multispectral reflectance). The illumination light for both imaging modalities was delivered to the sample with an oblique angle, collected by a variable magnification objective (0.753 to 33; Edmund Optics), split by a dichroic
mirror, and acquired simultaneously by CCD cameras for combined multispectral and laser speckle imaging. The final multispectral imaging field was
positioned over the right hemisphere (7 3 6 mm2). The data were subsequently interpolated to the common time base using the recorded filter wheel
angular positions and exposure times of both cameras.
Electrophysiological PID Recordings during dMCAO
Mice were placed in a stereotaxic frame (David Kopf Instruments) and burr
holes were drilled above the right hemisphere under saline cooling at (mm
from bregma): (1) posterior 3.5, lateral 2.0 (occipital, 0.5 mm diameter for electrode 1); (2) anterior 1.0, lateral 2.0 (frontal, 0.5 mm diameter for electrode 2).
Dura was kept intact to minimize trauma to the animal. The steady (DC) potential and electrocorticogram were recorded with glass micropipettes (filled with
154 mM NaCl) 300 mm below pia (Axoprobe-1A; Axon Instruments). Ag/AgCl
reference electrode was placed subcutaneously in the neck. Recording sites
were covered with mineral oil after electrode placement to prevent cortical drying. After surgical preparation, cortex was allowed to recover for 15 min, and
dMCAO was performed during electrophysiological recordings as described
above.
Tactile Stimulation to Trigger PIDs
Mice were manually stimulated with a cotton-tipped applicator (size: 15.2 cm;
Medline Industries) for a more physiological mode of stimulation, and to allow
stimulation of different anatomical regions (contralesional or ipsilesional forepaw, upperforelimb/shoulder, whisker pad, and hindpaw) sequentially within
the same animal (Figure S1, tactile stimulation sites, related to Figure 1). Stimulation was continued for 5 min or until a PID was identified on laser speckle
images. In a small subset of animals, stimulation was continued for up to
20 min to examine in detail the PID origin; these were not included in statistical
comparisons of PID occurrence rates. Ten minutes were allowed after dMCAO
onset before the first stimulation, and at least 5 min were allowed between
each stimulation. Most animals received more than one type of stimulation
sequentially in random order. Each stimulus type is shown on a separate panel

(D) Summary of arterial pO2 and BP at baseline and during hypoxia (left) or hypotension (right), dichotomized based on whether a PID occurred (red) or not (blue)
during each attempt. Individual experiments and averages at baseline and during hypoxic or hypotensive trial are shown for each group. The arterial pO2 level
dropped to a significantly lower level during hypoxia in the group that developed a PID compared to the group that did not. In contrast, neither baseline pO2 nor the
magnitude of pO2 drop differed between the groups. In hypotension attempts, both baseline and hypotensive BP levels differed between the PID and no PID
groups; however, once again final BP alone could predict PID occurrence. Prediction success was 87.5% (90% for occurrence of a PID and 83.3% for absence of
a PID) for final pO2, and 89.4% (94.4% for occurrence of a PID and 72.7% for absence of a PID) for final BP. A binary logistic regression analysis was conducted to
predict the onset of a PID using baseline pO2, hypoxic pO2, the magnitude of pO2 drop, baseline BP, hypotensive BP, and the magnitude of BP drop, as predictors. Data are represented as box-whisker plot (line, median; +, mean; box, 25%–75% range; whiskers, min-max).
(E) The time course of resting BP during 10 min preceding spontaneous PIDs (n = 32; BP could not be measured reliably during 1 spontaneous PID). There was on
average a 10% drop in resting BP 2 min before the occurrence of a spontaneous PID. One-way ANOVA for repeated measures. Data are represented as mean ± SE.
(F) Depiction of tissue pO2 probe (ptiO2) and 6-contact platinum subdural ECoG recording strip implanted over peri-infarct tissue guided by laser speckle imaging
(see Experimental Procedures).
(G) Representative tissue pO2 tracing showing the transient dip in O2 availability preceding a PID in human cortex. Gray shade indicates the 5 min segment
averaged to calculate the pre-PID oxygenation shown in (H). Baseline levels were selected when there was no PID occurrence within a 2 hr period (see
Experimental Procedures).
(H) Mean tissue pO2 levels prior to PID were significantly lower compared with baseline levels (Wilcoxon signed-rank test). Data are represented as box-whisker
plot (line, median; +, mean; box, 25%–75% range; whiskers, min-max).

Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1127

Figure 7. Tactile Stimulation-Induced PIDs Worsen Ischemic Tissue Perfusion and Outcome
(A) Average cumulative induced and spontaneous PID frequency in mice receiving tactile stimulation starting 10 min after MCAO (red, n = 14), and spontaneous
PID frequency in non-stimulated controls (green, n = 17). None of the mice in these cohorts were subjected to transient hypoxia or hypotension as part of the
experimental protocol.
(B) Area of perfusion defect with %30% residual CBF increased in proportion with PID occurrence in the stimulated group over time. Two-way ANOVA for
repeated measures. Data are represented as mean ± SE.
(C) Representative laser speckle flowmetry images showing the expansion of perfusion defect (blue pixels with %30% residual CBF) between 10 and 60 min after
MCAO in a mouse that received tactile stimulation, and the stable perfusion defect in a mouse without tactile stimulation.
(D) Infarct volumes measured using TTC staining were larger in the group receiving forepaw but not whisker stimulation starting 10 min after MCAO (n = 6, 4, and 4
in control, forepaw, and whisker stimulation groups; p < 0.05; t test). These experiments were performed in a separate cohort of mice without endotracheal
intubation or mechanical ventilation in order to minimize surgical morbidity and mortality. The experimental protocol was otherwise identical to other tactile
stimulation experiments above. There were a total of 2.25 ± 0.25 PIDs in the forepaw-stimulated group, whereas no spontaneous or induced PID was detected in
non-stimulated and whisker stimulated cohorts, respectively. Data are represented as box-whisker plot (line, median; +, mean; box, 25%–75% range; whiskers,
min-max).
(E) Infarct volumes measured 72 hr after stroke onset using H&E-stained coronal brain sections were larger in the group receiving forepaw stimulation starting
10 min after dMCAO (n = 9 each; t test). In this cohort, we initially studied n = 5 mice per group. The data showed higher than expected coefficient of variation. We
then performed a power analysis, determined n = 10 mice per group as the appropriate sample size, and added five more mice in each group. One mouse was
excluded in each group based on a priori criteria (one in non-stimulated group due to total absence of an infarct; one in stimulated group due to clip-related trauma
precluding reliable infarct measurement). Therefore, final sample sizes were n = 9 per group. As with the 24 hr assessment group above, these experiments were
performed in a separate cohort of mice without endotracheal intubation or mechanical ventilation in order to minimize surgical morbidity and mortality. In this
experimental cohort, inhalation gas included 70%N2/30%O2 mixture. By doing this, we also reproduced the effect of stimulation-induced PIDs on tissue outcome
in the absence of N2O. The experimental protocol was otherwise identical to other tactile stimulation experiments above. Representative sections show the infarct
at each slice level in one non-stimulated and forepaw and shoulder stimulated mouse each. Data are represented as box-whisker plot (line, median; +, mean; box,
25%–75% range; whiskers, min-max).
in Figure 1 for the sake of clarity. Spontaneous PIDs continued to appear between stimulations albeit with lower frequency compared to non-stimulated
(i.e., control) mice after dMCAO; these were omitted from the timeline figures
again for the sake of clarity. When a spontaneous PID occurred stimulation
was delayed for at least 5 min. Similarly, at least 5 min were allowed after an
induced PID before another stimulation was attempted. Entire timelines are
shown in Figure S4.
Open Cranial Window for TTX Application on PIDs
For tetrodotoxin (TTX) application onto the S1 cortex, a 1.2-mm-diameter burr
hole was drilled at 0.5 mm posterior, 2 mm lateral to bregma, under saline cooling, and dura was removed. Inadvertent induction of spreading depression
during craniotomy was monitored using laser speckle imaging. 0.05 ml TTX

1128 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

(1 uM) was topically applied onto the cortex for 25 min prior to tactile stimulation to trigger PIDs.
Somatosensory-Evoked Potentials to Demonstrate TTX Efficacy
To demonstrate the suppression of cortical evoked activity by topical TTX,
we anesthetized animals (isoflurane in 30% O2 and 70% N2) and placed
them in a stereotaxic frame. An open cranial window was prepared over
the right barrel cortex, 1.3 mm posterior and 3.6 mm lateral to bregma. A
glass micropipette was placed on the exposed dura and extracellular
somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs) were recorded relative to an
Ag/AgCl reference electrode placed subcutaneously in the neck. Cortical
surface was kept moist by 0.9% NaCl solution. Signals were amplified (Axoprobe 1A, Axon Instruments) and digitized for offline analysis (Powerlab/16sp,

replenished during 30 min subsequent recording. SSEPs were averaged offline every 2 min and plotted over time.
Electrophysiological Mapping of the Primary Somatosensory Cortex
Under isoflurane anesthesia (70% N2, 30% O2), mice were placed in a stereotactic frame. After midline scalp incision to expose the skull, two tungsten electrodes (100 mm tip diameter) were placed on the bone and electrical contact
ensured with a drop of electrode gel (signagel, Parker Laboratories). One electrode was placed over the hemisphere ipsilateral to the stimulated body side
as a reference, and another was used to record SSEPs from primary somatosensory cortex (S1) contralateral to the stimulated body side. A third electrode
was inserted in the tail and used as a ground. Whisker pad, forepaw, shoulder,
or hindpaw were stimulated using electrical current pulses (0.1 Hz, 150 ms, 1 to
3 mA; WPI A390 stimulus isolator) applied through a pair of needle electrodes
inserted subcutaneously with an inter-electrode distance of 2–4 mm. A coordinate grid was formed relative to bregma, with a point separation of 500 mm
in antero-posterior and medio-lateral axes, relative to bregma (Figure S1).
For each body part to be stimulated (in random order in each animal), the
recording electrode was placed on the skull at the anticipated coordinate of
the center of respective S1 (Franklin and Paxinos, 2008). At least 20 SSEPs
were recorded at each coordinate before moving to an adjacent point on the
grid. In this way, the size of the recorded area was systematically expanded
from the center of S1 along the antero-posterior and medio-lateral axes until
SSEP amplitudes dropped to less than 20% of peak, or the edge of the
exposed skull was reached. At least 2.5 3 2.5 mm of cortex was mapped
for each region. After mapping was complete, the recording electrode was replaced back at the peak SSEP coordinate to confirm stable amplitudes over
time; datasets with unstable SSEPs were excluded. The procedure was
repeated for each body part. In most animals, 2-3 S1 regions were mapped.
The SSEP amplitudes at each coordinate were normalized to maximum amplitude within that region. Peak SSEP coordinates along the antero-posterior and
medio-lateral axes were calculated in each animal by Gaussian curve fitting
and then averaged among all animals.
Induction of Transient Hypoxemia and Hypotension
After measuring baseline pH, pCO2, and pO2, the fraction of O2 in the ventilation air was reduced for 5 min, or less if a PID occurred sooner. Blood gas measurements were repeated after normoxia was reinstituted. Hypotension was
induced by controlled blood withdrawal through the femoral artery catheter
for 5 min, or less if a PID occurred sooner. Blood pressures at baseline and
the end of hypotensive period were noted, and arterial blood was re-infused.
At least 5 min were allowed between each intervention. Entire timelines are
shown in Figure S4.

Figure 8. The Concept of Peri-infarct Hot Zones Susceptible to PID
Initiation
(A) Three-dimensional rendering of a hypothetical CBF defect upon focal
arterial occlusion, depicting the conceptual framework consisting of the
severely ischemic depolarized core (red), the penumbra (yellow), and the
metastable hot zone surrounding it (lavender). The narrow critical CBF range
defining the hot zone is also shown from Figure 2D (yellow bar, residual CBF in
shoulder S1 where a PID is triggered upon shoulder stimulation).
(B) Two-dimensional projection of the perfusion defect. In the metastable hot
zone, increased demand during functional activation of the tissue worsens the
supply-demand mismatch to trigger a PID. Because penumbra is electrophysiologically silent, by definition it cannot be activated upon somatosensory
stimulation; therefore, it is only susceptible to reduced O2 supply during
hypoxic and hypotensive transients to trigger a PID.

ADinstruments). Contralateral whisker pad was stimulated in a bipolar
fashion by needle electrodes 5 mm apart (700 mA, 150 ms square pulses at
0.1 Hz; A395 stimulus isolator, WPI triggered by an S48 square pulse stimulator, Grass Technologies). After locating the maximal SSEP amplitude
(450 mm below dura), baseline SSEPs were recorded for 5 min, and TTX
(1 mM in 0.9% NaCl) was applied topically onto the recording window and

Induction of Stable Hypotension to Shift the Hot Zone
Ten minutes after dMCAO, systemic arterial pressure was reduced to
60 mmHg by controlled blood withdrawal and maintained there throughout
the experiment.
Tissue Outcome Assessments after dMCAO
Spontaneously breathing animals were anesthetized with 1.5% isoflurane in
70% N2O and 30% O2. CBF was monitored by laser speckle imaging. Three
cohorts were studied. In the first cohort, 10 min after dMCAO (clip) entire contralesional forepaw and shoulder region was stimulated for 5 min every 5 min to
maximally increase PID occurrence rate as described above. In a separate
group, whisker pad was stimulated in a similar manner. Control animals did
not receive any stimulation after dMCAO. 60 min after dMCAO the clip was
removed and successful reperfusion confirmed on laser speckle images. In
the second cohort, permanent dMCAO was induced using 10-0 nylon suture
ligation. Immediately after dMCAO, we applied slow manual whisker stimulation (2 Hz) for 10 min, as described previously (Davis et al., 2011). Immediately
after stimulation, anesthesia was discontinued and animals transferred to
their cages. Once again, control animals did not receive any stimulation
after dMCAO. In the first and second cohorts, mice were sacrificed 24 hr after
reperfusion. Infarct volume was calculated by integrating the infarct area
on 1-mm-thick, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC)-stained coronal
sections. In the third cohort, forepaw and shoulder-stimulated and control

Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1129

(i.e., non-stimulated) mice were sacrificed 72 hr after 1 hr dMCAO and reperfusion, coronal cryosections obtained every 1 mm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Infarct areas were integrated along the anteroposterior axis to
calculate the infarct volume.
Human Intracranial Electrocorticogram and Tissue pO2
The study was approved by the local research ethics committee of the
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin. Informed consent was obtained from
the patient or legal representative. In seven patients (two female/five
male) with a median age of 60 years (range 44–68 years) and malignant
hemispheric stroke, the infarct border was determined by laser speckle
contrast imaging (MoorFLPI, Moor Instruments) during decompressive surgery (Woitzik et al., 2013). A probe to measure tissue partial pressure of oxygen (ptiO2) (Licox, Integra LifeSciences) was implanted 10 mm from the
infarct in still vital subpial cortex. Next to it, a 6-contact platinum subdural
electrocorticography (ECoG) recording strip (Ad-Tech Medical) was placed
over the peri-infarct tissue as depicted in Figure 3. Patients were transferred
to the intensive care unit where tissue pO2, ECoG, mean arterial pressure
(MAP), and intracranial pressure (ICP) were continuously recorded during
5 days post-surgery. Mean tissue pO2 values were determined during a
5 min period prior to each PID. Moreover, mean baseline tissue pO2 values
were determined from 5 min periods taken every 2 hr unless a PID had
occurred 2 hr before or after. For each patient, the average of the tissue
pO2 values before PID was calculated as well as the average of the baseline
tissue pO2 values. The seven mean values of tissue pO2 before PID from the
seven patients and the corresponding seven baseline tissue pO2 values
were statistically compared.
Data Analysis and Statistics
Data were presented as fraction of total (%), box-whisker plot (line, median; +,
mean; box, 25%–75% range; whiskers, min-max), or mean ± SE and analyzed
using c2 test, one-way ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak’s or Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test, two-way ANOVA for repeated-measures followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons test, paired or unpaired t tests, and Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, where appropriate. The statistical method used to analyze
each dataset is indicated in respective figure legends.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes five figures, one table, and four movies and
can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.
2015.02.007.

REFERENCES
Ayata, C., Dunn, A.K., Gursoy-OZdemir, Y., Huang, Z., Boas, D.A., and
Moskowitz, M.A. (2004). Laser speckle flowmetry for the study of cerebrovascular physiology in normal and ischemic mouse cortex. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 24, 744–755.
Davis, M.F., Lay, C.C., Chen-Bee, C.H., and Frostig, R.D. (2011). Amount but
not pattern of protective sensory stimulation alters recovery after permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 42, 792–798.
Dohmen, C., Sakowitz, O.W., Fabricius, M., Bosche, B., Reithmeier, T.,
Ernestus, R.I., Brinker, G., Dreier, J.P., Woitzik, J., Strong, A.J., and Graf, R.;
Co-Operative Study of Brain Injury Depolarisations (COSBID) (2008).
Spreading depolarizations occur in human ischemic stroke with high incidence. Ann. Neurol. 63, 720–728.
Dreier, J.P. (2011). The role of spreading depression, spreading depolarization
and spreading ischemia in neurological disease. Nat. Med. 17, 439–447.
Dreier, J.P., Windmüller, O., Petzold, G., Lindauer, U., Einhäupl, K.M., and
Dirnagl, U. (2002). Ischemia caused by inverse coupling between neuronal
activation and cerebral blood flow in rats. In Brain Activation and CBF
Control, M. Tomita, I. Kanno, and E. Hamel, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier),
pp. 487–492.
Dreier, J.P., Woitzik, J., Fabricius, M., Bhatia, R., Major, S., Drenckhahn, C.,
Lehmann, T.N., Sarrafzadeh, A., Willumsen, L., Hartings, J.A., et al. (2006).
Delayed ischaemic neurological deficits after subarachnoid haemorrhage
are associated with clusters of spreading depolarizations. Brain 129, 3224–
3237.
Dunn, A.K., Devor, A., Bolay, H., Andermann, M.L., Moskowitz, M.A., Dale,
A.M., and Boas, D.A. (2003). Simultaneous imaging of total cerebral hemoglobin concentration, oxygenation, and blood flow during functional activation.
Opt. Lett. 28, 28–30.
Dunn, A.K., Devor, A., Dale, A.M., and Boas, D.A. (2005). Spatial extent of oxygen metabolism and hemodynamic changes during functional activation of
the rat somatosensory cortex. Neuroimage 27, 279–290.
Eikermann-Haerter, K., Lee, J.H., Yuzawa, I., Liu, C.H., Zhou, Z., Shin, H.K.,
Zheng, Y., Qin, T., Kurth, T., Waeber, C., et al. (2012). Migraine mutations increase stroke vulnerability by facilitating ischemic depolarizations. Circulation
125, 335–345.
Franklin, K., and Paxinos, G. (2008). The Mouse Brain in Stereotaxic
Coordinates, Third Edition. (San Diego: Academic Press).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Hartings, J.A., Strong, A.J., Fabricius, M., Manning, A., Bhatia, R., Dreier, J.P.,
Mazzeo, A.T., Tortella, F.C., and Bullock, M.R.; Co-Operative Study of Brain
Injury Depolarizations (2009). Spreading depolarizations and late secondary
insults after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 26, 1857–1866.

D.v.B., T.H., J.S., Y.Z., E.D., K.E.H., and T.Q. conducted the experiments,
analyzed the data, and helped draft the manuscript; N.S., J.P.D., and J.W.
collected and analyzed the clinical data; S.S., D.A.B., M.E., M.A.M., and
E.H.L. contributed to data interpretation and manuscript preparation; C.A.
conceived and designed the study, analyzed and interpreted the data, and
prepared the manuscript.

Hertle, D.N., Dreier, J.P., Woitzik, J., Hartings, J.A., Bullock, R., Okonkwo,
D.O., Shutter, L.A., Vidgeon, S., Strong, A.J., Kowoll, C., et al.; Cooperative
Study of Brain Injury Depolarizations (COSBID) (2012). Effect of analgesics
and sedatives on the occurrence of spreading depolarizations accompanying
acute brain injury. Brain 135, 2390–2398.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Hoffmann, U., Sukhotinsky, I., Eikermann-Haerter, K., and Ayata, C. (2013).
Glucose modulation of spreading depression susceptibility. J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 33, 191–195.

Supported by grants from the NIH (NS055104, NS061505), the AHA
(11SDG7600037), the Fondation Leducq, the Heitman Foundation, the Ellison
Foundation, the Konrad-Adenauer-Foundation, the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG-WO 1704/1-1, DFG DR 323/5-1, Excellence cluster NeuroCure; SFB TR 43, KFO 247, KFO 213), EU (European Stroke Network,
WakeUp, Counterstroke), Corona Foundation and Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (Center for Stroke Research Berlin, 01 EO 0801).
Received: April 1, 2014
Revised: November 1, 2014
Accepted: January 23, 2015
Published: March 4, 2015

1130 Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc.

Hossmann, K.A. (1996). Periinfarct depolarizations. Cerebrovasc. Brain
Metab. Rev. 8, 195–208.
Kayama, Y., and Iwama, K. (1972). The EEG, evoked potentials, and single-unit
activity during ketamine anesthesia in cats. Anesthesiology 36, 316–328.
Kumagai, T., Walberer, M., Nakamura, H., Endepols, H., Sué, M., Vollmar, S.,
Adib, S., Mies, G., Yoshimine, T., Schroeter, M., and Graf, R. (2011). Distinct
spatiotemporal patterns of spreading depolarizations during early infarct evolution: evidence from real-time imaging. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31,
580–592.
Lauritzen, M., Dreier, J.P., Fabricius, M., Hartings, J.A., Graf, R., and Strong,
A.J. (2011). Clinical relevance of cortical spreading depression in neurological

disorders: migraine, malignant stroke, subarachnoid and intracranial hemorrhage, and traumatic brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 31, 17–35.
Lay, C.C., Davis, M.F., Chen-Bee, C.H., and Frostig, R.D. (2010). Mild sensory
stimulation completely protects the adult rodent cortex from ischemic stroke.
PLoS ONE 5, e11270.
Leng, L.Z., Fink, M.E., and Iadecola, C. (2011). Spreading depolarization: a
possible new culprit in the delayed cerebral ischemia of subarachnoid hemorrhage. Arch. Neurol. 68, 31–36.
Luckl, J., Baker, W., Sun, Z.H., Durduran, T., Yodh, A.G., and Greenberg, J.H.
(2010). The biological effect of contralateral forepaw stimulation in rat focal cerebral ischemia: a multispectral optical imaging study. Front Neuroenergetics
2, 19.
Nakamura, H., Strong, A.J., Dohmen, C., Sakowitz, O.W., Vollmar, S., Sué, M.,
Kracht, L., Hashemi, P., Bhatia, R., Yoshimine, T., et al. (2010). Spreading depolarizations cycle around and enlarge focal ischaemic brain lesions. Brain
133, 1994–2006.
Nedergaard, M., and Astrup, J. (1986). Infarct rim: effect of hyperglycemia on
direct current potential and [14C]2-deoxyglucose phosphorylation. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 6, 607–615.
Nedergaard, M., and Hansen, A.J. (1993). Characterization of cortical depolarizations evoked in focal cerebral ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 13,
568–574.
Sakowitz, O.W., Kiening, K.L., Krajewski, K.L., Sarrafzadeh, A.S., Fabricius,
M., Strong, A.J., Unterberg, A.W., and Dreier, J.P. (2009). Preliminary evidence
that ketamine inhibits spreading depolarizations in acute human brain injury.
Stroke 40, e519–e522.

Shin, H.K., Nishimura, M., Jones, P.B., Ay, H., Boas, D.A., Moskowitz, M.A.,
and Ayata, C. (2008). Mild induced hypertension improves blood flow and oxygen metabolism in transient focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 39, 1548–1555.
Strong, A.J., Smith, S.E., Whittington, D.J., Meldrum, B.S., Parsons, A.A.,
Krupinski, J., Hunter, A.J., Patel, S., and Robertson, C. (2000). Factors influencing the frequency of fluorescence transients as markers of peri-infarct depolarizations in focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 31, 214–222.
Strong, A.J., Bezzina, E.L., Anderson, P.J., Boutelle, M.G., Hopwood, S.E.,
and Dunn, A.K. (2006). Evaluation of laser speckle flowmetry for imaging
cortical perfusion in experimental stroke studies: quantitation of perfusion
and detection of peri-infarct depolarisations. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
26, 645–653.
Strong, A.J., Anderson, P.J., Watts, H.R., Virley, D.J., Lloyd, A., Irving, E.A.,
Nagafuji, T., Ninomiya, M., Nakamura, H., Dunn, A.K., and Graf, R. (2007).
Peri-infarct depolarizations lead to loss of perfusion in ischaemic gyrencephalic cerebral cortex. Brain 130, 995–1008.
Ullmann, J.F., Watson, C., Janke, A.L., Kurniawan, N.D., and Reutens, D.C.
(2013). A segmentation protocol and MRI atlas of the C57BL/6J mouse
neocortex. Neuroimage 78, 196–203.
Woitzik, J., Hecht, N., Pinczolits, A., Sandow, N., Major, S., Winkler, M.K.,
Weber-Carstens, S., Dohmen, C., Graf, R., Strong, A.J., et al.; COSBID study
group (2013). Propagation of cortical spreading depolarization in the human
cortex after malignant stroke. Neurology 80, 1095–1102.

Shin, H.K., Dunn, A.K., Jones, P.B., Boas, D.A., Moskowitz, M.A., and Ayata,
C. (2006). Vasoconstrictive neurovascular coupling during focal ischemic depolarizations. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 26, 1018–1030.

Woolsey, T.A., and Van der Loos, H. (1970). The structural organization of layer
IV in the somatosensory region (SI) of mouse cerebral cortex. The description
of a cortical field composed of discrete cytoarchitectonic units. Brain Res. 17,
205–242.

Shin, H.K., Dunn, A.K., Jones, P.B., Boas, D.A., Lo, E.H., Moskowitz, M.A., and
Ayata, C. (2007). Normobaric hyperoxia improves cerebral blood flow and
oxygenation, and inhibits peri-infarct depolarizations in experimental focal
ischaemia. Brain 130, 1631–1642.

, S., Srinivasan, V.J., Shin, H.K., Eikermann-Haerter, K.,
Yuzawa, I., Sakadzic
Boas, D.A., and Ayata, C. (2012). Cortical spreading depression impairs oxygen delivery and metabolism in mice. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32,
376–386.

Neuron 85, 1117–1131, March 4, 2015 ª2015 Elsevier Inc. 1131

