Peritoneal Dialysis International, Vol. 34, pp. 7–8
doi: 10.3747/pdi.2013.00302

0896-8608/14 $3.00 + .00
Copyright © 2014 International Society for Peritoneal Dialysis

COMMENTARIES

PERITONEAL DIALYSIS FOR STROKE: AMAZING, BUT PROMISING!

P

events—specifically, production of reactive oxygen
species, inflammation, and uncoupling of oxidative
phosphorylation—eventually leading to apoptosis and
cell death. The local release of glutamate after stroke
also enhances brain-to-blood efflux, leading to a transient increase in the blood concentration, a finding that
has been associated with disease progression in a large
cohort of patients with acute ischemic stroke (4).
In their study, Godino Mdel et al. (1) tested the
hypothesis that PD could lower blood levels of glutamate,
thereby preventing the progression of ischemic brain
damage. In a rat model of stroke, the authors showed that
PD using glucose-based dialysis solution—two consecutive dwells for a total of 2 hours, beginning 2.5 hours or 5
hours after occlusion of the middle cerebral artery—was
effective in attenuating the transient increase in blood
levels of glutamate after stroke. That attenuation was
associated with a reduced cerebral infarct size measured
24 hours after the arterial occlusion: 12.1% ±  2.2%
in treated rats versus 23.3±1.3% in rats not receiving
PD. The addition of glutamate to the dialysis solution
completely abrogated the reduction in blood glutamate
levels and the beneficial effect of PD on infarct size,
demonstrating the critical role of glutamate clearance
by diffusion across the peritoneum. The benefits of
PD were further evaluated 2 weeks after the ischemic
insult by functional magnetic resonance imaging and an
evaluation of limb-use asymmetry. Both techniques demonstrated significant improvement in tissue viability and
function among rats treated with PD, reducing the degree
of disability. Lastly, the demonstration of effective glutamate clearance across the peritoneum of end-stage renal
disease patients on PD after a 4-hour dwell suggested the
potential clinical benefit of the findings (1).
The ingenious idea of applying PD to enhance transperitoneal diffusion and clearance of a transient excess
of glutamate opens perspectives for improving functional
outcome after stroke. Achieving glutamate clearance by

This single copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.
For permission to reprint multiple copies or to order presentation-ready copies
for distribution, contact Multimed Inc. at marketing@multi-med.com

7

Downloaded from http://www.pdiconnect.com/ by guest on October 4, 2016

eritoneal dialysis (PD) applies the principles of diffusion and osmosis across the peritoneal membrane to
restore electrolyte and fluid balance in patients with acute
renal failure and end-stage renal disease. In addition to
its role as a renal replacement therapy, an increasing
body of evidence suggests that PD can help to treat fluid
overload in refractory heart failure patients, thereby
relieving their symptoms and reducing hospitalization
rates. A recent study published in the Journal of Clinical
Investigation (1) suggests that stroke might, in the future,
be added to the list of nonrenal indications for PD.
Stroke is one of the leading causes of death worldwide and a major source of disability among survivors.
Ischemic stroke results from a reduction in cerebral blood
flow restricted to the territory of a major brain artery.
Thrombolytic therapy with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator is currently the only effective strategy
to reverse vessel obstruction and improve outcomes (2).
Unfortunately, that approach is restricted to relatively
few patients. Recent progress in the understanding of
the fundamental mechanisms of neuronal cell death
has contributed to the development of novel alternative
therapeutic perspectives (3).
The ischemic peri-infarct zone is now considered
to be a main target for therapy, because this region is
functionally impaired and at risk for irreversible structural damage, but still salvageable. In this peri-infarct
zone, glutamate, the most abundant neurotransmitter
in mammals, was shown to play a critical role in the
propagation of ischemic brain damage by a mechanism
called excitotoxicity (3). In the ischemic brain, glutamate
abnormally accumulates in the extracellular space as a
consequence of energy and ion pump failure, and a failure
of reuptake mechanisms. Glutamate overload exerts toxic
effects on metabolically viable tissue through sustained
activation of postsynaptic receptors, leading to a massive influx of calcium, sodium, and water into neurons.
That influx in turn triggers a cascade of ­intracellular

january  2014 - Vol. 34, No. 1	

MORELLE AND GOFFIN	

DISCLOSURES
The authors have no financial conflicts of interest
to declare.

8

Johann Morelle*
Eric Goffin
Division of Nephrology
Université catholique de Louvain
Saint-Luc University Hospital
Brussels, Belgium
*email: johann.morelle@uclouvain.be
REFERENCES
	 1.	 Godino Mdel C, Romera VG, Sánchez–Tomero JA, Pacheco
J, Canals S, Lerma J, et al. Amelioration of ischemic
brain damage by peritoneal dialysis. J Clin Invest 2013;
123:4359–63.
	 2.	 Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995;
333:1581–7.
	 3.	 Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C. The science of stroke:
mechanisms in search of treatments. Neuron 2010;
67:181–98.
	 4.	 Castillo J, Dávalos A, Noya M. Progression of ischaemic stroke and excitotoxic aminoacids. Lancet 1997;
349:79–83.
	 5.	 Rogachev B, Ohayon S, Saad A, Vorobiovsky V, Gruenbaum
BF, Leibowitz A, et al. The effects of hemodialysis on blood
glutamate levels in chronic renal failure: implementation
for neuroprotection. J Crit Care 2012; 27:743.e1–7.

This single copy is for your personal, non-commercial use only.
For permission to reprint multiple copies or to order presentation-ready copies
for distribution, contact Multimed Inc. at marketing@multi-med.com

Downloaded from http://www.pdiconnect.com/ by guest on October 4, 2016

promptly initiating PD could indeed extend the window
of opportunity for intervention in patients with stroke.
However, the optimal timing of PD, and the modalities
of PD catheter insertion and PD prescription, will need
to be carefully addressed to ensure the efficiency of
such an intervention, while avoiding early—that is,
mechanical—complications.
Glutamate has been shown to play a pivotal role not
only in ischemic stroke, but also in the physiopathology of
many neurologic diseases such as hemorrhagic stroke and
seizures. Enhancing glutamate clearance could therefore
potentially be of benefit in those conditions as well (1).
The effect on outcomes after stroke or other neurologic
disorders with the decreased clearance and higher blood
levels of glutamate seen in patients with end-stage renal
disease (5) have not yet been investigated. Given the small
size of the glutamate molecule (169 Da), hemodialysis
would presumably also be as effective as PD in removing it; however, the hemodynamic stability and lack of a
need for anticoagulation represent advantages of PD over
hemodialysis in the setting of acute stroke. The relevance
of the animal studies of Godino Mdel et al. and the possibility of adding a new indication for PD need now to be
rigorously tested in patients with stroke.

PDI

