Intracranial Transplantation of
Monocyte-Derived Multipotential Cells
Enhances Recovery After Ischemic
Stroke in Rats
Hidenori Hattori,1 Shigeaki Suzuki,1 Yuka Okazaki,2 Norihiro Suzuki,1
and Masataka Kuwana2*
1Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
2Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
Cell transplantation has emerged as a potential therapy
to reduce the neurological deficits caused by ischemic
stroke. We previously reported a primitive cell population
, monocyte-derived multipotential cells (MOMCs),
which can differentiate into mesenchymal, neuronal, and
endothelial lineages. In this study, MOMCs and macrophages
were prepared from rat peripheral blood
and transplanted intracranially into the ischemic core of
syngeneic rats that had undergone a left middle cerebral
artery occlusion procedure. Neurological deficits, as
evaluated by the corner test, were less severe in the
MOMC-transplanted rats than in macrophage-transplanted
or mock-treated rats. Histological evaluations
revealed that the number of microvessels that had
formed in the ischemic boundary area by 4 weeks after
transplantation was significantly greater in the MOMC-
transplanted rats than in the control groups. The blood
vessel formation was preceded by the appearance
of round CD311 cells, which we confirmed were derived
from the transplanted MOMCs. Small numbers of
blood vessels incorporating MOMC-derived endothelial
cells expressing a mature endothelial marker RECA-1
were detected at 4 weeks after transplantation. In
addition, MOMCs expressed a series of angiogenic
factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor,
angiopoetin-1, and placenta growth factor (PlGF).
These findings provide evidence that the intracranial
delivery of MOMCs enhances functional recovery by
promoting neovascularization in a rat model for ischemic
stroke. V V C 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: stroke; angiogenesis; transplantation;
monocytes; macrophages
Cell transplantation is a potential therapy for
improving functional capacity in patients with cerebral
ischemia. Several cell types have been proposed as transplantable
cells, based on improved outcomes in a rodent
stroke model. For example, the intravenous administration
of cultured bone marrow stromal cells, which exhibit
the properties of multipotential stem cells, reduced neurological
deficits in a rodent model of stroke (Chen et al.,
2001a; Shen et al., 2007a,b). Bone marrow stromal cell
transplantation was reported to be effective and safe in
five stroke patients in Korea, although the preparation of a
sufficient quantity of autologous bone marrow stromal
cells required at least 1 month of ex vivo culture (Bang
et al., 2005). On the other hand, the intravenous administration
of cultured human endothelial progenitor cells
resulted in improved neurobehavioral outcomes in adult
nude mice with experimentally induced cerebral ischemia
(Fan et al., 2010). Other proposed cell sources for
transplantation include human umbilical cord blood cells
(Chen et al., 2001b) and bone marrow mononuclear
cells (MNCs; Iihoshi et al., 2004; Kamiya et al., 2008;
Brenneman et al., 2010). One of the advantages of using
these freshly prepared cells is the feasibility of transplantation
immediately after cerebral ischemia, but the optimal
route and timing of administration may differ among cell
sources.
We recently identified a human primitive cell population
consisting of cells we termed monocyte-derived
multipotential cells (MOMCs), which show a fibroblastlike
morphology in culture and have a unique molecular
phenotype: they are positive for a monocytic marker,
CD14; a hematopoietic marker, CD45; CD34 expressed
Contract grant sponsor: Japanese Ministry of Education, Science, Sports
and Culture (to M.K.); Contract grant sponsor: Japanese Ministry of
Health, Labor and Welfare (to M.K.); Contract grant sponsor: New
Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization of Japan
(to M.K.).
*Correspondence to: Masataka Kuwana, Division of Rheumatology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine,
35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.
E-mail: kuwanam@z5.keio.jp
Received 25 January 2011; Revised 30 May 2011; Accepted 30 June
2011
Published online 4 November 2011 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jnr.22755
Journal of Neuroscience Research 90:479–488 (2012)
' 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
by endothelial cells and hematopoietic progenitors; and
type I collagen (Kuwana et al., 2003). This cell type is
generated by culturing peripheral blood MNCs on fibronectin
in the presence of fetal bovine serum as the only
source of exogenous growth factors. MOMCs are
derived from circulating CD141 monocytes but can differentiate
into several distinct mesenchymal cell types,
including bone, cartilage, fat, and skeletal and cardiac
muscle, similarly to mesenchymal stem cells (Kuwana
et al., 2003; Kodama et al., 2005). In addition, human
MOMCs can differentiate into the endothelial and
neuronal lineages under the appropriate lineage-specific
culture conditions (Kuwana et al., 2006; Kodama et al.,
2006). Finally, MOMCs secrete a variety of cytokines
and growth factors that are involved in tissue repair
processes (Seta and Kuwana, 2010). This series of studies
suggested that MOMCs are a potential transplantable cell
source for use in tissue repair and regeneration.
In this study, we evaluated the beneficial effects of
the intracranial transplantation of MOMCs in a rat
model of ischemic stroke. We also examined the mechanisms
underlying the potential benefits of MOMC delivery
to ischemic lesions in the brain.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Preparation of Rat MOMCs
Rat MOMCs were prepared as described for human
MOMCs (Kuwana et al., 2003), with some modifications.
Briefly, peripheral blood was obtained from the portal vein of
male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (CLEA Japan, Tokyo, Japan)
and subjected to Lymphoprep (Nycomed Pharma AS, Oslo,
Norway) density gradient centrifugation. The MNCs were
isolated and resuspended in low-glucose Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (JRH Bioscience, Lenexa, KS), 2 mM L-glutamine
, 50 U/ml penicillin, and 50 lg/ml streptomycin. The
cells were then spread at a density of 23 106/ml on fibronectin-coated
plastic plates and cultured without any additional
growth factors at 378C. After 7 days of culture, adherent cells
were collected as MOMCs and used for transplantation. In
some experiments, circulating MNCs were cultured on
uncoated plastic plates for 1 hr, and adherent and nonadherent
cells were recovered separately for mRNA expression analysis.
Macrophages were prepared by culturing adherent splenocytes
on plastic plates in Medium 199 supplemented with 20% fetal
bovine serum and 4 ng/ml macrophage colony-stimulating
factor (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) for 7 days. In some
instances, MOMCs and macrophages were also prepared from
transgenic male SD rats with an ‘‘enhanced’’ green fluorescent
protein (GFP) cDNA, under the control of a chicken b-actin
promoter and cytomegalovirus enhancer (Japan SLC,
Hamamatsu, Japan; Ikawa et al., 1999). The phenotypic characteristics
of rat MOMCs were evaluated by the following
procedures (Kuwana et al., 2003).
Flow cytometric analysis. The cells were stained
with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated mouse anti-rat
CD11b/Mac-1a monoclonal antibody (mAb; clone OX-42;
Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) or mouse anti-rat CD34
mAb (clone ICO115; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA), in combination with biotin-conjugated goat polyclonal
antibodies to mouse IgG and streptavidin-PC5 (Beckman
Coulter). Negative controls were cells incubated with an isotype-matched
mouse mAb to an irrelevant antigen. The cells
were analyzed on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences
, San Diego, CA) using CellQuest software.
Uptake of acetylated low-density lipoprotein. The
cells were labeled with 1,10-dioctadecyl-3,3,30,30-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
(Dil)-labeled acetylated low-density
lipoprotein (acLDL; Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) for 1 hr
at 378C and then analyzed by flow cytometry.
Immunocytochemistry. The cultured cells were
fixed with formalin and incubated with the following primary
antibodies: goat anti-rat CD45 polyclonal antibody (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology), mouse anti-rat CD34 mAb, rabbit antirat
collagen type I polyclonal antibody (Chemicon, Temecula,
CA), and mouse anti-rat collagen type III mAb (clone
FH-7A; Sigma, St. Louis, MO). Negative controls were cells
incubated with normal goat IgG, normal rabbit IgG, or
isotype-matched mouse mAb to an irrelevant antigen, instead
of the primary antibody. Biotin-labeled anti-goat, -rabbit,
or -mouse IgG antibodies combined with a streptavidinhorseradish
peroxidase complex (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan) were
used for diaminobenzidine staining. Nuclei were counterstained
with hematoxylin.
Analysis of mRNA expression. Total RNA was
extracted from freshly prepared circulating MNCs, adherent
MNCs, nonadherent MNCs, MOMCs, or bone marrow cells
and subjected to cDNA synthesis using reverse transcriptase
(Takara, Kyoto, Japan) with oligo-dT priming. The resulting
cDNA (50 ng total RNA equivalent) was subjected to polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) amplification using the following
rat-specific primer pairs: CD14, 50-GATCTGTCTGACAA
CCCTGAGT-30 (sense) and 50-GTGCTCCTGCCCAGTG
AAAGAT-30 (antisense); collagen a1 type I, 50-CTGGTGCT
GCTGGTCGTGTT-30 (sense) and 50-TTGTTCGCCTGTC
TCACCCT-30 (antisense); and b-actin, 50-AGGCATCCT
GACCCTGAAGTAC-30 (sense) and 50-TCTTCATGAGG
TAGTCTGTCAG-30 (antisense). The primer sets for vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), angiopoetin-1 (Ang-1),
placenta growth factor (PlGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), and glial cell line-derived nerve growth factor
(GDNF) were as described previously (Yamamoto et al.,
2007; Torry et al., 2009; Zhao et al., 2011; Rodrigues et al.,
2011). The PCR products were resolved by electrophoresis
on 2% agarose gels and visualized by staining with ethidium
bromide.
RAT MODEL FOR CEREBRAL ISCHEMIA
The model for cerebral ischemia was prepared by
1 hr of left middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO),
followed by reperfusion, according to the method established
by Belayev et al. (1996), with some modifications.
Briefly, SD rats weighing 300–340 g were anesthetized
with 2% isoflurane in a nitrous oxide/oxygen mixture
(70%/30%) and maintained on this mixture during surgery.
A midline surgical incision was made to expose the
480 Hattori et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1726758573)
left common, internal, and external carotid arteries. The
distal portion of the external carotid artery was ligated,
and the common and internal carotid arteries were
temporarily blocked. A small incision was made in the
proximal portion of the external carotid artery. A distal
segment of a 4-0 nylon monofilament suture (Matsuda
Ikakogyo, Tokyo, Japan) was coated with poly-L-lysine
(Sigma) and Xantopren (Heraeus Kulzer, South Bend,
IN) and inserted into the internal carotid artery to block
the origin of the left middle cerebral artery. After 1 hr
of MCAO, the intraluminal suture was carefully
removed, and the neck incision was closed with silk
thread. The rectal temperature was maintained between
36.58C and 37.58C using a thermostat-controlled heating
pad during the surgical procedure. The animals were
allowed to recover, with free access to food and water.
This protocol was approved by the institutional Laboratory
Animals Care and Use Committee, and all animal
experiments were performed in accordance with the
guidelines for animal experiments of Keio University
School of Medicine.
MOMC Transplantation
Three groups of rats were given intracranial transplantations.
One group received syngeneic MOMCs
(107 cells/3 ll RPMI1640), one received syngeneic
macrophages (107 cells/3 ll RPMI1640), and the control
(mock-treated) group received 3 ll of RPMI1640
medium alone. For intracranial delivery, rats were
reanesthetized 7 days after the MCAO procedure and
subjected to stereotaxic injection of the cells into the
striatum, adjacent to the ischemic core, as described previously
(Suzuki et al., 2005). Figure 1a shows the site of
injection: 1.0 mm posterior to the bregma, 3.0 mm
lateral to the midline, and 7.0 mm ventral to the skull
bone (Paxinos and Watson, 1998). In some instances,
MOMCs and macrophages prepared from transgenic
GFP-expressing syngeneic rats were used for the
transplantations.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Rats were anesthetized and placed in a horizontal
7-Tesla animal magnetic resonance imager (PharmaScan
70/16; Bruker BioSpin).
Behavioral Tests
Rats underwent behavioral tests 1 week after
MCAO and immediately before cell transplantation. The
behavioral tests were repeated at 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks after
the transplantation. All rats were trained with three
consecutive trials to generate stable baseline values before
the MCAO procedure. All behavioral testing was performed
and scored by the same experienced investigator
(H.H.), who was blinded to the identity of the experimental
group. The behavioral tests are described below.
Modified neurological severity score (mNSS).
The mNSS is a composite of motor, sensory, balance,
and reflex tests (Chen et al., 2001a), and neurological
function was graded on a scale of 0–18 (Table I).
Percentage severity in mNSS was calculated as the ratio
of the scores at 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks after transplantation
divided by the score before transplantation.
Corner test. This procedure was performed as
described previously (L. Zhang et al., 2002), with some
modifications. The apparatus consists of two boards of
60 3 50 3 0.5 cm set at a 458 angle, so that the angle
is perpendicular to the testing surface. A 1-cm opening
is left between the boards to encourage the rat to enter
the corner. A rat is placed between the two angled
boards facing and halfway to the corner. When a rat
attempts to enter the corner, the vibrissae on both sides
of the head are stimulated simultaneously. The rat reacts
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the stereotaxic cell injection site and a
magnetic resonance image taken 1 week after the MCAO procedure.
a: Schematic diagram of a rat coronal brain section at the level of the
striatum (1.0 mm posterior to the bregma). The vertical arrow indicates
the needle track and the site of cell transplantation or medium
injection. b: Coronal brain section generated by T2-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging of a rat 1 week after MCAO. A representative
image from one of five rats is shown. Scale bar5 5 mm.
MOMC Transplantation in Ischemic Stroke 481
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-349802854)
to the stimulation by rearing up (so that it can turn in
the tight corner space) and turning, and it returns to all
four paws facing the open end of the apparatus. Rats
without ischemic injury turn either right or left with
equal frequency, but rats that received the left MCAO
procedure tended to turn toward the nonimpaired (left)
side. Only turns involving full rearing along either board
were recorded. Ten trials were performed for each rat,
and the percentage of left turns was recorded as a
measure of the severity of neurological damage.
Histological Assessments of the Brain
Sections of brain from the ischemic and contralateral
sides were obtained at 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks after
transplantation. For sacrifice, the rats were transcardially
perfused with ice-cold 0.9% saline solution and then
with 4% paraformaldehyde/0.1 M phosphate-buffered
saline. Frozen sections (20 lm) were prepared and stored
at –808C until use. Some sections were used for hematoxylin
and eosin staining to assess tissue damage. A
whole coronal brain section at the level of the striatum
was recorded as an image under a digital microscope
(VCR FRM20LZ; Omron, Kyoto, Japan), and infract
sizes were evaluated in NIH Image. After endogenous
peroxidases and nonspecific binding had been blocked
with 1.5% skim milk, the sections were incubated overnight
at 48C with mouse anti-CD31 mAb (clone TLD-
3AR; BD Biosciences). The slides were then reacted
with an avidin-biotinylated enzyme complex system
(DakoCytomation LSAB 2 system-HRP for use on rat
specimens; Dako), and the immunoreactive signals were
visualized with diaminobenzidine. To assess the specificity
of the immunoreactivity, the primary antibody was
omitted to provide a nonspecific control. The number
of vessel-like structures or CD311 cells in a 0.25-mm2
area was counted in 12 sections from four rats and is
shown as the mean6 SD.
For fluorescent immunohistochemistry, the sections
were incubated with mouse anti-CD31, anti-RECA-1
(clone HIS52; Serotec, Du ¨sseldorf, Germany) or anti-
NeuN mAb (clone A60; Chemicon), followed by
incubation with mouse-specific IgG conjugated to
AlexaFluor 568 and anti-GFP antibody conjugated to
AlexaFluor 488 (Molecular Probes). Nuclei were stained
with TO-PRO-3 (Molecular Probes), and the sections
were examined with a confocal laser fluorescence microscope
(Fluoview FV1000; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Statistical Analysis
All variables are shown as the mean6 SD, and differences
between two groups were examined by paired
t-test. Serial changes were analyzed by repeated-measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA). When a result reached
significance (P < 0.05), post hoc tests were then carried
out using Fisher’s PLSD method. All statistical analyses
were performed in Statview (version 5.0 for Windows;
SAS Institute).
RESULTS
Establishment of Rat MOMCs
When the method for generating human MOMCs
was applied to circulating MNCs from rats, the majority
of adherent cells were spindle shaped (Fig. 2a). The majority
of these cells were positive for a monocytic
marker, CD11b/Mac-1a, and CD34 and were able to
take up acLDL (Fig. 2b). Immunocytochemical analysis
showed that the adherent cells expressed CD45, CD34,
and type I and III collagens (Fig. 2c). Cells derived from
five different rats showed the same characteristics.
We also prepared freshly isolated circulating
MNCs, adherent and nonadherent MNCs (the adherent
cells were obtained by the 7-day MOMC induction culture
), and freshly isolated bone marrow cells from rats
and subjected them to reverse transcription followed by
PCR, to evaluate the expression of CD14 and type I
collagen (Fig. 2d). We found that CD14 was markedly
downregulated and that type I collagen was upregulated
in the adherent cells obtained by the MOMC induction
culture. Concordant findings were obtained in five independent
experiments. These morphologic and phenotypic
profiles of rat circulating MNC-derived adherent
cells were unique and compatible with those of human
MOMCs (Kuwana et al., 2003).
TABLE I. Modified Neurological Severity Score (mNSS)a
1. Motor tests (total 6)
Raising rat by tail (sum all items satisfied) subtotal 3
Flexion of forelimb 1
Flexion of hindlimb 1
Head moved>108 to vertical axis within 30 sec 1
Placing rat on floor (select one) subtotal 3
Normal walk 0
Inability to walk straight 1
Circling toward paretic side 2
Falls down to paretic side 3
2. Sensory tests (sum all items satisfied; total 2)
Visual and tactile test 1
Deep sensation (pushing paw against table edge to
stimulate limb muscles) 1
3. Beam balance tests (select one; total 6)
Balances with steady posture 0
Grasps side of beam 1
Hugs beam and 1 limb falls down from beam 2
Hugs beam and 2 limbs fall down from beam,
or spins on beam (>60 sec) 3
Attempts to balance on beam out but falls off (>40 sec) 4
Attempts to balance on beam out but falls off (>20 sec) 5
Falls off; no attempt to balance or hang on to beam (<20 sec) 6
4. Relax absence and abnormal movements
(sum all items satisfied; total 4)
Pinna reflex (head shake when auditory meatus is touched) 1
Corneal reflex (eye blink when cornea is lightly touched
with cotton) 1
Startle reflex (motor response to a brief noise from snapping) 1
Seizures, myoclonus, myodystony 1
Maximum points5 18
a13–18, severe injury; 7–12, moderate injury; 1–6, mild injury.
482 Hattori et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Functional Recovery After Intracranial
Transplantation of MOMCs
Rats that underwent left MCAO consistently
showed right hemibody neurological deficits. Coronal
brain sections generated by T2-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging in a representative rat showed a hyperintense
lesion in the middle cerebral artery territory
(Fig. 1b), indicating the successful induction of left middle
cerebral artery infraction. Only rats with severe neurological
deficits showing both an mNSS > 6 and consistent
turning to the left in the corner test 1 week after MCAO
were used for the transplantation procedure.
In total 72 rats were assigned to one of three groups:
the MOMC-transplanted group (n 5 24), the macrophage-transplanted
group (n5 24), and the mock-treated
group (n5 24). The medium with or without cells was
transplanted into the center of the ischemic site. All the
animals survived to the planned endpoint and underwent
serial neurological testing throughout the study.
The serial mNSSs demonstrated minimal functional
recovery in all three groups 1 week after the transplantation
(Fig. 3a). In the MOMC-transplanted rats, the
mNSS severity tended to improve gradually until the
4-week endpoint, but the difference among the three
groups never reached significance. The behavioral
evaluation by the corner test also showed a trend toward
functional recovery in all three groups (Fig. 3b). However
, the MOMC-transplanted rats showed clear
improvement at 3 weeks after the transplantation, which
was greater than in the other two groups (P 5 0.02).
The post hoc analysis revealed a statistically significant
difference in the percentage severity at 4 weeks after the
transplantation: 70% 6 15% in the MOMC-transplanted
group vs. 85% 6 11% in the macrophage-transplanted
group or 89% 6 13% in the mock-treated group
(P5 0.04 for both comparisons).
MOMC Transplantation Promoted
Neovascularization in Ischemic Brain
The hematoxylin-eosin staining of brain sections
showed massive necrosis in the ischemic core, and there
was no difference in the infarct size among the three
groups (Fig. 4). In the infarcted area of the cerebral cortex
, especially in the ischemic boundary area, microvessel-like
structures had appeared by 3 weeks after the
transplantation, and their number increased dramatically
thereafter in the MOMC-transplanted group (Fig. 5a),
but almost none of these structures was detected in the
Fig. 2. Characterization of rat MOMCs. a: Phase-contrast images of
cultured MOMCs. b: Flow cytometric analysis of MOMCs. Cells
were stained with anti-CD11b or anti-CD34 mAbs or were cultured
with Dil-acLDL and analyzed by flow cytometry. Expression or
uptake of the molecules of interest is shown as shaded histograms.
Open histograms represent staining with control antibody or mock
treatment. c: Immunohistochemical analysis of MOMCs. Cells were
stained with antibodies to the indicated cell-surface markers. Controls
were incubated with control antibodies. Nuclei were counterstained
with hematoxylin. d: PCR analysis to evaluate mRNA expression of
CD14, type I collagen (Col[I]a1), and b-actin in freshly prepared
MNCs, adherent MNCs, nonadherent MNCs, MOMCs, and bone
marrow cells. Results shown are representative of five independent
experiments. Scale bars5 100 lmina;50lminc.
MOMC Transplantation in Ischemic Stroke 483
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.417587000)
macrophage-transplanted or mock-treated group. At 4
weeks, the number of microvessel-like structures was
significantly greater in the MOMC-transplanted group
than in the macrophage-transplanted or mock-treated
group (7.5 6 1.6 vs. 3.1 6 1.5 or 3.0 6 1.3, P < 0.01
for both comparisons; Fig. 5b). When expression of
CD31, also termed platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1, was evaluated on the brain sections, large, round
cells positive for CD31 were found in the ischemic
boundary area of the MOMC-transplanted rats (Fig. 5c).
These cells began to appear by 1 week after the transplantation
; their numbers peaked at 2 weeks and
decreased thereafter. Interestingly, these round CD311
cells were undetectable in the infarct lesions of mocktreated
rats, but a small number was found at 2 and 3
weeks in the macrophage-transplanted rats. The number
of round CD311 cells was significantly greater in the
MOMC-transplanted group, compared with the macrophage-transplanted
or mock-treated group, at 2 and 3
weeks after transplantation (P< 0.01 for all comparisons;
Fig. 5d).
To evaluate further the fate of the transplanted cells
in the ischemic brain, we used MOMCs and macrophages
derived from syngeneic GFP-transgenic rats for
cell transplantation (Fig. 6a). At 2 weeks after the transplantation
, GFP-positive round cells were detected
within the ischemic boundary of MOMC- and macrophage-transplanted
rats, but their number was clearly
greater in the MOMC-transplanted rats. The majority of
GFP-positive cells were confirmed to express CD31,
indicating that the round CD311 cells were derived
from the transplanted MOMCs or macrophages. At 4
weeks posttransplantation, these GFP-positive transplanted
cells had greatly decreased in number both in
the MOMC-transplanted rats (Fig 6a, left), suggesting
that the majority of these transplanted cells did not survive
for 4 weeks. At high power, the cells surrounding
the vascular structures clearly expressed both GFP and a
mature endothelial marker, RECA-1 (Fig. 6a, right
Fig. 3. Serial evaluations of rats after the MCAO procedure by
mNSS (a) and the corner test (b) at 0 (pretransplantation), 1, 2, 3,
and 4 weeks after cell transplantation. The mean value obtained from
24 rats in the MOMC-transplanted, macrophage-transplanted, and
mock-treated groups is shown. The percentage severity in mNSS was
calculated as the ratio of the scores at 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks after transplantation
divided by the score before transplantation. The percentage
of left turns was recorded as the measure of severity in the corner
test. An asterisk indicates a statistically significant difference by post
hoc analysis.
Fig. 4. Infarct sizes of whole coronal sections of MCAO rats after
cell transplantation. a: Representative brain images of MOMC-transplanted
, macrophage-transplanted and mock-treated rats at 4 weeks
after transplantation. A dotted line denotes the ischemic boundary. b:
Percentage infarct area in the whole-brain sections of MOMC-transplanted
, macrophage-transplanted, and mock-treated rats at 4 weeks
after transplantation. In total six sections were assessed for each
group. The whole brain area and infract area were measured individually
, and percentage infarct area was calculated based on a formula:
infarct area divided by the whole brain area 3 100. There was no
statistical difference among three groups.
484 Hattori et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
lower panel). Incorporation of GFP-positive cells into
the endothelium was detected only in the MOMC-
transplanted rats, suggesting that the transplanted
MOMCs differentiated into mature endothelial cells.
However, in sections derived from four MOMC-transplanted
rats at 4 weeks, the proportion of endothelial
cells expressing both GFP and RECA-1 in total GFP-
positive cells was only 8%, and the majority of GFP-positive
cells in the infarcted cortex remained the round
CD311 cells. Moreover, only nine (18%) of 50 blood
vessel-containing sections included GFP1 endothelial
cells, indicating that MOMC differentiation into endothelial
cells was not a common event. Finally, none of
the GFP-positive cells in the ischemic lesion of
MOMC- or macrophage-transplanted rats expressed
NeuN, a marker for mature neurons.
To examine further whether MOMCs were a
source of angiogenic and neuroprotective factors,
MOMCs, macrophages, and circulating MNCs were
subjected to PCR to evaluate mRNA expression of
selected factors associated with functional recovery in
the brain (Johanson et al., 2011; Fig. 6b). MOMCs
expressed a series of angiogenic factors, including VEGF,
Ang-1, and PlGF. Especially strong expression of VEGF
was relatively specific to MOMCs. On the other hand,
expression of BDNF and GDNF was prominent in circulating
MNCs, whereas expression of GDNF was also
found in MOMCs but not in macrophages.
Fig. 5. Histological findings in brain sections of MCAO rats after
cell transplantation. a: Representative hematoxylin-eosin-stained
images in the infarcted cortex of MOMC- and macrophagetransplanted
rats at 2 and 4 weeks after transplantation. Arrows
indicate a blood vessel structure. b: The number of blood vessel
structures in the infarcted cortex of MOMC-transplanted, macrophage-transplanted
, and mock-treated rats at 2 and 4 weeks after
transplantation. In total 12 sections from four rats were assessed for
each group. *P < 0.01. c: Representative images of CD31 immunostaining
in the brain of MOMC- and macrophage-transplanted
rats. Arrows indicate CD311 round cells. d: The number of
CD311 round cells in the infarcted cortex of MOMC-transplanted,
macrophage-transplanted, and mock-treated rats at 1, 2, 3, and
4 weeks after transplantation. In total 12 sections from four rats
were assessed for each group. *P < 0.01. Scale bars 5 100 lm in 
a; 50 lm in c. 
MOMC Transplantation in Ischemic Stroke 485
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
DISCUSSION
In the present study, we successfully prepared a rat
counterpart to human MOMCs. These cells showed a
fibroblast-like morphology in culture and a unique molecular
phenotype, positive for both hematologic and
mesenchymal markers as well as CD34. In addition, intracranial
transplantation of MOMCs 1 week after stroke
reduced neurological deficits measured by the corner test
in rats. The reduction in the functional impairment of
the MOMC-transplanted rats could be explained by de
novo vascularization in the infarct area, which was preceded
by the appearance of MOMC-derived round
CD311 cells. These findings provided evidence that
MOMC-based cell therapy has potential efficacy for the
treatment of ischemic stroke.
We detected the beneficial effect of MOMC transplantation
on functional recovery by the corner test but
not by the mNSS. This discrepancy may be attributable
Fig. 6. Mechanisms of MOMC-mediated functional recovery in
MCAO rats. a: Double immunostaining of brain sections of
MCAO rats after the transplantation of GFP-transgenic rat-derived
MOMCs. Representative immunofluorescent images in the ischemic
boundary of MOMC-transplanted rats at 2 and 4 weeks after
transplantation. Left panels are low-magnification images of immunostaining
for GFP. Right panels show high-magnification images
with double immunostaining for GFP and CD31 (top) or RECA-
1 (bottom). Nuclei were counterstained with TO-PRO-3. An asterisk
denotes a vascular lumen. b: PCR analysis to evaluate
mRNA expression of VEGF, Ang-1, PlGF, BDNF, GDNF, and
b-actin in MOMCs, macrophages, and circulating MNCs. Results
shown are representative of five independent experiments. Scale
bars 5 25 lm in a, left; 100 lm in a, right.
486 Hattori et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
( 8.0.0.2542.1958642856 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
to the different aspects of neurologic deficits evaluated
by these behavioral tests. Specifically, the mNSS is composed
of tests for a variety of neurological parameters,
including alertness, motor functions, sensory functions,
and reflexes (Chen et al., 2001a), and it is widely used
for evaluating the most severe stroke conditions. In contrast
, the corner test reflects sensory and motor asymmetries
associated with cortical and striatal dysfunction and
is often used to evaluate long-term functional deficits
(L. Zhang et al., 2002). In fact, neurological recovery after
bone marrow MNC transplantation was previously
demonstrated in a rat model of cerebral ischemia by
using the corner test (Brenneman et al., 2010).
In our protocol, MOMCs were transplanted 1 week
after MCAO. This experimental protocol was designed to
build in relevance to clinical application, because the preparation
of MOMCs requires 1 week of culture. The
administration of MOMCs immediately after cerebral ischemia
may result in a more prominent reduction of ischemic
brain injury, as reported in many rodent models
for evaluating the effects of cell transplantation therapy
(Chen et al., 2001a,b; Kamiya et al., 2008; Brenneman
et al., 2010; Fan et al., 2010). However, other authors
have reported that the therapeutic window for cell transplantation
therapy is up to 1 month after stroke (Iihoshi
et al., 2004; Shen et al., 2007b). Our study also differs
from some others in that we chose an intracranial
approach, to deliver cells directly into the ischemic lesion,
because MOMCs administered via the circulation may
not reach the lesion in sufficient numbers to repair massive
injuries to the brain, owing to the damaged blood-supplying
vessels. In addition, the intravenous delivery of bone
marrow-derived cells was reported to result in loss of the
cells from trapping by first-pass filters, such as the liver and
lung (Chen et al., 2001a; Fischer et al., 2008). An intracarotid
injection of MOMCs is another potential approach,
but it was reported that the intraarterial delivery of bone
marrow MNCs led to immediate deposition of the cells in
the periinfarct area, but the majority of cells entered apoptosis
immediately after migrating to the area of injury
(Brenneman et al., 2010).
The mechanism underlying the MOMC-mediated
functional recovery remains unclear. In this regard,
MOMC transplantation did not decrease the infarct size,
although this might have been due to the late timing of
the transplantation. Moreover, we did not obtain any
evidence that the transplanted MOMCs differentiated
into neural cells, as described by Iihoshi et al. (2004) and
Shyu et al. (2006). Instead, remarkable microvessel formation
was observed in the ischemic boundary area at 4
weeks after the transplantation in the MOMC-transplanted
rats; however, we did not confirm blood flow in
these structures. Neovessel formation was preceded by
an accumulation of MOMC-derived round CD311 cells
in the infract area, which peaked 2 weeks after the transplantation
, indicating that these MOMC-derived cells
are likely to be involved in microvessel formation
through at least two different processes. One possible
mechanism is in vivo differentiation into mature endothelial
cells and integration into the newly formed vasculature
, because human MOMCs could differentiate into
the endothelial cell lineage and contribute to vascular
formation in vitro and in vivo (Kuwana et al., 2006). In
this regard, vasculogenesis mediated by transplanted
endothelial progenitor cells or neural stem cells was
reported in several experimental ischemia models (Z.G.
Zhang et al., 2002; Ii et al., 2009; Fan et al., 2010).
However, our experiments using GFP-expressing
MOMCs for transplantation revealed that the integration
of MOMC-derived endothelial cells into the vascular
wall was not a common event, suggesting that this
mechanism does not solely play a role in the MOMC-
mediated functional recovery.
On the other hand, human MOMCs produce a
large variety of cytokines and growth factors that promote
angiogenesis and tissue repair (Kuwana et al.,
2006; Seta and Kuwana, 2010). In this study, we showed
that rat MOMCs expressed a series of angiogenic factors,
such as VEGF, Ang-1, and PlGF, which were shown to
promote angiogenesis and functional recovery in an
experimental stroke model (Liu et al., 2006; Onda et al.,
2008 Hermann and Zechariah, 2009). Thus, transplanted
MOMCs are likely to play a critical role in promoting
the local angiogenesis governed by residential endothelial
cells and progenitors through the secretion of a wide
array of angiogenic factors. Especially the ability of
MOMCs to express VEGF was greatly superior to macrophages
, suggesting that this is partially responsible for
the observed difference in functional recovery between
rats receiving transplantation of MOMCs and rats receiving
macrophages. Furthermore, GDNF produced by
MOMCs may promote neuroregenerative and neuroprotective
actions in the injured brain (Johanson et al.,
2011). It is also possible that increased production of
cytokines and growth factors in parallel to promotion of
neovascularization can influence plasticity of strokedamaged
brain, insofar as GDNF has been shown to
increase stroke-induced neurogenesis in an experimental
stroke model (Kobayashi et al., 2006). Therefore,
neovascularization through production of a large array of
angiogenic factors in combination with in vivo differentiation
into mature endothelial cells appears to be a
primary mechanism for MOMC-mediated functional
recovery in rat MCAO model.
In summary, our results with this clinically relevant
rodent model indicate that MOMCs are a potentially
effective candidate for use in cell transplantation therapy
for cerebral ischemia. The ready collection of MOMCs
from the peripheral blood makes them a safe and abundant
source of autologous cells. Further studies are necessary
to determine the optimal therapeutic timing and
dose as well as method for delivery for MOMCs to be
used clinically to treat ischemic stroke.
REFERENCES
Bang OY, Lee JS, Lee PH, Lee G. 2005. Autologous mesenchymal stem
cell transplantation in stroke patients. Ann Neurol 57:874–882.
MOMC Transplantation in Ischemic Stroke 487
Journal of Neuroscience Research
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1607270965)
Belayev L, Alonso OF, Busto R, Zhao W, Ginsberg MD. 1996. Middle
cerebral artery occlusion in the rat by intraluminal suture. Neurological
and pathological evaluation of an improved model. Stroke 27:1616–
1622.
Brenneman M, Sharma S, Harting M, Strong R, Cox CS Jr, Aronowski
J, Grotta JC, Savitz SI. 2010. Autologous bone marrow mononuclear
cells enhance recovery after acute ischemic stroke in young and middle-aged
rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30:140–149.
Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Lu D, Lu M, Chopp M. 2001a. Therapeutic
benefit of intravenous administration of bone marrow stromal
cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 32:1005–1011.
Chen J, Sanberg PR, Li Y, Wang L, Lu M, Willing AE, Sanchez-Ramos
J, Chopp M. 2001b. Intravenous administration of human umbilical
cord blood reduces behavioral deficits after stroke in rats. Stroke
32:2682–2688.
Fan Y, Shen F, Frenzel T, Zhu W, Ye J, Liu J, Chen Y, Su H, Young
WL, Yang GY. 2010. Endothelial progenitor cell transplantation
improves long-term stroke outcome in mice. Ann Neurol 67:488–497.
Fischer UM, Harting MT, Jimenez F, Monzon-Posadas WO, Xue H,
Savitz SI, Laine GA, Cox CS. 2008. Pulmonary passage is a major
obstacle for intravenous stem cell delivery: the pulmonary first pass
effect. Stem Cells Dev 18:683–692.
Hermann DM, Zechariah A. 2009. Implications of vascular endothelial
growth factor for postischemic neurovascular remodeling. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 29:1620–1643.
Ii M, Nishimura H, Sekiguchi H, Kamei N, Yokoyama A, Horii M,
Asahara T. 2009. Concurrent vasculogenesis and neurogenesis from
adult neural stem cells. Circ Res 105:860–868.
Iihoshi S, Honmou O, Houkin K, Hashi K, Kocsis JD. 2004. A
therapeutic window for intravenous administration of autologous bone
marrow after cerebral ischemia in adult rats. Brain Res 1007:1–9.
Ikawa M, Yamada S, Nakanishi T, Okabe M. 1999. Green fluorescent
protein (GFP) as a vital marker in mammals. Curr Top Dev Biol 44:1–
20.
Johanson C, Stopa E, Baird A, Sharma H. 2011. Traumatic brain injury
and recovery mechanisms: peptide modulation of periventricular neurogenic
regions by the choroid plexus-CSF nexus. J Neural Transm
118:115–133.
Kamiya N, Ueda M, Igarashi H, Nishiyama Y, Suda S, Inaba T,
Katayama Y. 2008. Intra-arterial transplantation of bone marrow mononuclear
cells immediately after reperfusion decreases brain injury after
focal ischemia in rats. Life Sci 83:433–437.
Kobayashi T, Ahlenius H, Thored P, Kobayashi R, Kokaia Z, Lindvall
O. 2006. Intracerebral infusion of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor promotes striatal neurogenesis after stroke in adult rats. Stroke
37:2361–2367.
Kodama H, Inoue T, Watanabe R, Yasuoka H, Kawakami Y, Ogawa S,
Ikeda Y, Mikoshiba K, Kuwana M. 2005. Cardiomyogenic potential of
mesenchymal progenitors derived from human circulating CD141
monocytes. Stem Cells Dev 14:676–686.
Kodama H, Inoue T, Watanabe R, Yasutomi D, Kawakami Y, Ogawa
S, Mikoshiba K, Ikeda Y, Kuwana M. 2006. Neurogenic potential of
progenitors derived from human circulating CD141 monocytes. Immunol
Cell Biol 84:209–217.
Kuwana M, Okazaki Y, Kodama H, Izumi K, Yasuoka H, Ogawa Y,
Kawakami Y, Ikeda Y. 2003. Human circulating CD141 monocytes as
a source of progenitors that exhibit mesenchymal cell differentiation.
J Leukoc Biol 74:833–845.
Kuwana M, Okazaki Y, Kodama H, Satoh T, Kawakami Y, Ikeda Y.
2006. Endothelial differentiation potential of human monocyte-derived
multipotential cells. Stem Cells 24:2733–2743.
Liu H, Honmou O, Harada K, Nakamura K, Houkin K, Hamada H,
Kocsis JD. 2006. Neuroprotection by PlGF gene-modified human
mesenchymal stem cells after cerebral ischaemia. Brain 129:2734–2745.
Onda T, Honmou O, Harada K, Houkin K, Hamada H, Kocsis JD.
2008. Therapeutic benefits by human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs)
and Ang-1 gene-modified hMSCs after cerebral ischemia. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 28:329–340.
Paxinos G, Watson C. 1998. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates,4th
ed. New York: Academic Press.
Rodrigues DM, Li AY, Nair DG, Blennerhassett MG. 2011. Glial cell
line-derived neurotrophic factor is a key neurotrophin in the postnatal
enteric nervous system. Neurogastroenterol Motil 23:e44–e56.
Seta N, Kuwana M. 2010. Derivation of multipotent progenitors from
human circulating CD141 monocytes. Exp Hematol 38:557–563.
Shen LH, Li Y, Chen J, Cui Y, Zhang C, Kapke A, Lu M, Savant-
Bhonsale S, Chopp M. 2007a. One-year follow-up after bone marrow
stromal cell treatment in middle-aged female rats with stroke. Stroke
38:2150–2156.
Shen LH, Li Y, Chen J, Zacharek A, Gao Q, Kapke A, Lu M, Raginski
K, Vanguri P, Smith A, Chopp M. 2007b. Therapeutic benefit of bone
marrow stromal cells administered 1 month after stroke. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 27:6–13.
Shyu WC, Lin SZ, Chiang MF, Su CY, Li H. 2006. Intracerebral
peripheral blood stem cell (CD34) implantation induces neuroplasticity
by enhancing b1 integrin-mediated angiogenesis in chronic stroke rats.
J Neurosci 26:3444–3453.
Suzuki S, Yamashita T, Tanaka K, Hattori H, Sawamoto K, Okano H,
Suzuki N. 2005. Activation of cytokine signaling through leukemia inhibitory
factor receptor (LIFR)/gp130 attenuates ischemic brain injury
in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25:685–693.
Torry RJ, Tomanek RJ, Zheng W, Miller SJ, Labarrere CA, Torry DS.
2009. Hypoxia increases placenta growth factor expression in human
myocardium and cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. J Heart Lung
Transplant 2:183–190.
Yamamoto A, Takahashi H, Kojima Y, Tsuda Y, Morio Y, Muramatsu
M, Fukuchi Y. 2007. Downregulation of angiopoietin-1 and Tie2 in
chronic hypoxic pulmonary hypertension. Respiration 75:328–338.
Zhang L, Schallert T, Zhang ZG, Jiang Q, Arniego P, Li Q, Lu M,
Chopp M. 2002. A test for detecting long-term sensorimotor dysfunction
in the mouse after focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Methods
117:207–214.
Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q, Chopp M. 2002. Bone marrow-derived
endothelial progenitor cells participate in cerebral neovascularization
after focal cerebral ischemia in the adult mouse. Circ Res 90:284–288.
Zhao T, Li Y, Tang L, Li Y, Fan F, Jiang B. 2011. Protective effects of
human umbilical cord blood stem cell intravitreal transplantation against
optic nerve injury in rats. Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol [E-pub
ahead of print].
488 Hattori et al.
Journal of Neuroscience Research
( 8.0.0.2542.2026427002 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
