Inflammation, Vol. 38, No. 1, February 2015 ( # 2014)
DOI: 10.1007/s10753-014-0005-0

Neuroprotective Effect of Humic Acid on Focal Cerebral
Ischemia Injury: an Experimental Study in Rats
Adile Ozkan,1,6 Halil Murat Sen,1 Ibrahim Sehitoglu,2 Hasan Alacam,3 Mustafa Guven,4
Adem Bozkurt Aras,4 Tarik Akman,4 Coşkun Silan,5 Murat Cosar,4 and
Handan Isin Ozisik Karaman1

Abstract—Stroke is still a major cause of death and permanent neurological disability. As humic acids
are well-known antioxidant molecules, the purpose of this study was to investigate the potential neuroprotective effects of humic acid in a focal cerebral ischemia model. Twenty-four rats were divided
equally into three groups. A middle cerebral artery occlusion model was performed in this study where
control (group II) and humic acid (group III) were administered intraperitoneally following an ischemic
experimental procedure. Group I was evaluated as sham. Malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dismutase (SOD), and nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) levels were analyzed biochemically on the right
side of the ischemic cerebral hemisphere, while ischemic histopathological studies were completed on
the left side to investigate the antioxidant status. Biochemical results showed that SOD and NRF-1 levels
were significantly increased in the humic acid group (III) compared with the control group (II) while
MDA levels were significantly decreased. On histopathological examination, cerebral edema, vacuolization, degeneration, and destruction of neural elements were decreased in the humic acid group (III)
compared with the control group (II). Cerebral ischemia was attenuated by humic acid administration.
These observations indicate that humic acid may have potential as a therapeutic agent in cerebral
ischemia by preventing oxidative stress.
KEY WORDS: cerebrum; humic acid; ischemia.

reperfusion period [2, 3]. This injury is associated with an
increase in intracellular calcium, generation of free radicals, oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation, inflammation, and
apoptosis.
Oxidative stress has for many years been reported to
be associated with cellular tissue damage and neuronal
death. Free radicals such as superoxide anion radical, hydroxyl radical, and nitric oxide (NO) exist during cerebral
ischemia, which lead to lipid peroxidation, inflammation,
and apoptosis. The damaging effects of free radicals are
normally reduced by antioxidant enzymes and free radical
scavengers. This antioxidant defense mechanism includes
superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione
peroxidase (GPx), glutathione (GSH), and vitamin C.
However, the brain has limited antioxidant capacity, so
especially after a reperfusion period, the brain is affected
[4, 5]. In addition to these endogenous antioxidant
enzymes, there are many molecules with antioxidant properties that have been shown to have beneficial effects
during cerebral ischemia [6–8].

INTRODUCTION
Ischemic stroke is the third leading cause of death and
the major cause of permanent neurological disability [1].
Therefore, it is very important to develop prophylactic
protection strategies against stroke using neuroprotective
agents. Cerebral ischemia begins with neurological injury
due to reduction of blood flow to the brain and during a
1

Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Çanakkale 18 Mart
University, Kepez, Çanakkale, Turkey
2
Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Recep Tayyip Erdogan
University, Rize, Turkey
3
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Samsun 19 Mayıs
University, Samsun, Turkey
4
Department of Neurosurgery, Faculty of Medicine, Çanakkale 18 Mart
University, Kepez, Çanakkale, Turkey
5
Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Çanakkale 18 Mart
University, Kepez, Çanakkale, Turkey
6
To whom correspondence should be addressed at Department of
Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Çanakkale 18 Mart University, Kepez,
Çanakkale, Turkey. E-mail: dradileozkan@gmail.com

32
0360-3997/15/0100-0032/0 #

2014 Springer Science+Business Media New York

33

Neuroprotective Effect of Humic Acid on Cerebral Ischemia
Humic acid (HA) is an important polyphenolic antioxidant that is known as a strong free radical scavenger. Humic
acid consists of a group of high molecular weight polymers
that are produced from organic materials that can be found
in soil, drinking water, peat, coal, and other sources [9]. It is
composed of aromatic rings, phenolic hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, and methoxyl groups attached to benzene rings.
Humic acids have been used for growth stimulation in plants
and as therapeutics in animals for many years [10]. They
also are used as pharmacologic agents in various medical
practices. It has been shown that HAs have local analgesic
properties; are antimicrobial, antiinflammatory, [11–14] and
antiviral; and have anti-HIV activity [15, 16], immunostimulatory, and antioxidant effects [17, 18].
With the knowledge of the important role of oxidative
stress on the pathophysiology of cerebral ischemia, we
investigated the antioxidant and potential neuroprotective
role of HA using a model of focal cerebral ischemia. To the
best of our knowledge, there is as yet no scientific evidence
concerning this issue. The primary outcome of our study
was to measure brain tissue free oxygen scavenger levels.
The secondary outcome was the histopathological and
immunohistochemical examination of brain tissue.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethical approval for this experimental study was
obtained from the Çanakkale 18 Mart University Medical
Faculty Animal Research Ethical Committee. Twenty-four
male Sprague–Dawley rats (aged 8–12 weeks) weighing
250–300 g were used in the study, which was carried out at
the Experimental Surgery Laboratory of Çanakkale 18
Mart University Faculty of Medicine, Çanakkale, Turkey.
The experimental protocols were performed according to
the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (US
National Institutes of Health, revised 1985). All rats were
placed in separate cages at room temperature during the
study under standard laboratory conditions with a 12
h light/12 h dark cycle and allowed to have ad libitum food
and water before and after surgery. All surgical procedures
were performed under sterile conditions by a surgical team.
Experimental Protocol
Twenty-four Sprague–Dawley rats were divided into
three groups as follows:
Group 1 (sham group, n=8): No additional medical
administration or surgical intervention was performed,
only follow-up.

Group 2 (control group, n=8): Middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) was induced by an intraluminal filament method, which has been shown previously to produce
focal cerebral ischemia [19], and 1 ml saline was injected
intraperitoneally.
Group 3 (humic acid group, n=8): MCA was occluded. Ten milliliters per kilogram of humic acid was administrated intraperitoneally (MCAO + HA).
Surgical Procedure
An accepted and published method for our experimental model (intraluminal filament technique) was used
as previously described [19]. Before the experimental procedure, all animals were weighed with an analytical balance and body weights were recorded. Rats were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of xylazine
(Rompun-Bayer, Istanbul, Turkey) 5 mg/kg and ketamine
hydrochloride (Ketalar, Eczacıbaşı, Istanbul, Turkey) 50
mg/kg. The skin on the head of the rat was shaved and then
prepared with povidone-iodine. As described by Longa
et al., the MCA was occluded to create focal cerebral
ischemia [19]. In the supine position with a midline neck
incision, as Kocher’s thyroidectomy incision, the left common carotid arteries were presented and then the external
carotid arteries dissected and suspended. A 4-0 nylon
monofilament (Ethilon, Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany)
was placed into the common carotid artery and moved
forward to a position 16–18 mm distal with a minor incision of the carotid artery. Without withdrawing the suture
material, the neck incision was closed with a 3-0 silk
suture.
Group I (sham group, n=8): No drug or saline was given to
this group. It was followed up for 24 h after routine
surgical procedures as written above.
Group II (control group, n=8): Following surgery, a sterile
saline solution of 0.9 % with a volume of 1 ml was given
intraperitoneally.
Group III (humic acid group, n=8): Following surgery,
humic acid (Sigma Tau, Rome, Italy) was administrated
at a dose of 10 ml/kg intraperitoneally. After recovery,
animals were followed and a left side weakness was
monitored in all animals.
After 24 h, all rats in the three groups were reanesthetized and sacrificed with a decapitation method. Whole
brains of the three groups were harvested for biochemical
analysis and histopathological investigation. The experimental procedure was immediately controlled to confirm
that the monofilament suture reached and occluded the

34

Ozkan, Sen, Sehitoglu, Alacam, Guven, Aras, Akman, Silan, Cosar, and Karaman

MCA. The brain was washed in cooled 0.9 % saline, kept
on ice, and subsequently blotted on filter paper. Half of the
right hemisphere was stored for tissue biochemical analysis. The other half was fixed in a solution of 4 % paraformaldehyde for histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations. Humic acid was dissolved in water.

ELISA method and the results are presented as nanomoles
per milliliter per milligram protein.
Histopathologic Examination
After the tissues were kept in fixative for 24 h, they
were washed under running water for approximately 6–8 h
and then passed through an ethanol–xylene series. Automatic tissue follow-up (Citadel 2000, Thermo Fisher Scientific Shandon, England) was performed and they were
immersed in liquid paraffin. From the tissues for routine
hematoxylin–eosin (HE) and Luxol fast blue (LFB) staining, 4–6-μm cross sections were obtained, and 3–4-μmthick cross sections were obtained for immunohistochemical staining.
Cross sections for immunohistochemical staining
were kept in xylene for 20 min and were passed through
an alcohol series (70–99 %) and then kept in 3 % H2O2
solution for 10 min. After they were washed with PBS,
they were heated in citrate-buffered solution four times for
5–10 min at 700–800 W and were kept in a secondary
blocker for 20 min. Each preparation was kept in different
dilutions of antibody (1/200–1/250) for 60–75 min. Diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as chromogen and
Mayer’s hematoxylin for cross staining. PBS was used
for negative controls. Preparations were sealed with appropriate sealing materials and were photographed. They were
separated into four categories as mild (+), moderate (++),
severe (+++), and very severe (++++) according to percentile values in each area of immunopositive reaction in the
tissues as a result of immunohistochemical staining. Fifteen different areas were examined for every preparation
subjected to hematoxylin staining. Each of these areas was
1,200 μm2, and cell density was determined by counting
the neuronal cells remaining within the frame of this area.

Tissue Biochemical Examination
Cerebral tissue samples were homogenized at 20,000
rpm for 30 s on ice with 1 ml cold phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) after being pulverized with liquid nitrogen.
The homogenate obtained was centrifuged for 10 min at
10,000×g at 4 °C. Supernatants were transferred to another
tube. All samples were stored at −80 °C until analyzed. The
samples were thawed at 2–8 °C on the day when the
analysis started.
Measurement of Levels of Protein, SOD, MDA,
and NRF-1
The protein content was measured by the method of
Lowry et al. with bovine serum albumin as the standard.
Results are presented as milligrams per milliliter [20].
Tissue SOD activity was determined using the nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) method defined by Sun et al. and
modified by Durak et al. [21, 22]. A Shimadzu spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan) was used for
the SOD assay. In this method, NBT is reduced to blue
formazan by superoxide (O2− ), which has a strong
absorbance at 560 nm. One unit (U) of SOD is defined as
the amount of protein that inhibits the rate of NBT reduction by 50 %. The calculated SOD activity is expressed as
units per milligram protein.
Malondialdehyde (MDA) levels were analyzed for
lipid peroxidation products [23]. MDA levels were measured by an ELISA method and the results are presented as
nanomoles per milliliter per milligram protein.
Nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) target genes
control cell adhesion, cell spreading, migration, proliferation, and apoptosis. NRF-1 levels were measured by an

Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with the Statistical
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 19.0 for
Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The

Table 1. The Mean Values of Histopathological Findings with HE and LFB Staining
Groups

Red neuron

Vacuolization

Cellular degeneration

Edema

Group I (sham)
Group II (control)
Group III (humic acid)

++
+++
++

+
++++
++

+
+++
++

+
+++
++

According to percentile values in each area of immunopositive reaction in the tissues as a result of immunohistochemical staining: mild (+), moderate (++),
severe (+++), and very severe (++++)

35

Neuroprotective Effect of Humic Acid on Cerebral Ischemia

Fig. 1. Representative photomicrographs showing neurons, astrocytes, and microglial cells stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) in the ischemic brain
area of rats after 6 h of MCA occlusion. a Sham group, b control group, and c humic (MCAO + HA) groups, sacrificed after 6 h. Red neurons are shown as
(rc) and edema as (e). Scale bars=20 μm.

Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to examine the compatibility between measured variables and normal distribution. One-way ANOVA and Tukey HSD for post hoc
comparison tests were used for statistical analysis. Descriptive statistics included arithmetic median (minimum–maximum). Statistical significance was set at a P value <0.05.

was fixed in saline and humic acid groups by a boardcertified blinded pathologist.
Histopathological and Immunohistochemical
Examination

RESULTS

The degree of ischemia was significantly smaller in
the humic acid (III) group than that in the control group
(II). On histopathological examination, cerebral edema,
vacuolization, degeneration, and destruction of neural elements were decreased in the humic acid (III) group compared with the control (II) group (Table 1, Figs. 1 and 2).
Caspase-3 immunoreactivity was decreased, especially in the cortex and external granular layers in the humic
acid group compared with the control group, but this was
not statistically significant (Fig. 3, Table 2).
In the control group, the immunopositivity for
caspase-9 was slightly greater than that in the humic acid
group. In the large ventricular zone surrounding cortical
neurons, caspase-9 staining showed immunopositivity in
the shape of rings (Fig. 4, Table 2).

No complication was recorded and no animal died
during the experimental procedure.

The Effect of Humic Acid on Cerebral Ischemia (MDA,
NRF-1 Levels, and SOD Activities)

Power Analysis
Sample size estimation was dependent on the standard deviation as in the published study by Park et al. [24].
It was calculated that sample size should be at least seven
rats per group with an alpha error of 0.05 and a power
of >80 %. Due to the estimated mortality rate during
the experimental procedure, we included eight rats in
each group. The sample size was calculated with
power calculator (UCLA Department of Statistics,
http://www.stat.ubc.ca/~rollin/stats/ssize).

Effect of the Intraluminal Filament Method
on Cerebral Tissue
After 24 h, focal cerebral ischemia developed in the
area supplied by the MCA after performing the intraluminal filament method in the control (II) and humic acid (III)
groups when compared with the sham (I) group. Tissue

While intraperitoneal administration of humic acid at
a dose of 10 μg/kg reduced cerebral tissue MDA levels,
SOD activity was significantly increased in the humic acid
group (III) compared with the control group (II).
NRF-1 levels in the humic acid group (III) and sham
group (I) were higher than those in the control group (II).
The mean values of NRF-1 levels in the sham, saline, and

Fig. 2. Representative photomicrographs showing neurons, astrocytes, and microglial cells stained with Luxol fast blue (LFB) in the ischemic brain area of
rats after 6 h of MCA occlusion. a Sham group, b control group, and c humic acid (MCAO + HA) group, sacrificed after 6 h. Red neurons (rc), vascular
dilatation (di), cellular degeneration (de), and edema (e) are shown. Scale bars=20 μm.

36

Ozkan, Sen, Sehitoglu, Alacam, Guven, Aras, Akman, Silan, Cosar, and Karaman

Fig. 3. Effects of HA on caspase-3 expression in the ischemic brain area by immunohistochemical methods at 6 h after experimental stroke. A representative
example of caspase-3 immunohistochemical staining in an ischemic brain section in the sham group (a), control group (b), and humic acid (MCAO + HA)
group (c). Caspase-3 expression in neurons (black arrows) is shown. Arrow head indicates peripheral positivity, black arrow intensely positive cells, and V
vacuolization. Scale bars=20 μm.

humic acid groups were 2.7±0.7, 0.7±0.3, and 1.4±0.3
(P<0.001), respectively. Our results demonstrated that humic acid reduces oxidative stress markers and has a positive antioxidant effect, which supports the antioxidant capacity in cerebral tissue of rats. All biochemical results are
shown in Table 3.

DISCUSSION
Stroke is the leading cause of adult disability and
mortality and is the third largest cause of death worldwide
[25]. Cerebral ischemia causes a rapid onset of neurological injury due to a decrease in blood circulation in affected
areas that leads to decreased oxygen and glucose supplies,
resulting in cellular damage and impairment of neurological functions. Thus, the affected brain area undergoes
dramatic changes and generates more free radical species,
which play an important role in cerebral ischemia. The
central nervous system (CNS) has an efficient antioxidant
defense system, including superoxide dismutase (SOD)
and catalase (CAT) as well as scavenger molecules such
as glutathione (GSH) and vitamin C. But the endogenous
antioxidant molecules are thought to have insufficient capacity during cerebral ischemia, resulting in an increase of
free radicals, including reactive oxygen species (ROS) and
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) [1, 26, 27]. SOD is the
most effective intracellular antioxidant enzyme, which catalyzes the dismutation of superoxide anion (O2−) into
H2O2 and molecular oxygen. During cellular damage
induced by oxygen free radicals, SOD increases and

protects cells from oxidative stress. Another event during
the ischemic process is lipid peroxidation, which leads to
permanent damage. Previous studies have indicated that
lipid peroxidation occurs in vivo during and after brain
ischemia and reperfusion. MDA is one of the end
products formed via the decomposition of certain primary
and secondary lipid peroxidation products. This reactive
species occurs naturally and is a sensitive marker of
oxidative stress [28, 29].
Mitochondria also play a role in energy metabolism
and generation of ROS during ischemic brain injury. Nuclear respiratory factor-1 encodes a protein that functions
as a transcription factor, activating the expression of key
metabolic genes regulating cellular growth and nuclear
genes required for respiration and mitochondrial DNA
transcription and replication. NRF-1 also has an important
role during production and regulation of antioxidant
enzymes. Previous studies have suggested that mitochondrial biogenesis contributes to improved post-ischemic
recovery of brain function and NRF-1 has been shown to
be increased after ischemic brain injury [30, 31].
Despite knowledge of the pathophysiology of cerebral ischemia, options for the prophylactic protection of
stroke with a neuroprotective agent are still limited. Therefore, recently, there have been many studies of molecules
with antioxidant and antiinflammatory effects, in order to
reduce permanent damage due to ischemic injury. Since the
previous studies have shown that both SOD and NRF-1
have antioxidant effects during ischemic brain injury in
protecting from oxidative stress, and production of MDA
occurs after an ischemic process due to lipid peroxidation,

Table 2. Immunoperoxidase Staining Results of Anti-caspase-3 and Anti-caspase-9
Parameters

Group I (sham)

Group II (control)

Group III (humic acid)

P value

Anti-caspase-3
Anti-caspase-9

2.00±0.34
2.00±0.83

4.00±0.74
4.00±0.46

3.86±0.53
3.64±0.89

>0.005
>0.005

Data are expressed as median ± SD. Statistically significant difference in comparison between sham, control, and experimental (P<0.05) groups

37

Neuroprotective Effect of Humic Acid on Cerebral Ischemia

Fig. 4. Effects of SA on caspase-9 expression in the ischemic brain area by immunohistochemical methods at 6 h after experimental stroke. Representative
example of caspase-9 immunohistochemical staining in an ischemic brain section in the sham (a), control group (b), and humic acid (MCAO + HA) group (c).
Black arrows indicate intensely positive cells, and stars mildly positive cells. Scale bars=20 μm.

we have examined these molecules to determine the antioxidant effects of HA after ischemic brain injury.
To our knowledge, there is no publication in the
current literature that evaluates the effects of humic acid
on focal cerebral ischemia. This study has demonstrated
that systemic administration of humic acid has a significant
antioxidant effect on focal cerebral ischemia. Humic acids
are well-known beneficial substances as therapeutic drugs
in veterinary applications and also have been widely used
in plant production for many years. Although many protective effects of HAs have been shown in experimental
studies, such as analgesic, antimicrobial, immunostimulatory, and antioxidant, different opinions exist in the literature about the safety of these molecules [10–18]. The
European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (EMEA) in 1999 reported protective effects on the
intestinal mucosa and adsorptive, antitoxic, and antimicrobial effects of humic acids [32]. Brzozowski et al. showed
that HA administration decreased the size of gastric mucosal damage and stimulated the healing time of gastric and
duodenal ulcers in rats [33]. Riede et al. showed that HA
raised the breaking point of the tail tendon of the rat and
also increased the resistance of collagen fibers [34].
However, the mechanism of HA action is still not
known, either in vivo or in vitro. Some reports have assumed that HAs induce oxidative DNA damage and may
increase NO, peroxynitrite production, and apoptosis [35–
37]. Cheng et al. have reported that HAs generate superoxide anion and reduce glutathione and several antioxidant
enzymes, and like the findings of several studies have
indicated that HA could induce oxidative injury and

DNA damage [38]. Humic substances also have been
found to play an important role in the pathogenesis of
blackfoot disease and some cancer types [39].
But contrary to these studies, Kodama et al. have
reported the in vivo antitumor effect of humus extract on
murine transplantable L1210 leukemia in mice, and also
they have shown a positive effect of administration of
humus extract against experimental infections in ulcer
disease caused by Aeromonas salmonicida in carp [40].
In another study of humus extract, these authors also have
shown antiinflammatory effects of humus extract against
Trypanosoma brucei infection in mice. They indicated that
humic substances enhance host immune responses nonspecifically in their study [41].
Humic acids have also been suggested to show antiviral activity. Van Rensburg et al. demonstrated anti-HIV
properties of oxihumate in their in vitro studies [13]. On the
other hand, HAs have been reported to have immunostimulatory effects. Joone et al. showed that oxihumate increased IL-2 receptors on lymphocytes and
the proliferative response of lymphocytes that leads
to enhancement of TH1 cell activities [42]. Consistent with this study, Vucskits et al. indicated that
both fulvic acid (FA) and HA are strong humoral
immune stimulants by enhancing lymphocyte proliferation, and they also increased the persistence of
antibodies systemically in their experimental rat study
[17]. There are very limited studies about the antioxidant properties of HA. Efimova et al. added HA to
a cumene-dimethyl sulfoxide–initiator reaction mixture and observed that it inhibited oxidation of the

Table 3. The Activity of Superoxide Dismutase (SOD), Level of Malondialdehyde (MDA), and Nuclear Respiratory Factor-1 (NRF-1)
Parameters

Group I (sham)

Group II (control)

Group III (humic acid)

P value

SOD (U/mg protein)
MDA (nmol/ml/mg protein)
NRF-1 (nmol/ml/mg protein)

6.9±1.2
0.5±0.2
2.7±0.7

2.3±1.0
1.7±0.5
0.7±0.3

4.2±1.6
0.9±0.2
1.4±0.3

<0.001
<0.001
<0.001

Data are expressed as median ± SD. Statistically significant difference in comparison between sham, control, and experimental (P<0.05) groups

38

Ozkan, Sen, Sehitoglu, Alacam, Guven, Aras, Akman, Silan, Cosar, and Karaman

hydrocarbon substrate. They showed that HA had
antioxidant properties since it inhibited radical chain
oxidation [18].
Here, we have shown that HA significantly increased
SOD and NRF-1 levels and decreased MDA levels in a
focal cerebral ischemia model, and these findings were
supported histopathologically. Humic acid protected rats
from ischemia-induced brain injury, which may be due to
the reduction of oxidative stress. These observations suggest that humic acid may be a clinically viable protective
agent against cerebral ischemia where cellular damage is a
consequence of oxidative stress. In addition, humic acid
may potentially be a new agent to be used in the prevention
of focal cerebral ischemia, being also inexpensive and
easily available.

Conflict of Interest. The authors declare no conflicts of
interest.

Financial Support. No financial support

REFERENCES
1. Brouns, R., and P.P. De Deyn. 2009. The complexity of neurological processes in acute ischemic stroke. Clinical Neurology
and Neurosurgery 111: 483–495.
2. Lipton, P. 1999. Ischemic cell death in brain neurons. Physiological
Reviews 79: 1431–1568.
3. Kuroda, S., and B.K. Siesjo. 1997. Reperfusion damage following
focal ischemia: pathophysiology and therapeutic windows. Clinical
Neuroscience 4: 199–212.
4. Chan, P.H. 2001. Reactive oxygen radicals in signaling and damage in
the ischemic brain. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism
21: 2–14.
5. Zimmermann, C., K. Winnefeld, S. Streck, M. Roskos, R.L. Haberl,
et al. 2004. Antioxidant status in acute stroke patients and patients at
stroke risk. European Neurology 51: 157–61.
6. Simonyi, A., Q. Wang, R.L. Miller, et al. 2005. Polyphenols in
cerebral ischemia: novel targets for neuroprotection. Molecular Neurobiology 31(1–3): 135–47.
7. Gilgun-Sherki, Y., E. Melamed, and D. Offen. 2001. Oxidative stress induced-neurodegenerative diseases: the need for
antioxidants that penetrate the blood brain barrier. Neuropharmacology
40: 959–975.
8. Cho, J.Y., I.S. Kim, Y.H. Jang, et al. 2006. Protective effect of
quercetin, a natural flavonoid against neuronal damage after transient
global cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience Letters 404: 330–335.
9. Hartenstein, R. 1981. Sludge decomposition and stabilization. Science
212(802): 743–749.
10. Chen, Y., J. Katan, A. Gamliel, et al. 2000. Involvement of soluble
organic matter in increased plant growth in solarized soils. Biology
and Fertility of Soils 32: 28–34.

11. -Gostishcheva M.V.2008. Chemical-pharmaceutical study of native
humic acids from peats of Tomsk Oblast, Cand. Sci. Dissertation,
Perm
12. Van Rensburg, C.E.J., A. Van Straten, and J. Dekker. 2000. An in vitro
investigation of the antimicrobial activity of oxifulvic acid. Journal of
Antimicrobial Chemotherapy 46: 853–854.
13. Van Rensburg, C.E.J., S.C.K. Malfield, and J. Dekker. 2001. Topical
application of oxifulvic acid suppresses the cutaneous immune response in mice. Drug Development Research 53: 29–32.
14. Cloete T. E, Swart H, Cronje I. J et al.1990. Oxidized coal products as
industrial bactericides. Third International Symposium on Gas, Oil,
Coal and Environmental Biotechnology, New Orleans, Louisiana, 3–
5 December.
15. Van Rensburg, C.E.J., J. Dekker, R. Weis, et al. 2002. Investigation on
the anti-HIV properties of oxihumate. Chemotherapy 48: 138–143.
16. Thiel, K.D., B. Helbig, R. Klöcking, et al. 1981. Comparison of the
in vitro activities of ammonium humate and of enzymically oxidized
chlorogenic and caffeic acids against type 1 and type 2 human herpes
virus (author’s transl). Pharmazie 36(1): 50–3. German.
17. Vucskits, A.V., I. Hullár, A. Bersényi, et al. 2010. Effect of fulvic and
humic acids on performance, immune response and thyroid function in
rats. Journal of Animal Physiology and Animal Nutrition (Berlin)
94(6): 721–8.
18. Efimova, I.V., S.L. Khil’ko, and O.V. Smirnova. 2012. Antioxidant
activity of humic acids in radical-chain oxidation processes. Russian
Journal of Applied Chemistry 85(9): 1351–54.
19. Longa, E.Z., P.R. Weinstein, S. Carlson, et al. 1989. Reversible middle
cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20(1):
84–91.
20. Lowry, O.H., N.J. Rosebrough, A.L. Farr, et al. 1951. Protein
measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. Journal of Biological
Chemistry 193: 265–75.
21. Sun, Y., L.W. Oberley, and Y. Li. 1988. A simple method for clinical
assay of superoxide dismutase. Clinical Chemistry 34: 497–500.
22. Durak, I., Z. Yurtarslanl, O. Canbolat, et al. 1993. A methodological
approach to superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity assay based on
inhibition of nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) reduction. Clinica Chimica
Acta 214: 103–4.
23. Buege, J.A., and S.D. Aust. 1978. Microsomal lipid peroxidation.
Methods in Enzymology 52: 302–10.
24. Park, H.S., K.H. Han, J.A. Shin, et al. 2014. The neuroprotective
effects of carnosine in early stage of focal ischemia rodent model.
Journal of Korean Neurosurgical Society 55(3): 125–30.
25. Bonita, R., S. Mendis, T. Truelsen, et al. 2004. The global stroke
initiative. Lancet Neurology 3: 391–393.
26. Evans, P.H. 1993. Free radicals in brain metabolism and pathology.
British Medical Bulletin 49: 577–587.
27. Durukan, A., and T. Tatlisumak. 2007. Acute ischemic stroke: overview of major experimental rodent models, pathophysiology, and
therapy of focal cerebral ischemia. Pharmacology Biochemistry and
Behavior 87: 179–197.
28. Braughler, J.M., and E.D. Hall. 1989. Central nervous system trauma
and stroke. I. Biochemical considerations for oxygen radical formation
and lipid peroxidation. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 6: 289–
301.
29. Bromont, C., C. Marie, and J. Bralet. 1989. Increased lipid peroxidation in vulnerable brain regions after transient forebrain ischemia in
rats. Stroke 20(7): 918–24.
30. Zhang, Q., Y. Wu, P. Zhang, et al. 2012. Exercise induces mitochondrial biogenesis after brain ischemia in rats. Neuroscience 15(205):
10–7.
31. St-Pierre, J., S. Drori, M. Uldry, et al. 2006. Suppression of reactive
oxygen species and neurodegeneration by the PGC-1 transcriptional
coactivators. Cell 127(2): 397–408.
32. EMEA. Humic acids and their sodium salts, summary report.
Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products. European
Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products Available

39

Neuroprotective Effect of Humic Acid on Cerebral Ischemia

33.
34.
35.
36.

37.

via http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/
Maximum_Residue_Limits_-Report/2009/11/
WC500014416.pdf; 1999
Brzozowski, T., A. Dembiński, and S. Konturek. 1994. Influence of
Tołpa Peat Preparation on gastroprotection and on gastric and duodenal ulcers. Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica 51(1): 103–7.
Riede, U.N., I. Jonas, B. Kirn, et al. 1992. Collagen stabilization
induced by natural humic substances. Archives of Orthopaedic and
Trauma Surgery 111(5): 259–64.
Hu, C.W., C.C. Yen, Y.L. Huang, et al. 2010. Oxidatively damaged
DNA induced by humic acid and arsenic in maternal and neonatal
mice. Chemosphere 79(1): 93–9.
Hseu, Y.C., S.C. Chen, Y.L. Chen, et al. 2008. Humic acid induced
genotoxicity in human peripheral blood lymphocytes using comet and
sister chromatid exchange assay. Journal of Hazardous Materials 153:
784–791.
Gau, R.J., H.L. Yang, J.L. Suen, et al. 2001. Induction of oxidative
stress by humic acid through increasing intracellular iron: a possible
mechanism leading to atherothrombotic vascular disorder in blackfoot

38.

39.

40.
41.
42.

disease. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 283:
743–749.
Cheng, M.L., H.Y. Ho, Y.W. Huang, et al. 2003. Humic acid induces
oxidative DNA damage, growth retardation, and apoptosis in human
primary fibroblasts. Experimental Biology and Medicine (Maywood,
N.J.) 228(4): 413–23.
Cheng, M.L., H.Y. Ho, D.T. Chiu, et al. 1999. Humic acid-mediated
oxidative damages to human erythrocytes: a possible mechanism
leading to anemia in blackfoot disease. Free Radical Biology and
Medicine 27(3–4): 470–477.
Kodama, H., and Denso. 2007. Antitumor effect of humus extract on
murine transplantable L1210 leukemia. Journal of Veterinary Sciences
and Medicine 69: 1069–1071.
Kodama, H., Okazaki F. Denso, and S. Ishida. 2008. Protective effect
of humus extract against Trypanosoma brucei infection in mice. Journal of Veterinary Medical Science 70(11): 1185–90.
Joone, G.K., J. Dekker, and C.E. Van Rensburg. 2003. Investigation of the immunostimulatory properties of oxihumate.
Zeitschrift fu¨ r Naturforschung. C 58: 263–267.

