[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302440/-/DC1
[Link]
mailto:kimmitsu@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
616
In developed countries, the number of dementia cases is 
increasing as the population ages, causing the financial 
cost of dementia to increase.1 Vascular dementia (VaD) is the 
second most common cause of dementia after Alzheimer disease2 and is characterized by white matter (WM) lesions.3 The 
cause and development of WM lesions are not fully understood.
Cerebral microangiopathies, one major cause of VaD, 
are detected using MRI and histopathologic examinations or 
assays.4 Histologically, cerebral microangiopathy is characterized
by vascular wall thickening, collagen deposition, degeneration
of smooth muscle cells, and narrowing of the lumen; 
it is often associated with blood–brain barrier (BBB) breakdown.4 Although the association between VaD and Alzheimer 
disease is most likely caused by the interplay of common 
and shared vascular risk factors possibly leading to a vascular
drainage failure of β-amyloid, cerebrocapillary damage 
caused by cerebral hypoperfusion might also contribute to the 
progression of Alzheimer disease.5–7 Despite the high level of 
need, there are currently no effective strategies for the treatment
or prevention of VaD. Therefore, the precise mechanism 
of VaD and the development of a clinical therapeutic strategy 
for VaD are urgent topics for research.
Apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), a member 
of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase kinase kinase 
family, activates MAP kinase kinases, which in turn activate 
p38 and C-Jun N-terminal (JNK) MAP kinase.8 ASK1 plays 
© 2013 American Heart Association, Inc.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol is available at http://atvb.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302440
Objective—There are currently no specific strategies for the treatment or prevention of vascular dementia. White matter 
lesions, a common pathology in cerebral small vessel disease, are a major cause of vascular dementia. We investigated 
whether apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) might be a key molecule in cerebral hypoperfusion, associated with 
blood–brain barrier breakdown and white matter lesions.
Approach and Results—A mouse model of cognitive impairment was developed by inducing chronic cerebral hypoperfusion 
in white matter including the corpus callosum via bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery. BCAS-
induced white matter lesions caused cognitive decline in C57BL/6J (wild-type) mice but not in ASK1-deficient (ASK1−/−) 
mice. Phosphorylated ASK1 increased in wild-type mouse brains, and phosphorylated p38 and tumor necrosis factor-α
expression increased in corpus callosum cerebral endothelial cells after BCAS in wild-type mice but not in ASK1−/− mice. 
BCAS decreased claudin-5 expression and disrupted blood–brain barrier in the corpus callosum of wild-type but not 
ASK1−/− mice. Cerebral nitrotyrosine was increased in wild-type and ASK1−/− BCAS mice. Cerebral phosphorylated 
ASK1 did not increase in wild-type mice treated with NADPH-oxidase inhibitor. A p38 inhibitor and NADPH-oxidase 
inhibitor mimicked the protective effect of ASK1 deficiency against cognitive impairment. Specific ASK1 inhibitor 
prevented cognitive decline in BCAS mice. In vitro oxygen-glucose deprivation and tumor necrosis factor-α stimulation 
caused the disruption of endothelial tight junctions from wild-type mice but not ASK1−/− mice.
Conclusions—Oxidative stress-ASK1-p38 cascade plays a role in the pathogenesis of cognitive impairment, through blood–
brain barrier breakdown via the disruption of endothelial tight junctions. ASK1 might be a promising therapeutic target 
for chronic cerebral hypoperfusion–induced cognitive impairment. (Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014;34:616-625.)
Key Words: ASK1 protein, mouse ◼ blood–brain barrier ◼ dementia, vascular
Received on: March 28, 2013; final version accepted on: December 16, 2013.
From the Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Therapeutics (K.T., N.K., K.U., Y.H., K.K., T.K., D.S., M.J.M., T.N., S.K.-M.) and Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Faculty of Life Science (K.T., H.O.), Kumamoto University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto, Japan; Research 
Fellowship of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan (K.T.); Department of Cardiovascular Clinical and Translational Research, 
Kumamoto University Hospital, Kumamoto, Japan (O.Y.); Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Mie University, Tsu, Japan (H.T.); and 
Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Global Center of Excellence (GCOE) Program, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan (H.I.).
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://atvb.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302440/-/DC1.
Correspondence to Shokei Kim-Mitsuyama, MD, PhD, Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Therapeutics, Kumamoto University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences, 1-1-1 Honjyo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan. E-mail kimmitsu@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp
Apoptosis Signal–Regulating Kinase 1 Is a Novel Target 
Molecule for Cognitive Impairment Induced by Chronic 
Cerebral Hypoperfusion
Kensuke Toyama, Nobutaka Koibuchi, Ken Uekawa, Yu Hasegawa, Keiichiro Kataoka,  
Tetsuji Katayama, Daisuke Sueta, Ming Jie Ma, Takashi Nakagawa, Osamu Yasuda, 
Hidekazu Tomimoto, Hidenori Ichijo, Hisao Ogawa, Shokei Kim-Mitsuyama
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1483336826)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
Toyama et al ASK1 and Dementia 617
a key role in cellular responses induced by a variety of stressors
including oxidative stress9 (Figure I in the online-only 
Data Supplement). Our previous reports showed that ASK1 
is involved in angiotensin II–induced vascular endothelial 
dysfunction and apoptosis,10 balloon injury–induced vascular 
neointima formation,11 and ischemia-induced angiogenesis.12
The potential role of ASK1 in cerebral vasculature/small vessels
should be further investigated in relation to VaD. Cerebral 
ischemia increases cerebral oxidative stress levels13 and vascular
cognitive impairment induced by chronic cerebral ischemia
is associated with BBB disruption.14–16 The BBB consists 
of endothelial cells, basal lamina matrix, astrocyte end-feet, 
and pericytes. Therefore, in the present study, we hypothesized 
that ASK1 might be involved in oxidative stress–induced BBB 
disruption because of cerebral endothelial cell dysfunction 
and thereby might be responsible for chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
–induced WM lesions and cognitive impairment.
The rat model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion induced 
by bilateral common carotid artery occlusion is characterized
by WM rarefaction and is widely used as a VaD model.17
However, accurate behavioral assessment of this rat model 
is often hampered by loss of the visual pathway caused by 
occlusion of the ophthalmic arteries. Therefore, in the present 
study, we used a mouse model of cognitive impairment, produced
by bilateral common carotid arterial stenosis (BCAS) 
with microcoils.13,18,19 This model develops mild damage to 
the visual pathway and maintains a residual blood flow within 
the common carotid arteries and branches, such as the ophthalmic
arteries,19 because BCAS surgery in mice induces a 
milder decrease in the cerebral blood flow than bilateral common
carotid artery occlusion in rats. Pathology of the BCAS 
mouse model is characterized commonly by memory deficits 
with WM lesions and BBB breakdown.13,16,19
This study examined the effects of BCAS surgery on cognitive
function, WM pathology, and BBB function between 
C57BL/6J wild-type mice and ASK1-deficient (ASK1−/−) 
mice and also investigated the effects of a specific ASK1 
inhibitor in BCAS mice.
Materials and Methods
Materials and Methods are available in the online-only Supplement.
Results
Role of ASK1 in a Mouse Model of 
Cognitive Impairment Induced by 
Chronic Cerebral Hypoperfusion
BCAS surgery significantly and equally lowered cerebral 
blood flow of C57BL/6J wild-type mice and ASK1−/− mice at 
10 minutes (Figure IIA in the online-only Data Supplement) 
and 4 weeks (Figure IIB in the online-only Data Supplement). 
To evaluate the role of ASK1 in cognitive function, we performed
Y-maze tests, Morris water maze tests, fixed and 
progressive ratio tasks, and novel object recognition tests on 
wild-type mice and ASK1−/− mice subjected to BCAS surgery. 
Consistent with previous reports,13,18 mice subjected to sham 
versus BCAS surgery did not show significant differences in 
locomotor activity. In the Y-maze test, there was no significant
difference in the number of arm entries among all groups, 
indicating no change in motor performance (Figure 1A). 
However, compared with sham surgery, BCAS surgery caused 
significant cognitive decline in wild-type mice but not in 
ASK1−/− mice (Figure 1B).
In the Morris water maze test, wild-type mice subjected 
to BCAS surgery had severe learning deficits in the hidden 
platform test compared with sham, whereas ASK1−/− mice 
subjected to BCAS did not exhibit any learning impairment 
(Figure 1C). In the probe test, only wild-type mice subjected to 
BCAS surgery demonstrated significantly poor performance, 
although the other groups crossed over the previous platform 
location (Figure 1D). In the visible test, there were no significant
differences in escape time among all groups, indicating 
that visual function was similar between them (Figure 1E).
In the fixed ratio tasks evaluated by the operant chamber
, as the fixed rate of lever presses increased, from rate 1 
to 3, the mean response times of wild-type mice subjected 
to BCAS surgery tended to decrease to a lesser extent than 
the other 3 groups (Figure IIIA–IIIC in the online-only Data 
Supplement). As shown in Figure 1F, there were significantly 
poor responses for fixed lever presses at rate 4 in wild-type 
BCAS mice, whereas ASK1−/− BCAS mice showed good 
responses similar to both sham groups. In the progressive ratio 
tasks, the mean lever presses at the break point of wild-type 
BCAS mice were significantly lower than in the other groups 
(Figure 1G).
In the novel object recognition test, there were no significant
differences in the exploratory preferences at the baseline
among all groups (Figure IIID in the online-only Data 
Supplement), and there was no significant difference in the 
exploratory preferences toward the novel object among the 
4 experimental groups (Figure IIIE in the online-only Data 
Supplement).
To evaluate anxiety-like responses, we also performed the 
light and dark test because cognition is strongly affected by 
motivational and emotional features. BCAS surgery did not 
affect anxiety-like responses in wild-type or ASK1−/− mice 
(Figure IIIF and IIIG in the online-only Data Supplement), 
which is consistent with a previous report using the same 
mouse model.18
It was shown that cognitive dysfunction in this mouse 
model was because of WM lesions and astrocyte activity.19
To confirm cognitive decline was a result of the difference in 
WM lesions and glial activation, we evaluated the WM lesion 
grades and counted astrocyte cells in the corpus callosum as 
previously described.13 Interestingly, BCAS surgery caused 
significant increases in WM lesions (Figure 1H) and activation
of astrocytes (Figure 1I) in wild-type mice but not in 
ASK1-/- mice.
Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
ASK1 apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
BBB blood–brain barrier
BCAS bilateral common carotid artery stenosis
TNF-α tumor necrosis factor-α
VaD vascular dementia
WM white matter
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1296065072)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
618 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol March 2014
Comparison of Cerebral Blood Flow and 
Cognitive Decline Between BCAS Mice 
With 0.16- and 0.18-mm Microcoils
As shown in Figure IVA to IVC in the online-only Data 
Supplement, wild-type mice subjected to BCAS with 
0.16-mm microcoils, but not 0.18-mm microcoils, demonstrated
reference memory decline as previously reported.19
Importantly, mice treated with 0.16-mm microcoils had lower 
cerebral blood flow than those with 0.18-mm microcoils 
(Figure IVD and IVE in the online-only Data Supplement), 
suggesting that the significant difference in reference 
memory between mice with 0.16- and 0.18-mm microcoils 
might be partially because of the difference in cerebral 
blood flow. As shown in Figure IVF in the online-only Data
Supplement, the mortality rate of BCAS mice treated with 
0.16-mm microcoils was 37.5% (6/16) within 14 days after 
surgery, whereas that of BCAS mice treated with 0.18-mm 
microcoils was 0% (0/10). The mortality rate (37.5%) of 
our BCAS model with 0.16-mm microcoils was less than 
that (75%) reported in the previous article by Shibata et al.19
This difference in mortality rate between our present work 
and previous study19 can be possibly explained by the difference
in animal age, body weight, anesthesia (isoflurane 
in our work versus pentobarbital in the previous article),19
or operator.
Effect of Cerebral Hypoperfusion on 
ASK1 and Its Downstream Molecules
We next examined the effect of cerebral hypoperfusion induced 
by BCAS surgery on the induction of ASK and its downstream 
molecules, p38 and C-Jun N-terminal kinase. Interestingly, 
phosphorylation of ASK1 and p38 increased persistently in 
wild-type mouse brain tissue after BCAS surgery, but p38 
phosphorylation did not increase persistently in ASK1−/− mice 
(Figure 2A and 2B). In contrast, BCAS surgery did not affect 
C-Jun N-terminal kinase phosphorylation in both strains of 
mice (Figure 2C). To identify the site of cellular activation 
of phosphorylated p38, we performed double immunofluorescent
staining of phosphorylated p38 with cerebral endothelial
cells (CD31), oligodendrocytes (GSTpi), astrocytes, 
and microglia in the corpus callosum of both strains of BCAS 
mice at 30 minutes. Phosphorylated p38 was localized in the 
Figure 1. The role of apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) in cognitive impairment induced by chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. 
A and B, The effect of bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery on spatial working memory at 3 weeks. C, The effect of 
BCAS surgery at 3 weeks on escape time in the hidden platform test of the Morris water maze test. D, The mean annual crossing over 
the previous platform location (probe test). E, The escape time in the visible platform test of the Morris water maze test. F, The mean 
response time of fixed lever presses (rate 4: fixed ratio 4). G, The break point of progressive lever presses. The effect of BCAS surgery on 
white matter lesions (H) and on astrocyte activation (I). Scale bar, 100 μm in H and I. Values are the mean±SEM (n=10 for A–E; n=6 for 
F–I). ASK1−/− indicates apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1–deficient mice. by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
Toyama et al ASK1 and Dementia 619
nucleus of cerebral endothelial cells (Figure 2D–2F) and oligodendrocytes (Figure V in the online-only Data Supplement) 
in the corpus callosum of wild-type BCAS mice at 30 minutes 
but not in ASK1−/− mice.
Role of ASK1 in BBB and Cerebral Tight Junctions
BCAS surgery caused significant BBB disruption in the 
corpus callosum of wild-type mice but not in ASK1−/− mice, 
as evaluated by Evans blue leakage from cerebral endothelial
cells (Figure 3A). BBB breakdown is involved in 
the dysfunction of the neurovascular unit: the endothelial 
cell-basal lamina matrix-astrocyte end-feet and pericytes.20
BCAS surgery did not alter cerebral matrix metalloproteinase
activity evaluated by zymography (Figure VIA in 
the online-only Data Supplement), indicating no effect of 
cerebral hypoperfusion on the basal lamina matrix in brains 
of both strains of mice. Aquaporin-4 has an important role 
in the transport of water through the cell membrane of 
astrocyte end-feet and is associated with brain edema as 
a result of BBB dysfunction after cerebral ischemia.21 In 
the present study, changes in aquaporin-4 levels were not 
observed in brains from both strains of mice after BCAS 
surgery at early stages (Figure VIB in the online-only 
Data Supplement). However, BCAS surgery significantly 
decreased the expression of claudin-5 in the corpus callosum
of wild-type mice but not in ASK1−/− mice (Figure 3B).
As shown in Figure 3C, Evans blue leakage was observed 
with decreased claudin-5 expression in the corpus callosum 
of wild-type BCAS mice.
Effect of Cerebral Hypoperfusion 
on Tumor Necrosis Factor-α
Cerebral mRNA levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) 
increased from 24 hours (Figure 3D) to 4 weeks (data are 
not shown) after BCAS surgery in wild-type mice but not in 
ASK1−/− mice. As shown in Figure 3E, BCAS surgery significantly
increased TNF-α levels in the brain of wild-type mice 
at 72 hours but not in ASK1−/− mice. The active form of TNF-α
Figure 2. Effect of cerebral hypoperfusion on apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) and p38 activation. Effect of cerebral hypoperfusion
on the phosphorylation of ASK1 (p-ASK1; A), p38 (B), and C-Jun N-terminal (JNK; C) in the brains of wild-type and ASK1-deficient 
(ASK1−/−) mice subjected to bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery. D, Double immunofluorescent staining of phosphorylated
p38 (p-p38) and CD31 in the corpus callosum of wild-type and ASK1−/− mice subjected to BCAS surgery at 30 minutes. E, The 
enlarged image of the white box in D. F, Triple immunofluorescent staining of p-p38, CD31, and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) in 
the corpus callosum of wild-type mice subjected to BCAS surgery at 30 minutes. White arrows in E and F indicate p-p38 localized in the 
nucleus of endothelial cells and significantly distributed in parenchyma and endothelial cells. Top, A to C, Representative Western blot 
images. Scale bar, 50 μm in D, 5 μm in E, and 10 μm in F. Values are the mean±SEM (n=3–4 for A; n=4–5 for B and C). p-JNK indicates 
phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase; t-JNK, total c-Jun N-terminal kinase; and t-p38, total-p38. by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
620 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol March 2014
was expressed in the cerebral endothelial cells of wild-type 
BCAS mice at 72 hours (Figure 3F).
Effect of Cerebral Hypoperfusion 
on Oxidative Stress
To evaluate the effect of cerebral hypoperfusion on oxidative
stress, we measured cerebral nitrotyrosine levels. 
Interestingly, cerebral nitrotyrosine after BCAS surgery significantly
increased from 10 minutes in wild-type mice and 
ASK1−/− mice (Figure 4A). We next evaluated the effect of 
apocynin, a NADPH-oxidase inhibitor, on the phosphorylation
of ASK1 and p38 after cerebral hypoperfusion. As shown 
in Figure 4B and 4C, treatment of apocynin significantly prevented
the induction of phosphorylated ASK1 and p38 in the 
brains of mice subjected to BCAS surgery, indicating that oxidative
stress was upstream of ASK1.
In Vitro Effect of Oxygen-Glucose 
Deprivation on Cerebral Tight Junctions
To investigate the contribution of hypoxia conditions in the 
disruption of cerebral endothelial tight junctions, we used 
primary cultures of mouse cerebral endothelial cells from 
wild-type and ASK1−/− mice. Oxygen-glucose deprivation 
conditions decreased expression of cerebral tight junction integral
membrane protein claudin-5 and occludin in wild-type 
mouse cerebral endothelial cells, but not in ASK1−/− mouse 
cells (Figure 4D–4G).
In Vitro Effect of TNF-α Stimulation 
on Cerebral Tight Junctions
To investigate the contribution of TNF-α to the disruption 
of cerebral tight junctions, primary cultures of mouse cerebral
endothelial cells from wild-type and ASK1−/− mice were 
isolated. In vitro, TNF-α stimulation significantly decreased 
claudin-5 and occludin in cerebral endothelial cells from 
wild-type mice but not ASK1−/− mice (Figure VIIIA–VIIID 
in the online-only Data Supplement). To confirm whether 
TNF-α existed upstream and downstream of ASK1, the effect 
of TNF-α stimulation on phosphorylated ASK1 in cerebral 
cells from wild-type mice was evaluated. Phosphorylation of 
ASK1 was increased significantly in cerebral endothelial cells 
from wild-type mice at 10 minutes after TNF-α stimulation 
Figure 3. Effect of bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery on blood–brain barrier (BBB), claudin-5, and tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α). The effect of BCAS surgery on BBB function assessed by Evans blue extravasation (A) and claudin-5 expression (B) in 
the corpus callosum. C, Double staining of Evans blue and claudin-5 in the corpus callosum. D, The effect of BCAS surgery on cerebral 
mRNA levels of TNF-α. E, Quantitative data of TNF-α measured by Western blot analysis in the brains of wild-type and ASK1−/− mice 
subjected to BCAS at 72 hours. F, Double immunofluorescent staining of CD31 and TNF-α in the corpus callosum of wild-type mice subjected
to BCAS surgery at 72 hours. The images on the right side in F represent enlarged images of the white box. Scale bar, 100 μm in 
A, B and left of F; and 20 μm in C and right of F. Values are the mean±SEM (n=5 for A; n=4–5 for B; n=4–5 for D; n=5 for E). ASK1−/−
indicates apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1–deficient mice. by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(8.0.0.2542,1947105392 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
Toyama et al ASK1 and Dementia 621
(Figure VIIIE in the online-only Data Supplement). This finding
indicated TNF-α is a key mediator of the vicious cycle in 
the ASK1/TNF-α pathway.
Role of p38 and Oxidative Stress in BBB 
Dysfunction and Cognitive Impairment
We next investigated the role of p38 and oxidative stress in 
BBB dysfunction and cognitive impairment. BCAS surgery
significantly and equally lowered cerebral blood flow 
in wild-type mice treated with vehicle or SB239063 (a specific
p38 inhibitor) or apocynin (Figure 5A and 5B). There 
was no significant difference in blood pressure (Figure 5C) 
or the number of arm entries among all groups (Figure 5D). 
Treatment with SB239063 and apocynin prevented cognitive 
decline (Figure 5E), WM lesions (Figure 5F), activation of 
astrocytes (Figure 5G), and the induction of cerebral mRNA 
levels of TNF-α (Figure 5H) in wild-type BCAS mice. As 
shown in Figure 5I, BCAS surgery failed to disrupt the BBB 
in wild-type mice treated with SB239063 and apocynin.
Treatment With Compound K811, ASK1 
Selective Inhibitor, on Cognitive Impairment 
Induced by Cerebral Hypoperfusion
BCAS surgery significantly and equally lowered cerebral 
blood flow in wild-type mice treated with vehicle and those 
pretreated with compound K811 (Figure 6A and 6B). There 
was no significant change in blood pressure (Figure 6C) or 
in the number of arm entries (Figure IXA and IXB in the 
online-only Data Supplement) among all groups. Interestingly, 
pretreatment with compound K811 prevented cognitive 
decline (Figure 6D and Figure IXC in the online-only Data 
Supplement), WM lesions (Figure 6E), activation of astrocytes
(Figure 6F), and the induction of cerebral TNF-α mRNA 
(Figure 6G) in wild-type BCAS mice.
Figure 4. In vitro effect of cerebral hypoperfusion on cerebral nitrotyrosine and effect of oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD) conditions 
on cerebral endothelial cells. A, The effect of cerebral hypoperfusion on the cerebral nitrotyrosine in the brains of wild-type and apoptosis
signal–regulating kinase 1–deficient (ASK1−/−) mice subjected to bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery. Effect of 
cerebral hypoperfusion on the phosphorylation of ASK1 (B), p38 (C) in the brains of wild-type BCAS mice with and without apocynin. D, 
Representative Western blot images of the tight junction integral membrane proteins claudin-5 and occludin after OGD stimulation. E and 
F, Quantitative data of the Western blot images of claudin-5 and occludin after OGD stimulation. G, Double immunofluorescent staining of 
claudin-5 and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) in cerebral endothelial cells from wild-type and ASK1−/− mice pre- and post stimulation
of OGD. p-p38 indicates phosphorylated p38; and t-p38, total-p38. Scale bar, 50 μm in G. Values are the mean±SEM (n=4 for A; n=3 
for B and C; and n=3 for E and F). by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(8.0.0.2542.2014889538 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
622 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol March 2014
Postsurgery administration of compound K811 also prevented
cognitive decline in wild-type BCAS mice (Figure XA 
and XB in the online-only Data Supplement).
Discussion
In the present study, we investigated the role of ASK1 in cognitive
impairment and the effect of compound K811, a specific 
ASK1 inhibitor, on cognitive decline. The major findings of 
this study were as follows: (1) the oxidative stress-ASK1-p38 
pathway is involved in chronic cerebral hypoperfusion–
induced WM lesions and cognitive impairment, through 
BBB breakdown via the disruption of cerebral endothelial 
tight junctions; and (2) compound K811 prevented cognitive 
decline in the BCAS mouse model by a similar mechanism to 
that in ASK1−/− mice. ASK1 deficiency or inhibition of ASK1 
using a pharmacological agent attenuated the severity of cerebral
hypoperfusion–induced cognitive impairment, highlighting
the ASK1 signaling pathway as a potential therapeutic 
target during cognitive impairment.
Cerebrovascular WM lesions caused by chronic cerebral 
ischemia are observed in aging and stroke and are responsible 
for subcortical VaD.22 To evaluate the role of ASK1 in cerebral
hypoperfusion–induced cognitive impairment, we used 
an established BCAS mouse model, in which chronic cerebral 
ischemia causes disruption of the BBB.16,19 In the present study, 
we evaluated cognitive impairment using the following behavior
tests: Y-maze test, water maze test, fixed and progressive 
tasks, and novel object recognition tests. Cognitive impairment
in this mouse model was characterized by deficits of spatial
working memory (Y-maze test), learning and reference-/
working-memory (water maze test), and sensorimotor learning
and memory (fixed and progressive tasks), whereas 
ASK1 deficiency eliminated the development of cognitive 
impairment. These results suggest the BCAS model is characterized
by WM lesions and hippocampal injury. However, 
BCAS surgery did not affect novel object recognition, suggesting
that the perirhinal cortex might not be injured. Thus, 
BCAS surgery mainly causes WM lesions and hippocampal 
Figure 5. Role of p38 and oxidative stress in cognitive impairment and blood–brain barrier (BBB) breakdown induced by chronic cerebral 
hypoperfusion. Cerebral blood flow ratio post–bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery at 10 minutes presurgery (A) and 
4 weeks presurgery (B) in wild-type mice subjected to sham and BCAS surgery treated with vehicle, SB239063 (p38 inhibitor), and apocynin
(selective NADPH-oxidase inhibitor). C, The effect of SB239063 and apocynin on blood pressure in wild-type mice subjected to BCAS 
surgery at 1 week. D and E, The effect of SB239063 and apocynin on spatial working memory after BCAS surgery at 3 weeks. The effect 
of SB239063 and apocynin on white matter lesions (F) and on astrocyte activation (G) in the corpus callosum of wild-type mice subjected 
to BCAS surgery. H, The effect of SB239063 and apocynin on cerebral mRNA levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) after BCAS 
surgery at 4 weeks. I, The effect of SB239063 and apocynin on BBB dysfunction in the corpus callosum of wild-type mice subjected to 
BCAS surgery at 72 hours. Scale bar, 50 μm in F and 100 μm in G and I. Values are the mean±SEM (n=6–8 for A–E; n=6 for F–H; and  
n=4 for I). by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(8.0.0.2542,1827617784 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
Toyama et al ASK1 and Dementia 623
injury. Previous reports indicated that the rat model of chronic 
cerebral hypoperfusion also developed working-memory and 
reference-memory deficits.5,23 Therefore, the characteristics 
of our mouse BCAS model were similar to those of the rat 
model. In contrast, previous reports by 2 different groups 
showed reference memory was not impaired in BCAS mice 
with 0.18-mm internal diameter microcoils.18,24 However, our 
BCAS model was prepared with 0.16-mm internal diameter 
microcoils. In the present study, we confirmed that BCAS 
mice treated with 0.18-mm microcoils did not exhibit reference
memory decline, in agreement with previous reports.18,24
Importantly, BCAS mice treated with 0.16-mm microcoils 
had less cerebral blood flow than those with 0.18-mm 
microcoils, suggesting that the significant difference in reference
memory observed with different size microcoils might 
be partially because of the difference in cerebral blood flow. 
Furthermore, the anxiety response was not affected by chronic 
cerebral hypoperfusion in either wild-type or ASK1−/− mice, 
thereby excluding the possibility that cognitive function might 
be affected by motivational and emotional features.
A neurovascular unit consists of microvessels (endothelial 
cells-basal lamina matrix-astrocyte end-feet, and pericytes), 
astrocytes, neurons and their axons, in addition to other cell 
types (microglia and oligodendrocytes).20 BBB breakdown 
is involved in the dysfunction of the neurovascular unit. 
Compared with neurons, cerebral microvessels are more susceptible
to cell injury after brain ischemia.20 In the present 
study, cerebral oxidative stress levels were increased in mice 
subjected to BCAS surgery, as previously reported.25 NADPH 
oxidase is a major enzyme-producing superoxide (oxidative
stress) and is significantly increased in cerebral tissue of 
BCAS mice.13 Therefore, we investigated the involvement of 
oxidative stress in ASK1-mediated cerebral hypoperfusion–
induced cognitive impairment by administering apocynin, an 
NADPH-oxidase inhibitor, to BCAS surgery. ASK1 was activated
by oxidative stress caused by cerebral hypoperfusion. 
Furthermore, to determine whether p38, a downstream molecule
of ASK1, contributed to cognitive impairment induced 
by cerebral hypoperfusion, we examined the effect of a specific
p38 inhibitor in this model. p38 inhibition mimicked the 
Figure 6. Effect of compound K811 on cognitive impairment induced by chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Cerebral blood flow ratio post–
bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) surgery at 10 minutes to presurgery (A) and 4 weeks to presurgery (B). C, The effect of 
compound K811, an apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) inhibitor, on blood pressure. D, The effect of compound K811 on spatial 
working memory after BCAS surgery at 3 weeks. The effect of compound K811 on white matter lesions (E) and on astrocyte activation (F) 
in the corpus callosum of wild-type mice subjected to BCAS surgery. G, The effect of compound K811 on cerebral mRNA levels of tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) after BCAS surgery at 4 weeks. Scale bar, 100 μm in E and F. Values are the mean±SEM (n=9–10 for A–F; 
n=6–10 for G). by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.99290174)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
624 Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol March 2014
protective effect of ASK1 deficiency against cerebral hypoperfusion
–induced cognitive impairment. Collectively, our 
observations demonstrate that the oxidative stress-ASK1-p38 
pathway is involved in the pathogenesis of cerebral hypoperfusion
–induced cognitive impairment.
Cerebral endothelial tight junction proteins, such as 
claudin-5, play a critical role in maintenance of the BBB. 
Campbell et al26,27 used claudin-5 siRNA to demonstrate that 
claudin-5 has a major role in BBB in mice. In the present 
study, the BBB was disrupted by decreased claudin-5 in the 
corpus callosum of WM via the ASK1-p38 signaling pathway 
during the early stages after cerebral hypoperfusion. To reproduce
hypoperfusion-induced BBB breakdown in vitro, we 
examined the effect of oxygen-glucose deprivation conditions 
on cultured mouse cerebral endothelial cells. Oxygen-glucose 
deprivation conditions significantly reduced claudin-5 and 
occludin in endothelial cells from wild-type mice but not 
ASK1−/− mice, thus confirming that hypoperfusion itself is 
involved in BBB disruption via ASK1.
During focal ischemia, cytokines such as TNF-α are significantly
generated and secreted by cells within and around 
the injured area.28,29 The importance of TNF-α on BBB disruption
caused by cerebral infarct was reported previously.30
However, the mechanism of BBB breakdown by TNF-α is 
not fully understood. In the present study, BCAS surgery significantly
increased the cerebral endothelial active form of 
TNF-α via the ASK1-p38 signaling pathway in the corpus 
callosum, thereby supporting the idea that TNF-α may disrupt
tight junctions via the ASK1-p38 signaling pathway. To 
elucidate the role of TNF-α in BBB disruption, we compared 
the effect of TNF-α between cerebral endothelial cells from 
wild-type mice and ASK−/− mice. Interestingly, in vitro, TNF-
α stimulation of cerebral endothelial cells from wild-type mice 
caused both activation of ASK1 and significant disruption of 
cerebral endothelial tight junctions attributed to a decrease in 
claudin-5 and occludin. In contrast, TNF-α stimulation failed 
to disrupt cerebral endothelial tight junctions in ASK1−/−mice. 
Collectively our results show that the ASK1-p38-TNF-α pathway
is involved in the disruption of tight junctions in the early 
stages after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion.
Recent studies showed compound K811, a specific ASK1 
inhibitor, had a beneficial effect on glial cell activation in 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis31 and gastric
cancer cell growth in vitro and in vivo.32 In the present 
study, administration of compound K811 mimicked the protective
effects of ASK1 deficiency in the BCAS mice model. 
Furthermore, the mechanisms underlying protection against 
cognitive impairment induced by cerebral hypoperfusion were 
similar between compound K811 and ASK1−/− mice. Of note, 
the postischemic administration of compound K811 also prevented
cognitive decline in wild-type mice subjected to BCAS 
surgery. Our present work indicated that ASK1 might be a 
novel target molecule for the treatment of cerebral hypoperfusion
–induced cognitive impairment. However, further study is 
required to translate our present experimental data into clinical
settings.
There were several limitations in this study. First, macroangiopathic
changes such as BCAS surgery are not common 
causes of VaD. Although appropriate animal models should 
be selected for each investigation, there are no complete 
models that include all the features of human VaD.4 Second, 
although cerebral microangiopathy and BBB breakdown 
are seen in histopathologies of vascular cognitive impairment
, WM lesions are not necessarily associated with BBB 
breakdown. Thus, the potential role of BBB disruption in the 
pathogenesis of VaD remains to be fully determined. Finally, 
BCAS mice with 0.16-mm microcoils displayed a significant 
decline of Y-maze and water maze performances, indicating 
that the BCAS model is characterized by hippocampal injuries
and WM lesions. However, histological assessment of 
hippocampus was not performed, thus further investigation 
is required to define the characteristics of the BCAS model 
used in this study.
In conclusion, this study provides the first evidence that the 
oxidative stress-ASK1-p38 cascade has a pivotal role in the 
pathogenesis of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion–induced cognitive
impairment and WM lesions, through BBB breakdown 
via the disruption of endothelial tight junctions (Figure XI in 
the online-only Data Supplement). We also demonstrated that 
an ASK inhibitor prevented cognitive decline in BCAS mice. 
We propose that ASK1 could be a potential novel target for the 
treatment of cognitive impairment induced by chronic cerebral
hypoperfusion.
Acknowledgments
We thank Yuriko Shimamura, Miho Kataoka, Michie Uchikawa, 
Keiko Morozumi, Noriko Yoshimura and Shuhei Hasebe, Kazuko 
Noda, Tomoko Moriyama, and Haruna Toyama for their excellent 
support during the study.
Sources of Funding
This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for (1) JSPS Fellow (JSPS 
KAKENHI Grant Number 242730, Dr Toyama) from the Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science and (2) Scientific Research from 
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology 
(23390058), and (3) Japan Cardiovascular Research Foundation.
Disclosures
Dr Yasuda received lecture fees and research grant from Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Shionogi, Bayer, Mitsubishi Tanabe, MSD, Servier, 
Astellas. Dr Ogawa received lecture fees and research grant from 
Astellas, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma, Eisai, Kowa, Kyowa Hakko 
Kirin, Mitsubishi Tanabe, MSD, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer, Sanofi, 
Sionogi, Takeda. Dr Kim-Mitsuyama received lecture fees and 
research grant from Astellas, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, Sionogi, Takeda, Kyowa Hakko Kirin. The 
other authors report no conflicts.
References
1. Hurd MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary 
costs of dementia in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1326–1334.
2. Freitag MH, Peila R, Masaki K, Petrovitch H, Ross GW, White LR, Launer 
LJ. Midlife pulse pressure and incidence of dementia: the Honolulu-Asia 
Aging Study. Stroke. 2006;37:33–37.
3. Román GC, Erkinjuntti T, Wallin A, Pantoni L, Chui HC. Subcortical ischaemic
vascular dementia. Lancet Neurol. 2002;1:426–436.
4. Hainsworth AH, Markus HS. Do in vivo experimental models reflect 
human cerebral small vessel disease? A systematic review. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab. 2008;28:1877–1891.
5. Farkas E, Luiten PG, Bari F. Permanent, bilateral common carotid artery 
occlusion in the rat: a model for chronic cerebral hypoperfusion-related 
neurodegenerative diseases. Brain Res Rev. 2007;54:162–180.
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1288974139)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
Toyama et al ASK1 and Dementia 625
6. Kalaria RN, Akinyemi R, Ihara M. Does vascular pathology contribute to 
Alzheimer changes? J Neurol Sci. 2012;322:141–147.
7. Weller RO, Boche D, Nicoll JA. Microvasculature changes and cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy in Alzheimer’s disease and their potential impact on 
therapy. Acta Neuropathol. 2009;118:87–102.
8. Ichijo H, Nishida E, Irie K, ten Dijke P, Saitoh M, Moriguchi T, Takagi M, 
Matsumoto K, Miyazono K, Gotoh Y. Induction of apoptosis by ASK1, a 
mammalian MAPKKK that activates SAPK/JNK and p38 signaling pathways. Science. 1997;275:90–94.
9. Soga M, Matsuzawa A, Ichijo H. Oxidative Stress-Induced Diseases via 
the ASK1 Signaling Pathway. Int J Cell Biol. 2012;2012:439587.
10. Yamamoto E, Kataoka K, Shintaku H, Yamashita T, Tokutomi Y, Dong 
YF, Matsuba S, Ichijo H, Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Novel mechanism
and role of angiotensin II induced vascular endothelial injury in 
hypertensive diastolic heart failure. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2007;27:2569–2575.
11. Izumi Y, Kim S, Yoshiyama M, Izumiya Y, Yoshida K, Matsuzawa A, 
Koyama H, Nishizawa Y, Ichijo H, Yoshikawa J, Iwao H. Activation of 
apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 in injured artery and its critical role in 
neointimal hyperplasia. Circulation. 2003;108:2812–2818.
12. Izumi Y, Kim-Mitsuyama S, Yoshiyama M, Omura T, Shiota M, Matsuzawa 
A, Yukimura T, Murohara T, Takeya M, Ichijo H, Yoshikawa J, Iwao H. 
Important role of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 in ischemia-induced 
angiogenesis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005;25:1877–1883.
13. Dong YF, Kataoka K, Toyama K, Sueta D, Koibuchi N, Yamamoto E, 
Yata K, Tomimoto H, Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Attenuation of brain 
damage and cognitive impairment by direct renin inhibition in mice with 
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Hypertension. 2011;58:635–642.
14. Popescu BO, Toescu EC, Popescu LM, Bajenaru O, Muresanu DF, 
Schultzberg M, Bogdanovic N. Blood-brain barrier alterations in ageing 
and dementia. J Neurol Sci. 2009;283:99–106.
15. Wardlaw JM, Sandercock PA, Dennis MS, Starr J. Is breakdown of the 
blood-brain barrier responsible for lacunar stroke, leukoaraiosis, and 
dementia? Stroke. 2003;34:806–812.
16. Nakaji K, Ihara M, Takahashi C, Itohara S, Noda M, Takahashi R, 
Tomimoto H. Matrix metalloproteinase-2 plays a critical role in the pathogenesis
of white matter lesions after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in 
rodents. Stroke. 2006;37:2816–2823.
17. Farkas E, De Vos RA, Jansen Steur EN, Luiten PG. Are Alzheimer’s 
disease, hypertension, and cerebrocapillary damage related? Neurobiol 
Aging. 2000;21:235–243.
18. Shibata M, Yamasaki N, Miyakawa T, Kalaria RN, Fujita Y, Ohtani R, 
Ihara M, Takahashi R, Tomimoto H. Selective impairment of working 
memory in a mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Stroke. 
2007;38:2826–2832.
19. Shibata M, Ohtani R, Ihara M, Tomimoto H. White matter lesions and 
glial activation in a novel mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. 
Stroke. 2004;35:2598–2603.
20. del Zoppo GJ. Inflammation and the neurovascular unit in the setting of 
focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience. 2009;158:972–982.
21. Lo AC, Chen AY, Hung VK, Yaw LP, Fung MK, Ho MC, Tsang MC, 
Chung SS, Chung SK. Endothelin-1 overexpression leads to further water 
accumulation and brain edema after middle cerebral artery occlusion via 
aquaporin 4 expression in astrocytic end-feet. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 
2005;25:998–1011.
22. Pantoni L, Garcia JH. Pathogenesis of leukoaraiosis: a review. Stroke. 
1997;28:652–659.
23. Ohta H, Nishikawa H, Kimura H, Anayama H, Miyamoto M. Chronic 
cerebral hypoperfusion by permanent internal carotid ligation produces
learning impairment without brain damage in rats. Neuroscience. 
1997;79:1039–1050.
24. Coltman R, Spain A, Tsenkina Y, Fowler JH, Smith J, Scullion G, 
Allerhand M, Scott F, Kalaria RN, Ihara M, Daumas S, Deary IJ, Wood 
E, McCulloch J, Horsburgh K.. Selective white matter pathology induces 
a specific impairment in spatial working memory. Neurobiol Aging. 
2011;32:2324 e2327–2312.
25. Washida K, Ihara M, Nishio K, Fujita Y, Maki T, Yamada M, Takahashi J, 
Wu X, Kihara T, Ito H, Tomimoto H, Takahashi R. Nonhypotensive dose 
of telmisartan attenuates cognitive impairment partially due to peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma activation in mice with chronic 
cerebral hypoperfusion. Stroke. 2010;41:1798–1806.
26. Campbell M, Hanrahan F, Gobbo OL, et al. Targeted suppression of 
claudin-5 decreases cerebral oedema and improves cognitive outcome following
traumatic brain injury. Nat Commun. 2012;3:849.
27. Campbell M, Humphries MM, Kiang AS, Nguyen AT, Gobbo OL, Tam 
LC, Suzuki M, Hanrahan F, Ozaki E, Farrar GJ, Kenna PF, Humphries 
P. Systemic low-molecular weight drug delivery to pre-selected neuronal 
regions. EMBO Mol Med. 2011;3:235–245.
28. Iadecola C, Anrather J. The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to 
translation. Nat Med. 2011;17:796–808.
29. Sirén AL, Heldman E, Doron D, Lysko PG, Yue TL, Liu Y, Feuerstein G, 
Hallenbeck JM. Release of proinflammatory and prothrombotic mediators 
in the brain and peripheral circulation in spontaneously hypertensive and 
normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats. Stroke. 1992;23:1643–1650; discussion 
1650.
30. Reyes R, Guo M, Swann K, Shetgeri SU, Sprague SM, Jimenez DF, 
Barone CM, Ding Y. Role of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 in blood-brain barrier disruption after peripheral thermal
injury in rats. J Neurosurg. 2009;110:1218–1226.
31. Guo X, Harada C, Namekata K, et al. Regulation of the severity of neuroinflammation
and demyelination by TLR-ASK1-p38 pathway. EMBO Mol 
Med. 2010;2:504–515.
32. Hayakawa Y, Hirata Y, Sakitani K, Nakagawa H, Nakata W, Kinoshita 
H, Takahashi R, Takeda K, Ichijo H, Maeda S, Koike K. Apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase-1 inhibitor as a potent therapeutic drug for the 
treatment of gastric cancer. Cancer Sci. 2012;103:2181–2185.
White matter lesions are a common pathological feature of cerebral small vessel disease, a major cause of vascular dementia. However, 
the molecular mechanism of vascular dementia is unknown and there is no current therapeutic strategy. Using a mouse model of cerebral 
hypoperfusion–induced cognitive impairment, we found the oxidative stress-apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1-p38 cascade plays a pivotal
role in the pathogenesis of cerebral hypoperfusion–induced cognitive impairment and white matter lesions, through blood–brain barrier 
breakdown via the disruption of endothelial tight junctions. Furthermore, compound K811, a specific apoptosis signal–regulating kinase 1 
inhibitor, prevented cognitive impairment induced by chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Thus, we propose that apoptosis signal–regulating 
kinase 1 could be a potential novel target for the treatment of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion–induced cognitive impairment.
Significance
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.2127286213)
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/34/3/616
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2013/12/26/ATVBAHA.113.302440.DC1.html
[Link]
http://www.ahajournals.org/site/rights/
[Link]
http://www.ahajournals.org/site/rights/
[Link]
http://www.lww.com/reprints
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
[Link]
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/
Tomimoto, Hidenori Ichijo, Hisao Ogawa and Shokei Kim-Mitsuyama
Katayama, Daisuke Sueta, Ming Jie Ma, Takashi Nakagawa, Osamu Yasuda, Hidekazu 
Kensuke Toyama, Nobutaka Koibuchi, Ken Uekawa, Yu Hasegawa, Keiichiro Kataoka, Tetsuji
Impairment Induced by Chronic Cerebral Hypoperfusion
Regulating Kinase 1 Is a Novel Target Molecule for Cognitive - Apoptosis Signal
Print ISSN: 1079-5642. Online ISSN: 1524-4636 
Copyright © 2013 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 
doi: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.113.302440
2013;
2014;34:616-625; originally published online December 26, Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/34/3/616
World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
http://atvb.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2013/12/26/ATVBAHA.113.302440.DC1.html
Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://atvb.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
at: 
is online Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology  Information about subscribing to Subscriptions:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
 Information about reprints can be found online at: Reprints:
document. Question and Answer
Permissions and Rights page under Services. Further information about this process is available in the
which permission is being requested is located, click Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web
Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Once the online version of the published article for 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology in
 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published Permissions:
 by guest on January 11, 2017 http://atvb.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Toyama K et al., Page 1
Detailed Materials and Methods
Animals
Nine-week-old male ASK1-deficient (ASK1-/-) mice and C57BL/6J wildtype mice 
were used in the present study.    ASK1-/- mice were backcrossed onto the C57BL/6J 5
background for at least 10 generations to reduce genetic variation.    C57BL/6J mice 
were purchased from SLC Japan (Shizuoka, Japan).    Animals were housed in a 
temperature-controlled (20 ± 2°C) and humidity-controlled (60%) room under a 12 h 
light/dark cycle (8:00/20:00).    All procedures were in accordance with institutional 
guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. 10
Bilateral Common Carotid Artery Stenosis (BCAS) Surgery
As previously described1, 2, chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in white matter including 
the corpus callosum was induced by BCAS surgery with microcoils (inner diameter:
0.16 mm for Study I, II and IV) in mice anesthetized with isoflurane on a warming pad 15
that was thermostatically controlled at 37°C.
Drugs
SB239063
SB239063, a second-generation p38 MAPK inhibitor, was purchased from Tocris 20
Bioscience.  A previous report demonstrated that oral administration of SB239063 at 
2.6 μg/g/day was sufficient to inhibit lipopolysaccharide-induced plasma TNF-α 
elevation in rats 3.  Furthermore, oral dosingof SB239063 at 5 μg/g/day has
neuroprotective effects such as reduction of brain infarct size and neurological 
deficits in a rat stroke model 3.  Thus, in the case of administration via osmotic 25
minipump, SB239063 at a dose of 2.5 μg/g/day is an appropriate dose to inhibit p38 
in vivo.
Compound K811
Compound K811 was kindly donated by Kyowa Hakko Kirin Co., Ltd, Japan.    The 30
selectivity profile of the compound K811 to over 60 kinases was determined using a 
kinase profiler.   Compound K811 has 99.1% selective inhibition for ASK1 at 100 nM 
and has an IC50 value below 10 nM. 
Study Protocol 35
Study I: Chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in white matter, including the corpus 
callosum, was induced via BCAS surgery in nine-week-old wildtype and ASK1-/- mice.  
Nine-week-old C57BL/6J and ASK1-deficient mice with sham operations served as 
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1940014459)
Toyama K et al., Page 2
controls. We evaluated spatial working memory as a cognitive function at three 
weeks post-BCAS surgery by assessing spontaneous alterations in behavior in the 40
Y-maze test.    We also performed the Morris Water Maze test, Novel Objective 
Recognition test, and Fixed and Progressive Ratio Task to evaluate cognitive function.   
Furthermore, the Light and Dark Transition test was used to assess an anxiety-like 
response after BCAS surgery. Four weeks after BCAS surgery, mice were deeply 
anesthetized with isoflurane.    After perfusion by phosphate-buffered saline, brains 45
were rapidly excised for the measurement of various parameters as described below.   
Extravasated Evans blue in the corpus callosum at 3 days post-BCAS was measured
under fluorescent microscopy to evaluate blood brain barrier (BBB) breakdown.
Study II: Nine-week-old wildtype mice were treated with vehicle (dimethyl sulfoxide), 50
SB239063 (p38 inhibitor; 2.5 μg/g/day) or apocynin (Sigma; selective 
NADPH-oxidase inhibitor; 0.6 mmol/kg per day 4) for 4 weeks.    SB239063, dissolved 
in dimethyl sulfoxide, was subcutaneously infused to mice via ALZET® micro-osmotic 
pump (Durect Co., Cupertino, CA). Apocynin was administered to mice in drinking 
water.    Three days after drug treatment, mice were subjected to BCAS surgery. 55
Wildtype mice with sham operations served as a control.   Cognitive function using
the Y-maze test, white matter lesions and glial cell activation in the corpus callosum 
were evaluated post-procedure in the same manner as in Study I.
Study III: In this in vitro experiment, cerebral endothelial cells in wildtype and ASK1-/- 60
mice were isolated to evaluate the effect of oxygen-glucose deprivation and TNF-α
(R&D, Tokyo, Japan) stimulation on endothelial tight junctions.
Study IV: Nine-week-old male wildtype mice were orally administered vehicle (0.5% 
carboxymethyl cellulose) or compound K811 (100 mg/kg/day) by gastric gavage once 65
a day.   Sham-operated nine-week-old mice served as controls.  The administration 
of each drug was started three days before BCAS surgery.   Cognitive function, white 
matter lesions and glial cell activation in the corpus callosum were evaluated in the 
same manner as in Study I. Furthermore, the administration of each drug was 
started at 24 hours after BCAS surgery to examine the effect of post-ischemic 70
administration.
( 8.0.0.2542.1588642568 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
Toyama K et al., Page 3
Comparison of Cerebral Blood Flow and Cognitive Decline between BCAS Mice 
with 0.16 mm and 0.18 mm Microcoils
Nine-week-old wildtype mice were subjected to BCAS surgery with 0.16 mm or 0.18 75
mm microcoils.   Sham-operated nine-week-old mice served as controls. We 
performed the Morris Water Maze test at three weeks post-BCAS surgery.
Measurement of Cerebral Blood Flow
As previously described2, cerebral blood flow was measured using a laser speckle 80
blood flow imager (Omega Zone; Omegawave, Tokyo, Japan).   Mice were held on a 
warming pad thermostatically controlled at 37°C to avoid the effect of body 
temperature on the measurement of cerebral blood flow.   The value of blood flow 
was expressed as a percentage of the baseline blood flow.
85
Measurement of Blood Pressure
As previously described 5, blood pressure of mice was measured at 1 week after 
BCAS surgery using the tail cuff method (BP-98A; Softron Co, Tokyo, Japan).
Evaluation of Spatial Working Memory 90
We evaluated spatial working memory as a cognitive function at 2 and 3 weeks after 
BCAS by assessing spontaneous alterations of behavior in the Y-maze test.  As 
previously described2, mice were placed at the end of an arm and allowed to move 
freely through the maze for 8-minute sessions during the dark period (7:00 to 12:00 
PM).  Spontaneous alterations were defined as the consecutive entry of a mouse 95
into all three different arms to form a triplet of non-repeated components.    The 
percentage of spontaneous alterations was calculated as the ratio of 
actual-to-possible alterations automatically by the Y-maze system (defined as the 
number of spontaneous alterations in behavior/(the total number of arm entries - 2) × 
100) (Muromachi Kikai, Tokyo, Japan).    The total number of arms entered during the 100
sessions reflected locomotor activity.
Morris Water Maze Test
The Morris Water Maze test was performed in a circular pool (Muromachi Kikai, 
Tokyo, Japan) filled with water at a temperature of 25.0 ± 1.0°C.  On the hidden 105
platform test, a transparent platform (diameter 12 cm) was submerged 1 cm below
the water surface level. The water tank was located in a test room in which there 
were many cues external to the maze.    The position of the cues remained
unchanged throughout the water maze test sessions. Swimming paths were 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Toyama K et al., Page 4
video-tracked with a camera fixed on the ceiling of the room and analyzed by the 110
software (Muromachi Kikai, Tokyo, Japan).
A training session was carried out before the hidden platform test sessions.  
Mice were given 60 seconds free swimming and guided to climb onto the hidden 
platform and allowed to remain there for 30 seconds before returning to their cages.  
[I] On the hidden platform test, the mice had four sessions per day on the following 115
four days (day 1 to 4).    The inter-test interval was approximately 10 minutes, and the 
inter-session interval was approximately 2 hours.    During each session mice were 
released from four randomly assigned starting points and swam for 100 seconds.   
After mounting the platform, the mice were allowed to remain there for 30 seconds, 
and then they were placed in their home cages until the start of the next sessions.  If 120
a mouse was unable to find the platform within 100 seconds, it was guided to the 
hidden platform and allowed to rest on the platform for 30 seconds.    [II] On the probe 
test (day 5), the hidden platform was removed and the mice swam freely for 100
seconds. The number of times the mice cross the original platform location was
simultaneously recorded.  [III] On the visible platform test (4 hours after the probe 125
test on day 5), the platform was elevated above the water surface level and placed in 
a different position.    The mice were given four sessions with an inter-session interval 
of 10 minutes. 
All tests were conducted at approximately the same time each day.   Groups 
were blinded to the examiners. Obviously floating mice that were not swimming 130
were disqualified from the statistical analysis.
Fixed and Progressive Ratio Tasks
The Operant Chamber Box (CompACT OPS; Muromachi Kikai, Tokyo, Japan) was 
used for this experiment.   In the dark chamber, the room light and an orange LED 135
above the lever were illuminated during the experiment.   A food pellet (Dustless 
Precision Pellet; Bio Serv, USA and Canada) was delivered after each lever press or 
presses depending on the session day.  There was a beeping sound with the 
delivery of a pellet. During the experiment, food pellets were given to mice at 
10:00-13:00 and 22:00-24:00.  Mice were fasted at other times.  All experiments 140
started from 10:00.
First, mice were trained on a fixed ratio (FR) schedule of reinforcement, in 
which they had to press a lever once (FR1), then two times (FR2), three times (FR3), 
and four times (FR4) to obtain one food pellet.    A session was terminated after 10 
sessions or 20 minutes, whichever came first.   Mice were trained to press the lever 145
before the FR1 task, and then they were tested from FR1 (day 1) to FR4 tasks (day 4).  
The measure used to evaluate performance on the FR schedule was inter-response 
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-630842886)
Toyama K et al., Page 5
time (i.e., time between consecutive lever presses, which was averaged for each 
animal). After finishing the FR4 task, a progressive ratio (PR) schedule of 
reinforcement was started (day 5).  In this schedule, mice were reinforced for the 150
first lever press and then required to increase the number of presses.  The ratio 
series for PR schedule was set as 4, 5, 6, 8, 11, 14, 19, 25, 32, 42, 55, 71, 93, 121, 
157, 204 and 266 lever presses.    The series was derived from the following 
equation: response rate= 13 * 0.1 * reinforce number.    The session length was 20 
minutes and the number of presses required in the final completed ratio determined 155
the break point.
Novel Object Recognition Test
The Novel Object Recognition test was performed in a 30 cm × 20 cm plastic box 
(height 18 cm).    Before the training session, the mouse explored the experimental 160
plastic box freely without objects for 5 minutes to habituate it (adaptation session).   
In the training session, mice were allowed to explore freely for 5 minutes, but two 
identical white cylindrical objects (diameter 3 cm × height 4 cm) were present.  One 
hour later, one of the objects was replaced by a blue cylindrical novel object (diameter 
4 cm × height 2.5 cm).   The mouse was placed in the box again, and explored it for 5 165
minutes (Retention test session).    A video camera was positioned over the 
experimental box, and mouse behavior was videotaped for later analysis.   
Exploration was defined as sniffing or touching the stimulus object with the nose 
and/or forepaws.    Sitting on or walking aimlessly around the objects was not 
considered exploratory behavior.   The number of instances of contact with each 170
object and the total time spent exploring each object were measured using two 
stopwatches by a well-trained operator who was blinded to the group assignments.
Light and Dark Transition Test
A cage was divided into two chambers, one of which was brightly illuminated (700 lux), 175
and the other was dark. There was a hole between the two chambers. A mouse was
placed into the light side and allowed to move freely for 5 minutes.   A video camera 
was positioned over the experimental chamber, and mouse behavior was videotaped 
for later analysis. Each test was conducted at approximately the same time each 
day.    The total number of transitions and time spent in the light side were all 180
evaluated using a stopwatch by a well-trained operator who was blinded to the group 
assignments.
( 8.0.0.2542.1401370814 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
Toyama K et al., Page 6
Assessment of White Matter Lesions and Glial Activation
Brain samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin and cut into 185
4 μm thick coronal sections.    As previously described2, sections were subjected to 
Klüver-Barrera staining for the measurement of white matter lesions in the corpus 
callosum.    The severity of white matter lesions was graded as normal (Grade 0), 
disarrangement of the nerve fibers (Grade 1), the formation of marked vacuoles 
(Grade 2), and the disappearance of myelinated fibers (Grade 3) in the corpus 190
callosum.    To assess activated astrocytes, sections were immunostained by goat 
anti-glial fibrillary acidic protein antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), reacted with 
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-goat secondary antibodies (Santa Cruz 
Biotechnology), visualized with 3,3’-diaminobenzidine (DakoCytomation, Carpinteria, 
CA, USA) and counter-stained with 1% methyl green.    As previously reported2, we 195
counted the numerical density of the glial cell nuclei with immunopositive perikarya in 
the white matter.
Quantitation of Evans Blue Extravasation
Mice were sacrificed at 72 hours after BCAS surgery to evaluate BBB dysfunction 200
pots-BCAS surgery as previously described 6.    One hour after intra-peritoneal 
injection of 1 mL of 4% Evans blue (Sigma Aldrich, Inc., USA),mice were 
anesthetized and then perfused transcardially with 30 mL of phosphate-buffered 
saline.  Brains were snap-frozen and sectioned into 10 μm-thick slices.  For 
detection of cerebral microvasculature, frozen sections were stained with anti-CD31 205
antibody (rat, 1:200 dilution; BD Biosciences, California, USA) and visualized with 
Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rat IgG secondary antibody (goat, 1:500 dilution; Invitrogen, 
Carlsbad, CA, USA).    Extravasated Evans blue from the cerebral microvasculature 
in the paramedian portion of the corpus callosum was evaluated under fluorescence 
microscopy.    The area of extravasated Evans blue was measured as an 210
approximate index of BBB breakdown using the WinROOF version 5.8.1 analysis 
software (Mitani Corporation, Tokyo, Japan).    Image analysis was focused on the 
paramedian portion of the corpus callosum facing the dorsal part of the lateral 
ventricle because white matter lesions were most intense in this region.
215
Isolation of Mouse Brain Cerebral Endothelial Cells
Brains without cerebellum in six- to nine-week-old male C57/BL6J and ASK1-/- mice 
were cut into small pieces.    The tissues was dissociated by up- and down-strokes 
with a 10 mL pipette in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; GIBCO Life 
Technologies) containing 0.1 % collagenase/dispase (Roche Diagnostic GmbH, 220
Mannheim, Germany) and 20 μg/mL DNase I (Sigma-Aldrich, Inc. USA) and were
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1820526851)
Toyama K et al., Page 7
incubated at 37°C with occasional agitation.    After centrifugation at 200 ×g for 3 
minutes at room temperature, the pellet was resuspended to remove myelin in 20% 
bovine serum albumin in DMEM and centrifuged at 1000 ×g for 10 minutes.   
Cerebral endothelial cells were separated in the first 2 passages (passage 0 and 1) 225
using the EasySep Mouse PE selection kit (Stemcell, Tokyo, Japan), then assessed
by flow cytometry using PE-labeled anti-mouse CD31 antibody (Bio Legend, CA, 
USA) for the selection of endothelial cells. Endothelial cell cultures were >95 % pure 
(Supplementary Figure VII).    Cells were cultured in collagen type I-coated dishes 
(Asahi Glass Co., Ltd, Japan) and grown in EGM-2 Bulletkit (Lonza, Basel, 230
Switzerland) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco Life Technologies) at 
37°C with a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2/95% air.    In this experiment, cells 
were used only at passage 1.
Oxygen-Glucose Deprivation (OGD) Studies 235
Cerebral endothelial cells were exposed to OGD conditions as previously described 7
8 with minor modifications.  The culture medium was replaced with glucose-free 
medium for 24 hours at 37°C with a humidified atmosphere of 3% O2 and 5% CO2
using Gas Pack Pouch bags (Bionix; Sugiyama-Gen Co., Ltd, Japan). As controls, 
the culture medium was replaced with fresh medium (1.0 g/L glucose levels) for 24 240
hours at 37°C with a humidified atmosphere of 21% O2 and 5% CO2.
TNF-α Stimulation Studies
The culture medium was replaced with fresh medium containing 10 ng/mL TNF-α
(R&D, Tokyo, Japan) for 6, 12 and 24 hours, and 100 ng/mL TNF-α for 10 and 30 245
minutes at 37°C with a humidified atmosphere of 21% O2 and 5% CO2. Then, cells 
were harvested for western blot analysis.
Cerebral Nitrotyrosine Level
In our previous study2, we demonstrated cerebral nitrotyrosine, a marker of oxidative 250
stress, was significantly increased after BCAS surgery. Furthermore, ASK1 is 
mainly activated by oxidative stress. To evaluate the effect of cerebral 
hypoperfusion on oxidative stress, we measured cerebral nitrotyrosine levels. As 
previously described2, brain samples were analyzed using a Nitrotyrosine ELISA Kit 
(Cell Biolabs, Inc, San Diego, CA). Nitrotyrosine concentrations were normalized per 255
milligram of protein measured by the Bradford method.
( 8.0.0.2542.1469154960 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
Toyama K et al., Page 8
Zymography 260
Brain tissues were homogenized on ice in phosphate-buffered saline solution 
consisting of 1.0% Triton-X 100. After centrifugation, supernatants were collected
and equal amounts of tissue extract were subjected to electrophoresis (10% 
SDS-PAGE containing gelatin). The gels were incubated overnight at 37°C in 50 
mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.4) containing 10 mM CaCl2 with washing in 2.5% Triton 265
X-100 buffer for 40 minutes and staining with Coomassie blue.   After destaining, the 
gels were photographed.    Cerebral infarct brain samples were used as positive 
controls.
Western Blot Analysis 270
A detailed method was previously described 9.    The following specific antibodies 
were used: anti-phospho-ASK1 (rabbit, 1:1000 dilution; a gift from Dr. Ichijo, Tokyo 
University 10); anti-phospho-p38 (Thr 180/Tyr 182) (rabbit, 1:3000 dilution; Cell 
Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) and total p38 (rabbit, 1:3000 dilution;
Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA), anti-phospho-JNK (Thr 183/Tyr 275
185) (rabbit, 1:3000 dilution; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) and 
total JNK (rabbit, 1:3000 dilution; Cell Signaling Technology, Inc., Danvers, MA, 
USA); anti-TNF-α (mouse, 1:3000 dilution; Abcam, Plc., Cambridge, UK) and 
anti-claudin-5 (rabbit, 1:30000 dilution; Abcam, Plc., Cambridge, UK); 
anti-aquaporin-4 (mouse, 1:3000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, 280
CA, USA); anti-occludin (rabbit, 1:15000 dilution; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA); 
anti-GAPDH (mouse, 1:30000 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, 
CA, USA) and anti-α-tubulin (mouse, 1:10000 dilution; Calbiochem).
Immunohistochemistry 285
To assess the localization of p38 activation in the brain, double-immunostained color 
images for anti-phospho-p38 antibody (Thr 180/Tyr 182) (rabbit, 1:100 dilution) 
visualized with Alexa Fluor 594 anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (donkey, 1:500 
dilution, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and anti-CD31 antibody (rat, 1:200 dilution) 
visualized with Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rat IgG secondary antibody (goat, 1:500 dilution) 290
were merged. Anti-phospho-p38 antibody (Thr 180/Tyr 182) (rabbit, 1:100 dilution) 
was visualized with Alexa Fluor 594 anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (donkey, 
1:500 dilution) and anti-GST-pi antibody (goat, 1:200 dilution; Abcam, Plc., 
Cambridge, UK) was visualized with Alexa Fluor 488 anti-goat IgG secondary 
antibody (donkey, 1:500 dilution) and were merged for double-immunostained color 295
images. To determine the change in claudin-5 expression in mouse endothelial cells
post- TNF-α and OGD stimulation, the anti-claudin-5 antibody (rabbit, 1:100 dilution) 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Toyama K et al., Page 9
was visualized with Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (goat, 1:500 
dilution).
300
Quantitative Real Time PCR
A detailed method was previously described 11.  We used specific oligonucleotide 
primers for target sequences of TNF-α (F 5’-AAGCCTGTAGCCCACGTCGTA-3; R 
5’-GGCACCACTAGTTGGTTGTCTTTG-3’) and GAPDH (F 
5’-TGTGTCCGTCGTGGATCTGA -3’; R 5’-TTGCTGTTGAAGTCGCAGGAG-3’). 305
Statistical Analysis
One-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s test was used to compare the different groups: 
(1) wildtype and ASK1-/- mice subjected to sham and BCAS surgery; (2) time course 
of protein kinase activity of each group; (3) cerebral endothelial cells of wildtype and 310
ASK1-/- mice pre- and post-stimulations of OGD and TNF-α;  (4) wildtype mice 
subjected to sham and BCAS surgery treated with vehicle, SB239063 and Apocynin;   
(5) wildtype mice subjected to sham and BCAS treated with vehicle and K811; and, 
(6) wildtype mice subjected to sham and BCAS surgery with 0.16 mm and 0.18 mm 
microcoils. For the escape time of the Morris Water Maze test and the response 315
time of Fixed Ratio task, two-way ANOVA with repeated measures followed by 
Bonferroni test was used to compare the results from different groups: (1) wildtype
and ASK1-/- mice subjected to Sham and BCAS surgery; and, (2) Wildtype mice 
subjected to sham and BCAS surgery with 0.16 mm and 0.18 mm microcoils. Data 
were expressed as the mean ± standard error (SEM), and p<0.05 was considered 320
statistically significant.    All statistical analyses were carried out using SPSS 
statistical software, version 11.0J (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).
References 325
1. Shibata M, Ohtani R, Ihara M, Tomimoto H. White matter lesions and glial 
activation in a novel mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Stroke. 
2004;35:2598-2603
2. Dong YF, Kataoka K, Toyama K, Sueta D, Koibuchi N, Yamamoto E, Yata K, 
Tomimoto H, Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Attenuation of brain damage and 330
cognitive impairment by direct renin inhibition in mice with chronic cerebral 
hypoperfusion. Hypertension. 2011;58:635-642
3. Barone FC, Irving EA, Ray AM, et al. SB 239063, a second-generation p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor, reduces brain injury and 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.862727169)
Toyama K et al., Page 10
neurological deficits in cerebral focal ischemia. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 335
2001;296:312-321
4. Yamamoto E, Tamamaki N, Nakamura T, Kataoka K, Tokutomi Y, Dong YF, 
Fukuda M, Matsuba S, Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Excess salt causes 
cerebral neuronal apoptosis and inflammation in stroke-prone hypertensive 
rats through angiotensin II-induced NADPH oxidase activation. Stroke. 340
2008;39:3049-3056
5. Toyama K, Nakamura T, Kataoka K, Yasuda O, Fukuda M, Tokutomi Y, Dong 
YF, Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Telmisartan protects against diabetic 
vascular complications in a mouse model of obesity and type 2 diabetes, 
partially through peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma-dependent 345
activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011;410:508-513
6. Nakaji K, Ihara M, Takahashi C, Itohara S, Noda M, Takahashi R, Tomimoto H. 
Matrix metalloproteinase-2 plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of white 
matter lesions after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in rodents. Stroke. 
2006;37:2816-2823 350
7. Gesuete R, Orsini F, Zanier ER, Albani D, Deli MA, Bazzoni G, De Simoni MG. 
Glial cells drive preconditioning-induced blood-brain barrier protection. Stroke. 
2011;42:1445-1453
8. Culot M, Mysiorek C, Renftel M, Roussel BD, Hommet Y, Vivien D, Cecchelli R, 
Fenart L, Berezowski V, Dehouck MP, Lundquist S. Cerebrovascular 355
protection as a possible mechanism for the protective effects of NXY-059 in 
preclinical models: an in vitro study. Brain Res. 2009;1294:144-152
9. Izumiya Y, Kim S, Izumi Y, Yoshida K, Yoshiyama M, Matsuzawa A, Ichijo H, 
Iwao H. Apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1 plays a pivotal role in angiotensin 
II-induced cardiac hypertrophy and remodeling. Circ Res. 2003;93:874-883 360
10. Ichijo H, Nishida E, Irie K, ten Dijke P, Saitoh M, Moriguchi T, Takagi M, 
Matsumoto K, Miyazono K, Gotoh Y. Induction of apoptosis by ASK1, a 
mammalian MAPKKK that activates SAPK/JNK and p38 signaling pathways. 
Science. 1997;275:90-94
11. Nakamura T, Yamamoto E, Kataoka K, Yamashita T, Tokutomi Y, Dong YF, 365
Matsuba S, Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S. Pioglitazone exerts protective effects 
against stroke in stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats, independently 
of blood pressure. Stroke. 2007;38:3016-3022
370
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-511355278)
MAPKKK:            ASK1
MAPKK:    MKK4/7   MKK3/6
Supplementary Figure I
NADPH Oxidase
Oxidative Stress
Compound K811
Apocynin
MAPK:          JNK           p38 SB239063
( 8.0.0.2542.1281883206 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
(A) (B)
Sham BCAS (10 mins)
Cerebral Blood Flow Ratio Post Surgery (10 mins) to Pre Surgery
Sham BCAS (10 mins)
0
25
50
75
100
%
Wildtype ASK1-/-Wildtype ASK1-/-
%
0
25
50
75
100 Cerebral Blood Flow Ratio Post Surgery (4 wks) to Pre Surgery
Sham BCAS (4 wks)
Supplementary Figure II p<0.01 vs Wildtype Sham
p<0.01 vs ASK1-/- Sham
Sham BCAS (4 wks)
Wildtype ASK1-/-Wildtype ASK1-/-
ASK1-/-
Wildtype
ASK1-/-
Wildtype
(8.0.0.2542.1701039243 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
0
100
200
300
Stay Time in Dark
Sec
Sham BCAS (2 wks)
(F) (G)
Response Time (FR1)
Session
1 5 10
0
50
100
150
200
Sec
(A)
0
50
100
150
200
Response Time (FR2)
Session
1 5 10
Sec
0
50
100
150
Response Time (FR3)
Session
1 5 10
Sec
Supplementary Figure III
(D) (E)
(B) (C)
BCAS (2 wks) Sham
Exploratory preference (Training session)
0
25
50
75
%
BCAS (2 wks) Sham
Exploratory preference (Retention test session)
0
25
50
75
%
0
5
10
15
20
Transitions
Sham BCAS (2 wks)
Wildtype
BCAS
(4 wks)
ASK1-/-  Sham ]
] Wildtype
ASK1-/- 
ASK1-/- Wildtype
ASK1-/- Wildtype ASK1-/- Wildtype
ASK1-/- Wildtype
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-391867670)
Supplementary Figure IV
* p<0.01 § p<0.05 vs Sham
† p<0.01 vs BCAS 0.18 mm
(D)
Cerebral Blood Flow Ratio Post Surgery (10 mins) to Pre Surgery
0
25
50
75
100
Sham 0.16 mm
BCAS (10 mins)
0.18 mm
%
p<0.01
0
25
50
75
100
(E)
Cerebral Blood Flow Ratio Post Surgery (4 wks) to Pre Surgery
Sham 0.16 mm
BCAS (4 wks)
0.18 mm
% p<0.05
§
1
2
3
4
5
0.16 mm
BCAS (3 wks)
Sham 0.18 mm
Mean Annual Crossing
0
25
50
75
100
Sec
Escape Time
Session
1 2 3 4
(A)
0
25
50
75
100
Sham
BCAS (3 wks) 0.16 mm
BCAS (3 wks) 0.18 mm
13
Escape Time
Sec
9 5
Session
1
(B) (C)
†
p<0.01
Sham
BCAS (3 wks) 0.16 mm
BCAS (3 wks) 0.18 mm
0 1 2 3 7 14 28
0
25
50
75
100
Sham
BCAS 0.16 mm
BCAS 0.18 mm
(F)
%
Survival Rate
Days
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.204595916)
Supplementary Figure V
Wildtype-BCSA (30 mins)
p-p38 GSTpi Merge
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-2000707672)
Supplementary Figure VI
Wildtype ASK1-/-
- Pro MMP 9
- Pro MMP 2
-        MMP 2
cerebral infarction 24 hrs 48 hrs 72 hrs 24 hrs 48 hrs 72 hrs 30 mins 2 hrs 6 hrs
(A)
BCAS
(B)
α-tubulin
Aquaporin 4
Relative Aquaporin-4 / α-tubulin
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
BCAS (72 hrs) BCAS (-)
+ - + + + + + + + + -
BCAS (-) BCAS (72 hrs)
Wildtype ASK1-/- Wildtype ASK1-/-
ASK1-/-
Wildtype
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1042907990)
Purity 10 %
(After Dissociation)
Purity 50 %
(Passage = 0)
Purity 95 %
(Passage = 1)
CD31 positive (101>)
Cells Counts
Supplementary Figure VII
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1042907990)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Relative Claudin-5 / α-tubulin
(hrs)
TNF-α + - - +
24 24
ASK1 -/- Wildtype
(B)
Supplementary Figure VIII
(C)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
TNF-α + - - + Relative Occludin / α-tubulin
(hrs) 24 24
ASK1 -/- Wildtype
* p< 0.01 † p <0.05 vs TNF-α (-)
10 mins 30 mins
Wildtype
p-ASK1
TNF-α - + +
(E)
α-tubulin 0
0.5
1.0
1.5
10 30 (mins)
TNF-α - + + Relative p-ASK1 / α-tubulin
Claudin-5 / DAPI
TNF-α (+); 24 hrs TNF-α (-)
(D)
-
(A)
TNF-α
6 hrs 12 hrs 24 hrs 6 hrs 12 hrs 24 hrs
Claudin-5
Wildtype ASK1-/-
α-tubulin
Occludin
+ + + - + + + -
(8.0.0.2542.1462064027 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
(B) (A)
Supplementary Figure IX
(C)
40
50
60
70
p<0.01
P<0.01 vs Sham
Sham Vehicle K811
BCAS (2 wks)
Spontaneous Alternation Behavior
30 0
10
20
30
Sham Vehicle K811
BCAS (2 wks)
Number of Total Arm Entries
0
10
20
30
Sham Vehicle K811
BCAS (3 wks)
Number of Total Arm Entries
%
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-855636236)
Supplementary Figure X
(A) (B)
10
20
30
40
0
Number of Total Arm Entries
Vehicle Sham K811
BCAS (3 wks)
40
50
60
70
30
† P<0.01 vs Sham
%
BCAS (3 wks)
p<0.05
Sham K811 Vehicle
Spontaneous Alternation Behavior
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Supplementary Figure XI
Cerebral Hypoperfusion
ASK1 ‐
p38 ‐
 (Cerebral ECs, Corpus Callosum) 
Cerebral mRNA of 
TNF-α‐
TNF-α (Active Form)‐
(Cerebral ECs)
Claudin-5 ‑
(Corpus Callosum)
BBB Breakdown
(Corpus Callosum)
White Matter Lesions
Cognitive Decline
Glial Cell Activation
Oxidative Stress
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Toyama K et al., Page 1 
Supplementary Figure I：Schema showing the link between oxidative stress and 
MAPK pathway.    The point of action of therapeutic agents used in this study is also 
shown. 
Abbreviations: ASK1, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1; JNK, C-Jun N-terminal 
Kinase, MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; MAPKK, MAPK kinase; MAPKKK, 5 
MAPK kinase kinase. 
Supplementary Figure II:   Cerebral blood flow ratio post-BCAS surgery at 10 
minutes to pre-surgery (A) and 4 weeks to pre-surgery (B). 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis; Wildtype, C57BL/6J 10 
mice; ASK1-/-, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1-deficient mice.    Values are the 
means ± SEM (n=10 for (A) and (B)). 
Supplementary Figure III:    (A), (B) and (C) indicate the mean response time of 
fixed lever presses (rate 1 to 3) on the fixed ratio tasks.    Exploratory preference in 15 
the training session (D) and retention test session (E) on the Novel Object 
Recognition test.  The numbers of transitions (F) and stay time in the dark side (G) 
on the Light and Dark test. 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis; Wildtype, C57BL/6J 
mice; ASK1-/-, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1-deficient mice.    Values are the 20 
means ± SEM (n=6 for (A) to (C); n=10 for (D) and (E); n=9-10 for (F) and (G)). 
Supplementary Figure IV:    Cerebral blood flow ratio post-sham and -BCAS surgery 
with 0.16 mm or 0.18 mm microcoils in wildtype mice at 10 minutes to pre-surgery (A) 
and 4 weeks to pre-surgery (B).    (C) indicates the effect of BCAS surgery at 3 weeks 25 
on the escape time in the hidden platform Morris Water Maze test.    (D) indicates the 
mean annual crossing over the previous platform location (Probe test).    (E) indicates 
the escape time in the visible platform Morris Water Maze test. (F) indicates the 
survival rates in each group after BCAS surgery. 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis.    Values are the 30 
means ± SEM (n=10 for (A) to (E)). In (F), n=16, n=10, and n=10 in BCAS mice with 
0.16 mm microcoils, BCAS mice with 0.18 mm microcoils, and Sham-operated mice, 
respectively.  
Supplementary Figure V:   Double immunofluorescent staining of phosphorylated 35 
p38 and oligodendrocytes (GFTpi) in the corpus callosum of wildtype mice subjected 
to BCAS surgery at 30 minutes. 
(8.0.0.2542,1274792273 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
Toyama K et al., Page 2 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis; p-p38, 
phosphorylated p38; Wildtype, C57BL/6J mice.    Scale bar = 20 μm. 
40 
Supplementary Figure VI: (A) indicates MMP activity in the brains of wildtype and 
ASK1-/- mice subjected to BCAS and wildtype mice presenting with cerebral 
infarction.    (B) indicates the quantitative data of cerebral aquaporin 4 measured by 
western blot analysis in the brains of wildtype and ASK1-/- mice subjected to BCAS at 
72 hours.   45 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis; ASK1-/-, apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1-deficient mice; Wildtype, C57BL/6J mice; MMP, matrix 
metalloproteinase. Values are the means ± SEM (n=5 for (B)). 
Supplementary Figure VII: Purity of CD31 positive cells after isolation of mouse 50 
brain cerebral endothelial cells assessed using flow cytometry. 
Supplementary Figure VIII:  (A) indicates representative western blot images of the 
tight junction integral membrane proteins claudin-5 and occludin.  The effect of 
TNF-α stimulation (10 ng/mL) on the tight junction integral membrane proteins 55 
claudin-5 (B) and occludin (C) in cerebral endothelial cells of wildtype and ASK1-/- 
mice.  (D) indicates double immunofluorescent staining of claudin-5 and DAPI in 
cerebral endothelial cells of wildtype mice pre- and post-TNF-α stimulation.  (E) 
indicates the effect of TNF-α stimulation (100 ng/mL) on phosphorylated ASK1 by 
western blot analysis in wildtype mouse cerebral endothelial cells. 60 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis; ASK1-/-, apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1-deficient mice; p-ASK1, phosphorylated apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1; DAPI, 4', 6-diamino-2-phenylindole; TNF-α; tumor 
necrosis factor α; Wildtype, C57BL/6J mice.    Scale bar = 50 μm in (D).  Values are 
the means ± SEM (n=3 for (B), (C) and (E)) 65 
Supplementary Figure IX: The effect of compound K811, administrated from three 
days before surgery, on spatial working memory in wildtype mice subjected to BCAS 
surgery at 3 weeks (A) and at 2 weeks (B) and(C). 
Abbreviations: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis.    Values are the 70 
means ± SEM (n=9-10 for (A) to (C)). 
Supplementary Figure X:    (A) and (B) indicate the effect of compound K811, 
administered from 24 hours after surgery, on spatial working memory in wildtype mice 
subjected to BCAS surgery at 3 weeks.   75 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.923420382)
Toyama K et al., Page 3 
Abbreviations used: BCAS, bilateral common carotid artery stenosis.    Values are the 
means ± SEM (n=10 for (A) and (B)). 
Supplementary Figure XI: Schematic overview.
Abbreviations: ASK1, apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1; TNF-α; tumor necrosis 80 
factor α; ECs, endothelial cells; BBB, blood brain barrier. 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.923420382)
