J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617
DOI 10.1007/s00540-014-1968-6

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Dietary supplementation with sodium nitrite can exert
neuroprotective effects on global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
in mice
Takasuke Fukuda · Manabu Kakinohana ·
Chitoshi Takayama · Masayuki Matsushita ·
Kazuhiro Sugahara 

Received: 19 September 2014 / Accepted: 20 December 2014 / Published online: 8 January 2015
© Japanese Society of Anesthesiologists 2015

Abstract 
Background  Nitrite-derived NO protects against middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice. We developed a new
mouse model of global cerebral ischemia and reperfusion
(GCI/R) involving reversible occlusion of the major vessels
from the aortic arch supplying the brain, and investigated
neuroprotection with dietary sodium nitrite supplementation against GCI/R injury.
Methods  Mice received drinking water with (nitrite
group) or without (control group) sodium nitrite (2 mM)
for 5 days and underwent 3-min GCI/R by reversible occlusion of major vessels from the aortic arch (i.e., brachiocephalic, left common carotid, and left subclavian artery).
Survival rates and neurological function scores were evaluated for up to 5 days after GCI/R. Histopathological studies were performed to detect neurological degeneration and
caspase-3 activation in serial hippocampal sections.
Results  In the control group, 17/30 mice (57 %) survived
5 days after 3-min GCI/R, whereas in the nitrite group

25/30 mice (83 %) survived (p < 0.05). The neurological
score at 5 days after GCI in control group was significantly
higher than in the nitrite group. Cerebral blood flow (CBF)
during GCI was significantly higher in the nitrite group
than in the control group, while MABP did not differ significantly between groups. Degenerative changes and caspase-3 activation in hippocampal sections after GCI were
observed in the control group but not in the nitrite group.
Pretreatment with the NO scavenger c-PTIO abolished the
neuroprotective effects of sodium nitrite.
Conclusions  Sodium nitrite supplementation attenuated
mortality and neurological impairment after 3-min GCI in
mice; an effect likely mediated via vascular mechanisms
involving NO.
Keywords  Nitrite · Neuroprotection · Global cerebral
ischemia and reperfusion

Introduction
T. Fukuda (*) · M. Kakinohana 
Department of Anesthesiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, 207 Uehara, Nishihara, Okinawa
903‑0215, Japan
e-mail: takasuke0302@gmail.com
C. Takayama 
Department of Molecular Anatomy, Graduate School
of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa,
Japan
M. Matsushita 
Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Graduate
School of Medicine, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara,
Okinawa, Japan
K. Sugahara 
University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan

Nitrite is an oxidative breakdown product of nitric oxide
(NO) that has traditionally been viewed as an acute
marker of NO flux/formation in biological systems, and
has recently been shown to be a storage pool for NO that
can be released via several tissue-specific pathways during
hypoxia and acidosis [1]. In short, as nitrite is converted
to NO mainly in hypoxic regions, NO generation rates
increase as oxygen concentrations and pH drop. In this
manner, nitrite could act as a prodrug for NO and would
be expected to have fewer off-target side effects than direct
treatment with NO.
NO is known for its involvement in numerous physiological processes under normal conditions. Besides its role
as a potent vasodilator, NO acts as an endothelial survival

13

	
610

factor preserving endothelial integrity [2], improves cell
survival [3], inhibits platelet and neutrophil aggregation
[4], scavenges free radicals [5], and inhibits mitochondrial
respiration [6]. Recently, it has been reported that during
ischemia/reperfusion, modulation of these processes by
NO can contribute to the outcome of tissue injury. Furthermore, a number of animal studies have demonstrated that
physiological and therapeutic levels of nitrite exert potent
cytoprotection after prolonged ischemia and blood-flow
reperfusion in liver [7, 8], heart [9, 10], kidney [11], and
brain [5]. Additionally, Dezfulian and colleagues reported
that administration of nitrite at the initiation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation improved outcomes in a murine cardiac arrest model, presumably by releasing NO [12]. The
cardiac arrest model would result not only in neuronal
injury but also damage to other vital organs (including
heart, liver, kidney, etc.); therefore, attenuation of mortality
and neurological impairment in this model following nitrite
administration might result from preservation of the function of organs except the brain. Thus, studies using cardiac
arrest models may be unable to reveal the precise mechanism underlying the neuroprotective effect of nitrite against
global cerebral ischemia and reperfusion (GCI/R). Consequently, we have developed a new mouse model of GCI/R
involving reversible occlusion of the major vessels originating from the aortic arch and supplying the brain, and
we then investigated the neuroprotective effects of dietary
sodium nitrite supplementation against GCI/R injury.

Materials and methods
Animals
All animal protocols were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care Committee, University of the Ryukyus. Adult
male C57/BL6 mice (8–10 weeks old) were used.
Anesthesia and monitoring
Male mice (C57/BL6) were anesthetized with 5 % isoflurane in a 100 % O2. The mice were then orotracheally
intubated and mechanically ventilated (Rodent Ventilator,
Model 683, Harvard Apparatus) with isoflurane (1–2 %).
Pharynx temperature was maintained at 37.0 °C by a feedback-controlled heating pad (Small Animals Heat Controller, Model ATC-101B, Unique Medical). Cerebral blood
flow (CBF) was determined by laser-Doppler flowmetry
(Advance Laser Flowmeter, Model ALF-21, Advance Co.)
using a flexible fiber-optic extension. The tip of the probe
was affixed to the surface of the skull over the brain. Mean
arterial blood pressure (MABP) was monitored via a cannula in the left femoral artery (PowerLab, AD Instruments).

13

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617

GCI model
Prior to surgery, mice received 100 IE of heparin intraperitoneally. A ventral midline cervicothoracic incision was
made and the chest wall was incised from the apex of the
caudal manubrium along the median sternum to the second
rib. The major vessels originating from the aortic arch (i.e.,
brachiocephalic artery, left subclavian artery, left common
carotid artery) were gently separated. A clip was placed
on the left subclavian artery followed by the left common
carotid artery and then the brachiocephalic artery. At 3 min
post-ischemia, all clips were removed and the chest was
closed in layers. Protamine sulfate (1 mg) was then administered intraperitoneally. At 5 min post-reperfusion, the
arterial catheter was removed, the incision was closed, and
the animals were allowed to recover from anesthesia.
Neurological function
On postoperative days 1–5, a neurological score based on a
maximum of 14 points for the most severe deficits was utilized to evaluate post-ischemic neurological function [13].
Briefly, eight parameters were assessed and scored: grasping movement reflex (present at all paws = 0, 1 point for
each missing reflex = 1~4), stop at the edge of a table (stopping at the end of table = 0, no stopping behavior = 1),
turning the head when touching the ear from behind with a
small rod (turning towards both directions = 0, 1 point for
each failure to turn towards the stimulated ear = 2), falling reflex (extension of both front paws = 0, not reaching
down towards the ground with both front paws = 1), spontaneous motility (immediate, spontaneous activity = 0,
activity after 30–60 s = 1, no activity within 60 s = 2),
circling behavior (no circling, moving in all directions = 0,
spontaneous circling, turning only to one direction = 2),
pelt property (clean, well kept = 0, coarse, scrubby = 1),
and flight reaction (normal behavior = 0, anxious, jumpy
behavior = 1). The total score was reported as the neurological function score (total possible score = 14).
Histological analysis of neuronal injury in hippocampal
CA1 region
To process brain tissue for histological and immunohistochemical examination, mice were anesthetized with 5 %
isoflurane. The mice were then transcardially perfused
with heparinized saline followed by 4 % paraformaldehyde
in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH = 7.4). After postfixation
for several hours, the brains were removed and embedded in paraffin, and cut into 6-µm-thick coronal sections.
Slides were stained with cresyl violet according to the Nissl
method and evaluated for evidence of cellular degeneration. Cells that contained Nissl substance in the cytoplasm,

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617	

loose chromatin, and prominent nucleoli were considered
to be normal neurons, and ischemic neurons were identified
by loss of Nissl substance and by the presence of pyknotic
homogenous nuclei.
Activation of caspase-3 was assessed by immunohistochemistry in paraffin-embedded coronal sections using
a rabbit monoclonal antibody against cleaved caspase-3
(1:50, Cell Signaling) according to the protocol recommended by the manufacturer of activated cleaved caspase-3 positive neuron in hippocampal CA1 region under
high-power magnification (200×) by an investigator (TK)
blinded as to the identify of mice.
Study 1: relationship between ischemic time and 5-day
mortality
For the quantal bioassay of the relationship between
GCI duration and 5-day mortality, the duration of GCI was
selected to span of mortality from survival or death until
5 days after GCI. Based on our pilot experiments, the duration of GCI for individual animals was varied from 2.5 min
up to 4 min (2.5 min n = 5, 3 min n = 13, 3.5 min n = 8
and 4 min n = 5). The P50 value represents the duration of
ischemia (in minutes) associated with a 50 % probability of
death 5 days after GCI.
Study 2: investigation of the neuroprotective effects of
dietary sodium nitrite supplementation against GCI.

611

Determination of NOx level in plasma
Concentrations of NOx were measured in plasma samples
obtained from mice with (n = 5) or without (n = 5) nitrite
(2 mM) supplementation for 5 days by using the Griess
method with an automated NO detector/high-performance
liquid chromatography system (ENO-20; Eicom, Kyoto,
Japan).
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate measurement in brain
tissue
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) levels were
measured in brain tissue taken from the mice during GCI.
Mice were decapitated after 2 min of GCI, and brain tissue
was immediately harvested and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Because significant differences in CBF during GCI
had already been observed at 2 min of GCI, we decided
to measure cGMP levels in brain tissue harvested at 2 min
of GCI. The cGMP measurements were performed using a
sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Cayman
Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Two groups were studied: a nitrite supplementation group (n = 6) and a control group (n = 6).
Statistical analysis

Sodium nitrite therapy
Mice were randomly divided into two groups as follows:
the nitrite group (n  = 30) was comprised of mice given
drinking water containing sodium nitrite (2 mM) for 5 days
before and after GCI; the control group (n = 30) received
drinking water without sodium nitrite. According to the
results derived from study 1, 3 min of GCI was determined
as an adequate duration of ischemia for subsequent studies.
Since our preliminary study using this GCI model showed
that 2 mM sodium nitrite containing drinking water exerted
a better survival rate than 0.5 or 10 mM sodium nitrite, we
made a choice for the sodium nitrite concentration of drinking water as 2 mM.
For investigating whether NO might be involved into the
neuroprotective effect of sodium nitrite therapy, CarboxyPTIO [2-(4-carboxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5–tetramethylimidazoline–1–oxyl–3–oxide potassium salt] (Sigma-Aldrich), a
direct intravascular NO scavenger, was used. Mice given
drinking water containing sodium nitrite (2 mM) for 5 days
were divided into two groups as follows; Nitrite + PTIO
group (n  = 9) was comprised of mice given intraperitoneally carboxy-PTIO dissolved in saline intraperitoneally
at a dose of 1 mg/kg 30 min before GCI; Intraperitoneal
saline instead of carboxy-PTIO was given in nitrite group
(n = 9).

All data are expressed as mean ± SEM. The number of
animals for each measurement was determined by a power
analysis using a type I error estimate of 0.05, a power
of 90 %. Neurological function scores were compared
between groups using the Wilcoxon Mann–Whitney rank
sum test, and p values were adjusted for multiple comparisons according to Bonferroni’s method. Quantal bioassay
results were analyzed based by logistic regression analysis [14]. Differences in survival rates were analyzed by
log-rank test. A p value <0.05 was regarded as statistically
significant.

Results
Survival rate after GCI
All mice were subjected to 2.5, 3, 3.5, or 4 min GCI.
The survival rates at 5 days after 2.5, 3, 3.5, or 4 min of
GCI were 100, 61, 25, and 0 %, respectively (Fig. 1).
Quantal bioassay analysis revealed that the P50 was
3.19 ± 0.81 min (Fig. 2). According to these results, 3 min
of GCI was determined as an adequate ischemic interval in
this study to evaluate neurological outcomes after 5 days of
reperfusion.

13

	
612

Fig. 1  Survival rate during the first 5 days after global cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion. There was a significant difference in survival rates among groups after global cerebral ischemia–reperfusion
for 2.5–4 min (p < 0.05). 2.5 min (n = 5), 3 min (n = 13), 3.5 min
(n = 8), and 4 min (n = 5)

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617

Fig. 3  Chronic sodium nitrite therapy alters blood nitrite levels. Concentrations of NOx in plasma at day 5 for MilliQ control and sodium
nitrite (2 mM)

Fig. 2  The 50 % probability of 5-day survival, representing the relationship between the duration of global cerebral ischemia and mortality, was 3.19 ± 0.81 min

Fig. 4  Effects of nitrite on cerebral blood flow and blood pressure.
Laser-Doppler flowmeter values are presented. The values are compared within the group at the indicated timepoints, and the cerebral
blood flow data are shown as mean ± SD. Significant differences are
denoted by *p < 0.01 (n = 5, multiple comparison by Bonferroni and
Tukey–Kramer tests)

Plasma NOx concentration

Table 1  Effects of nitrite on blood pressure

As shown in Fig. 3, sodium nitrite supplementation for
5 days significantly increased plasma NOx levels compared
with the control group.
Measurement of MABP and CBF
Before GCI, there were no significant differences in MABP
and CBF between the groups. MABP was increased immediately after onset of GCI and remained constant during the
ischemic period in all mice. CBF in the control group was
immediately reduced to less than 10 ml/min/100 g (10 %
of baseline) after the major vessels were clipped and it
remained constant during GCI. Although CBF in the nitrite
group also decreased immediately after onset of GCI, it

13

Blood pressure (mmHg)
 Pre-ischemic
 Ischemic 0 min
 Ischemic 1 min
 Ischemic 2 min
 Ischemic 3 min
 Postischemic

Control (n = 3)

Nitrite (n = 4)

80.7 ± 6.0
89.0 ± 10.1
125.0 ± 2.5
130.3 ± 25.5
130.0 ± 20.0

84.8 ± 10.8
92.0 ± 12.6
120.0 ± 7.1
130.3 ± 4.5
116.5 ± 19.8

87.3 ± 11.7

70.3 ± 9.0*

Data are presented as mean ± SD
* p < 0.05 compared with control

was significantly higher during GCI in the nitrite group
than in the control group, while MABP did not differ significantly between groups (Fig. 4; Table 1).

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617	

613

Nitrite improves long‑term survival rate and neurological
function after GCI
Although only 57 % of mice (17/30) in the control group
survived 5 days after GCI, 83 % of mice (25/30) in the
nitrite group survived 5 days after GCI (p < 0.05). Neurological function of the surviving mice in the control group
(n  = 4) gradually worsened starting at approximately
4 days after GCI, and at 5 days after GCI was significantly
higher neuroscore in the control group than in the nitrite
group (n  = 4), suggesting that even the surviving mice
in the control group had worsened neurological function
at 5 days after GCI as compared with the nitrite group
(Fig. 5).
Nitrite therapy is associated with cGMP
We evaluated the effect of nitrite on the levels of cGMP in
mouse brain during GCI. The activity of cGMP during GCI
was significantly higher in the nitrite group than in the control group (Fig. 6).
Neuronal injury in the hippocampal CA1 sector
In the control group, although few neurons in the CA1 sector showed degeneration at 2 days after GCI, most of the
pyramidal neurons exhibited pyknotic, shrunken nuclei
at 5 days after GCI, which was observed consistently. In
contrast, 3 min of GCI in the nitrite group did not affect
the appearance of neurons in the CA1 sector at 2 days and
5 days of GCI (Fig. 7a).
Immunohistological analysis revealed that neurons
containing cleaved caspase-3 in the CA1 sector of the
hippocampus appeared at 3 days post-GCI in the control
group. On the other hand, sodium nitrite supplementation
for 5 days before GCI inhibited the activation of caspase-3
in the CA1 region throughout this experiment (Fig. 7b).
Enhancement of cerebral blood flow by nitrite is dependent
on NO
To investigate whether NO production from nitrite would
be associated with neuroprotection after GCI, c-PTIO was
administered intraperitoneally 30 min before GCI. Figure 8
shows that pretreatment with c-PTIO completely abolished
the neuroprotective effects of sodium nitrite therapy.

Discussion
In the present study, using a new mouse model of GCI
we have demonstrated that sodium nitrite therapy reduced
mortality after 3-min GCI, and attenuated neurological

Fig.  5  a Survival rate during the first 5 days after global cerebral ischemia–reperfusion. Control mice subjected to global cerebral ischemia–reperfusion. Nitrite mice subjected to global cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion treated with nitrite. *p < 0.05 vs. control. b
Neurological function was determined on post-operative days 1–5.
Only animals surviving the whole experimental observation period
of 5 days were included in the analysis. Neurological function scores
in control mice were significantly increased in comparison to the
scores in global cerebral ischemia–reperfusion mice subjected to
nitrite treatment (mean ± SD: Significant differences are denoted by
*p < 0.05; n  = 14, multiple comparison by Bonferroni and Tukey–
Kramer tests)

dysfunction and histopathological changes in the CA1
sector of the hippocampus after reperfusion. In the group
that received sodium nitrite therapy, CBF was significantly
higher than that in the control group, and cGMP levels in
the cerebrum were also significantly higher in the nitrite
group during GCI, indicating that cerebral vascular dilatation and a subsequent increase in collateral blood flow
may be associated with the attenuation of neurological

13

	
614

Fig. 6  Neuroprotection mediated by nitrite-derived NO. Nitrite
treatment increases cGMP levels in the brain after global cerebral
ischemia. *p < 0.05 vs. the control global cerebral ischemia group
(Student’s t test and Mann–Whitney U test)

impairment. Additionally, the neuroprotective effect of
sodium nitrite therapy and its ability to attenuate mortality
was abolished by intraperitoneal pretreatment with c-PTIO,
suggesting that cerebral vasodilation by NO might be
related, in part, to neuroprotective effects of sodium nitrite
therapy after GCI in mice.
Several models of GCI have been developed in different
species in order to investigate circulatory arrest-induced
brain damage under laboratory conditions. However, techniques previously employed in rats and other rodents did
not yield sufficiently robust results in mice because of the
high variability of collateral flow in that species. One of

Fig.  7  a Neuronal cell death in the hippocampus after global cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion. Photomicrographs showing histopathological
changes in the hippocampal CA1 region after 3-min global cerebral
ischemia–reperfusion (Nissl staining). b Representative photomicrographs of the hippocampal CA1 region of mice subjected to 3-min
global cerebral ischemia–reperfusion showing cleaved caspase-3–

13

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617

the most widely used approaches to induce GCI is bilateral carotid occlusion with hypotension. Despite thorough
surgical techniques and excellent physiological monitoring, these approaches resulted in inconsistent reduction
of CBF due to residual collateral blood flow through the
basilar artery. Another approach used to induce GCI is
the three-vessel occlusion model, where the occlusion of
carotid arteries is combined with clamping of the basilar
artery; however, this method has major limitations and is
surgically challenging. Alternatively, several authors have
investigated the induction of global cerebral ischemia
in mice by cardiac arrest. However, in the cardiac arrest
model, blood flow to the brain as well as to other organs,
including heart, lung, liver, kidney, etc., is compromised.
In our new GCI model, clamping of three major vessels
(brachiocephalic, left carotid, and left subclavian artery)
originating from the aortic arch produced substantial
reduction of CBF (less than 10 % of baseline), but did
not reduce blood flow to other organs. Our study using
this model revealed that GCI for longer than 3 min was
associated with increased mortality at 5 days after GCI
(Fig. 1). Mice that underwent GCI for 3 min also consistently showed gradual development of neurological dysfunction starting at approximately 4 days after GCI, as
well as evidence of neurodegeneration in the CA1 sector
of the hippocampus 5 days after reperfusion. It is now well
known that injury to the brain initiated during ischemia
continues, and is magnified, during the post-ischemic
period. This reperfusion injury is caused in part by such
processes as excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, metabolic

immunoreactive neurons. Representative sections of approximately
the same portion of the hippocampal CA1 region are shown for the
control and nitrite-treated groups. Global cerebral ischemia–reperfusion resulted in significant cell death compared to control, which was
to a large extent reversed by nitrite therapy

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617	

Fig. 8  Evaluation of corrected survival rate and cerebral blood flow
demonstrated that carboxy-PTIO completely inhibited the neuroprotective effects of nitrite

failure, inflammation, apoptosis, and other mechanisms.
Apoptotic processes are known to be particularly important in the development of delayed neuronal death in the
hippocampus after GCI. It is likely that in our model, and
likely other models as well, neurodegeneration was preceded by activation of caspase-3 in hippocampal neurons,
which might also be capable of inducing apoptotic processes leading to delayed death of hippocampal neurons.
We therefore believe that this new model could be a viable
alternative to traditional GCI models.
Nitrite is an oxidative breakdown product of NO that has
been shown to serve as an acute marker of NO flux/formation [15]. Recently, nitrite has moved to the forefront of
NO biology with the discovery that it represents a critical
NO storage form in both blood and tissues [16]. Interestingly, a report by Kleinbongard and colleagues [17] demonstrated that plasma nitrite levels progressively decrease
with increasing cardiovascular risk. A number of studies
in different animal species have confirmed the protective
effects of low-dose nitrite in various settings of ischemia/
reperfusion injury, including models of kidney ischemia
[11], hepatic injury [18], lung injury [19], acute myocardial
infarction [10, 20], cardiac arrest [12], and chronic limb
ischemia [21]. With respect to the central nervous system,
a study by Jung and associates also demonstrated neuroprotective effects of nitrite therapy against focal cerebral
ischemia in mice, consistent with the present results [5].

615

In the present study, the attenuation of neurological
impairment by sodium nitrite therapy was abolished by
intraperitoneal pretreatment with c-PTIO, suggesting that
NO might be related, in part, to the beneficial effects of
sodium nitrite therapy in GCI mice. It has recently been
established that, during hypoxia, nitrite can be converted
into NO by acidosis, deoxyhemoglobin, xanthine oxidoreductase, complexes of the mitochondrial electron transport
chain, cytochrome P450, the enzyme nitric oxide synthase,
and other factors [22]. Since GCI should rapidly progress
to a severe hypoxic condition and acidosis in the brain, we
speculated that dietary sodium nitrite therapy increased the
systemic level of nitrite and NO was generated from nitrite
so efficiently in the brain after the onset of GCI that it
resulted in neuroprotection.
In general, the neuroprotective effect evoked by NO can
be caused by vascular and/or non-vascular mechanisms.
NO receptors possess intrinsic guanylyl cyclase activity and thus cGMP accumulates in the cells when they are
stimulated. Regarding the vascular mechanism responsible
for the neuroprotective effect of NO, selective arteriolar
vasodilatation in hypoperfused areas would be mediated via
this NO/guanylyl cyclase/cGMP pathway without concomitant systemic hypotension. Our measurements of cGMP
in the brain showed significantly higher levels during GCI
in the nitrite group than in the control group. Correspondingly, CBF in the nitrite group also remained roughly above
18 ml/min/100 g, but it was less than 10 ml/min/100 g in
the control group. Based on these data, it can be speculated
that the neuroprotective effect of nitrite could be mediated,
in part, via a vascular mechanism. In contrast, post-translational protein modification represents a non-vascular mechanism that may play a role in the neuroprotective effects of
NO. For example, S-nitrosylation by NO is a post-translational regulatory mechanism that usually decreases the
activity of the target protein. The present data suggest that
activation of caspase-3 in the hippocampal area after GCI
in this model might be one of the crucial factors responsible for the onset of neurodegeneration and subsequent
increase in mortality rates. Since the main cytoprotective
effects of NO have been attributed to the S-nitrosylation
of thiol groups from cysteine residues, which can result in
inhibition of caspase-3 and caspase-9, S-nitrosylation by
NO of caspases including caspase-3 might suppress apoptosis in the brain after GCI, resulting in better neurological
outcomes and attenuation of mortality.
The major health concern with inorganic nitrite is
known for a risk for development of methemoglobinemia.
In an animal study with intravenous infusion of high-dose
sodium nitrite (1.8 μmol/min for 14 days), the blood methemoglobin level remained at clinically acceptable limits (<2.1 % of total hemoglobin level) even under a much
higher plasma concentration of nitrite than our study [23].

13

	
616

We therefore speculated that sodium nitrite administration
in this study produced much less blood methemoglobin
level than toxicity.
Our data suggested that NO derived from nitrite under
ischemic condition might be involved in neuroprotection after GCI, in part, by the vascular mechanism. It is,
however, thought that NO derived from neuronal NOS
in the ischemic brain produces cytotoxic effects, including peroxynitrite [24] and glutamate neurotoxicity [25].
In contrast, NO generated from endothelial NOS (eNOS)
is known for potential neuroprotective effects through
inducing vasodilation, which in turn decreases the severity of ischemia. In eNOS-deficient mice with cardiomyocyte-restricted overexpression of eNOS, which should
have a higher level of blood nitrite concentration than
eNOS-deficient mice, the neurological function score
after cardiac arrest model was higher compared with
eNOS-deficient mice [26]. This data suggested that intravascular nitrite might be associated with better neurological function after global cerebral ischemia, which is consistent with our data.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that supplementation
with sodium nitrite could attenuate mortality and neurological impairment after 3-min GCI in mice. Although the
precise mechanism should be elucidated in future studies, it
can be speculated that this neuroprotective effect of sodium
nitrite could be mediated, in part, via vascular mechanisms
involving by NO.
Acknowledgments  We thank Masato Tsutsui MD, Ph.D and Mayuko Sakanashi Ph.D for technical assistance for measuring cGMP
level.
Financial Disclosure Statement  This work was supported by a
Grant-in-aid for scientific research from the Ministry of Education
of JAPAN (B) 25293329 to M. K. and Grant-in-aid for challenging
exploratory research JAPAN 25670559 to M. K.
Conflict of interest  Takasuke Fukuda, Manabu Kakinohana, Chitoshi Takayama, Masayuki Matsushita, and Kazuhiro Sugahara have
no conflicts of interest to disclose.

References
	 1.	 Cosby K, Partovi KS, Crawford JH, Patel RP, Reiter CD, Martyr
S, Yang BK, Waclawiw MA, Zalos G, Xu X, Huang KT, Shields
H, Kim-Shapiro DB, Schechter AN, Cannon IIIRO, Gladwin MT.
Nitrite reduction to nitric oxide by deoxyhemoglobin vasodilates
the human circulation. Nat Med. 2003;9:1498–505.
	 2.	 Dimmeler S, Zeiher AM. Nitric oxide-an endothelial cell survival
factor. Cell Death Differ. 1999;6:964–8.
	 3.	 Contestabile A, Ciani E. Role of nitric oxide in the regulation of
neuronal proliferation, survival and differentiation. Neurochem
Int. 2004;45:903–14.
	4.	Radomski MW, Palmer RMJ, Moncada S. Endogenous nitric
oxide inhibits human platelet adhesion to vascular endothelium.
Lancet. 1987;2:1057–8.

13

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617
	5.	 Jung KH, Chu K, Ko SY, Lee ST, Sinn DI, Park DK, Kim JM,
Song EC, Kim M, Roh JK. Early intravenous infusion of sodium
nitrite protects brain against in vivo ischemia-reperfusion injury.
Stroke. 2006;37:2744–50.
	 6.	 Brown GC. Nitric oxide and mitochondrial respiration. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 1999;1411:351–69.
	7.	 Duranski MR, Greer JJM, Dejam A, Jaganmohan S, Hogg N,
Langston W, Patel RP, Yet SF, Wang X, Kevil CG, Gladwin
MT, Lefer DJ. Cytoprotective effects of nitrite during in vivo
ischemia-reperfusion of the heart and liver. J Clinical Investigation. 2005;115:1232–40.
	 8.	 Lu P, Liu F, Yao Z, Wang CY, Chen DD, Tian Y, Zhang JH, Wu
YH. Nitrite-derived nitric oxide by xanthine oxidoreductase protects the liver against ischemia-reperfusion injury. Hepatobiliary
Pancreat Dis Int. 2005;4:350–5.
	9.	 Webb A, Bond R, McLean P, Uppal R, Benjamin N, Ahluwalia
A. Reduction of nitrite to nitric oxide during ischemia protects
against myocardial ischemia–reperfusion damage. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:2–7.
	10.	 Baker JE, Su J, Fu X, Hsu A, Gross GJ, Tweddell JS, Hogg N.
Nitrite confers protection against myocardial infarction: role of
xanthine oxidoreductase, NADPH oxidase and K(ATP) channels.
J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007;43:437–44.
	11.	 Tripatara P, Patel NSA, Webb A, Rathod K, Lecomte FMJ, Mazzon E, Cuzzocrea S, Yaqoob MM, Ahluwalia A, Thiemermann
C. Nitrite-derived nitric oxide protects the rat kidney against
ischemia/reperfusion injury in vivo: role for xanthine oxidoreductase. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007;18:570–80.
	12.	Dezfulian C, Shiva S, Alekseyenko A, Pendyal A, Beiser DG,
Munasinghe JP, Anderson SA, Chesley CF, Vanden Hoek TL,
Gladwin MT. Nitrite therapy after cardiac arrest reduces reactive
oxygen species generation, improves cardiac and neurological
function, and enhances survival via reversible inhibition of mitochondrial complex I. Circulation. 2009;120:897–905.
	13.	Thal SC, Thal SE, Plesnila N. Characterization of a 3-vessel
occlusion model for the induction of complete global cerebral
ischemia in mice. J Neurosci Methods. 2010;192:219–27.
14.	Zivin J, Waud DR. Quantal bioassay and stroke. Stroke.
	
1992;23:767–73.
15.	Kleinbongard P, Dejam A, Lauer T, Rassaf T, Schindler A,
	
Picker O, Scheeren T, Godecke A, Schrader J, Schulz R, Heusch
G, Schaub GA, Bryan NS, Feelisch M, Kelm M. Plasma nitrite
reflects constitutive nitric oxide synthase activity in mammals.
Free Radic Biol Med. 2003;35:790–6.
	16.	 Bryan NS. Nitrite in nitric oxide biology: cause or consequence?
A systems-based review. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006;41:691–701.
	17.	 Kleinbongard P, Dejam A, Lauer T, Jax T, Kerber S, Gharini P,
Balzer J, Zotz RB, Scharf RE, Willers R, Schechter AN, Feelisch
M, Kelm M. Plasma nitrite concentrations reflect the degree
of endothelial dysfunction in humans. Free Radic Biol Med.
2006;40:295–302.
	18.	Raat NJH, Noguchi AC, Liu VB, Raghavachari N, Liu D, Xu
X, Shiva S, Munson PJ, Gladwin MT. Dietary nitrate and nitrite
modulate blood and organ nitrite and the cellular ischemic stress
response. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009;47:510–7.
	19.	 Zuckerbraun BS, Shiva S, Ifedigbo E, Mathier MA, Mollen KP,
Rao J, Bauer PM, Choi JJW, Curtis E, Choi AMK, Gladwin MT.
Nitrite potently inhibits hypoxic and inflammatory pulmonary
arterial hypertension and smooth muscle proliferation via xanthine oxidoreductase-dependent nitric oxide generation. Circulation. 2010;121:98–109.
	20.	 Gonzalez FM, Shiva S, Vincent PS, Ringwood LA, Hsu LY, Hon
YY, Aletras AH, Cannon IIIRO, Gladwin MT, Arai AE. Nitrite
anion provides potent cytoprotective and antiapoptotic effects as
adjunctive therapy to reperfusion for acute myocardial infarction.
Circulation. 2008;117:2986–94.

J Anesth (2015) 29:609–617	
	21.	 Kumar D, Branch BG, Pattillo CB, Hood J, Thoma S, Simpson
S, Illum S, Arora N, Chidlow JH, Lagston W, Teng X, Lefer DJ,
Patel RP, Kevil CG. Chronic sodium nitrite therapy augments
ischemia-induced angiogenesis and arteriogenesis. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2008;105:7540–5.
	22.	 Raat NJH, Shiva S, Gladwin MT. Effects of nitrite on modulating
ROS generation following ischemia and reperfusion. Adv Drug
Deliv Rev. 2009;61:339–50.
	23.	 Pluta RM, Dejam A, Grimes G, Gladwin MT, Oldfield EH. Nitrite
infusions to prevent delayed cerebral vasospasm in a primate
model of subarachnoid hemorrhage. JAMA. 2005;293:1477–84.
24.	Fukuyama N, Takizawa S, Ishida H, Hoshiai K, Shinohara
	
Y, Nakazawa H. Peroxynitrite formation in focal cerebral

617
ischemia-reperfusion in rats occurs predominantly in the periinfarct region. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1996;18:123–9.
	25.	 Dawson VL, Dawson TM, London ED, Bredt DS, Snyder SH.
Nitric oxide mediates glutamate neurotoxicity in primary cortical
cultures. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1991;88:6368–71.
	26.	Nishida T, Yu JD, Minamishima S, Sips PY, Searles RJ, Buys
ES, Janssens S, Brouckaert P, Bloch KD, Ichinose F. Protective
effects of nitric oxide synthase 3 and soluble guanylate cyclase
on the outcome of cardiac arrest and cardiopulmonary resuscitation in mice. Crit Care Med. 2009;37:256–62.

13

