OPEN

Citation: Cell Death and Disease (2014) 5, e1331; doi:10.1038/cddis.2014.286
& 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited All rights reserved 2041-4889/14

www.nature.com/cddis

Ischemic tolerance modulates TRAIL expression and
its receptors and generates a neuroprotected
phenotype
G Cantarella1,5, G Pignataro2,5, G Di Benedetto1, S Anzilotti3, A Vinciguerra2, O Cuomo2, GF Di Renzo2, C Parenti4, L Annunziato2,3
and R Bernardini*,1

TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL), a member of the TNF superfamily released by microglia, appears to be involved in
the induction of apoptosis following focal brain ischemia. Indeed, brain ischemia is associated with progressive enlargement of
damaged areas and prominent inflammation. As ischemic preconditioning reduces inflammatory response to brain ischemia and
ameliorates brain damage, the purpose of the present study was to evaluate the role of TRAIL and its receptors in stroke and
ischemic preconditioning and to propose, by modulating TRAIL pathway, a new therapeutic strategy in stroke. In order to achieve
this aim a rat model of harmful focal ischemia, obtained by subjecting animals to 100 min of transient occlusion of middle
cerebral artery followed by 24 h of reperfusion and a rat model of ischemic preconditioning in which the harmful ischemia was
preceded by 30 mins of tMCAO, which represents the preconditioning protective stimulus, were used. Results show that the
neuroprotection elicited by ischemic preconditioning occurs through both upregulation of TRAIL decoy receptors and
downregulation of TRAIL itself and of its death receptors. As a counterproof, immunoneutralization of TRAIL in tMCAO animals
resulted in significant restraint of tissue damage and in a marked functional recovery. Our data shed new light on the
mechanisms that propagate ongoing neuronal damage after ischemia in the adult mammalian brain and provide new molecular
targets for therapeutic intervention. Strategies aimed to repress the death-inducing ligands TRAIL, to antagonize the death
receptors, or to activate the decoy receptors open new perspectives for the treatment of stroke.
Cell Death and Disease (2014) 5, e1331; doi:10.1038/cddis.2014.286; published online 17 July 2014
Stroke is a leading cause of death in industrialized countries1
and the most frequent cause of disability in adults.2 Although
different mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of
stroke, increasing evidence shows that ischemic injury and
subsequent inflammation are responsible for damage
progression,3 characterized by irreversible neuronal damage
within minutes of the onset.
In the past 30 years, it has been demonstrated that the
brain’s resistance to ischemic injury can be transiently
augmented by previous exposure to a non-injurious preconditioning (PC) stimulus.4 Evidence demonstrates that PC
inhibits apoptosis in the penumbra region, thus preventing the
spread of infarction. In addition, PC-induced neuroprotection
appears related to a persistent activation of survival kinases in
the penumbra.5 PC seems recognized by sensor molecules,
such as neurotransmitters, cytokines, and others, as a sign of
an event potentially more severe to come.6 In particular,
inflammatory cytokines, beside representing PC sensor
molecules, have a relevant role in acute stroke. For instance,
tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and IL-1 mediate the
inflammatory/immune response related to progression of the

ischemic lesion.7 In the brain, cytokines are expressed not
only in systemic immunocytes but also in resident cells,
including neurons and glia.8 In particular, microglia have a key
role as immune-competent cells of the CNS. Recruitment of
leukocytes from the blood stream and activation of microglia
are thought to contribute to the extension of the infarct
core into the surrounding penumbra.5 Substantial evidence
demonstrates that ischemia-activated microglia releases
several pro-inflammatory cytokines, as well as other
potentially cytotoxic molecules, including NO, ROS, and
eicosanoids.9 Such a large arsenal of cytotoxic molecules
appear to be involved in the induction of neuronal death.
TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL), a proapoptotic
member of the TNF superfamily released by glia10,11 and injured
neurons,12 appears to trigger apoptosis following focal brain
ischemia.13 TRAIL binds five receptors, death receptor-4 (DR4),
DR5, decoy receptor 1 (DcR1), DcR2, and osteoprogeterin.
Although DR4 and DR5 receptors contain an intracellular death
domain related to the apoptotic pathway, DcR1 and DcR2
serve as decoy receptors,14 eventually buffering death
receptors’ binding of TRAIL, thus preventing apoptosis.15,16

1
Department of Clinical and Molecular Biomedicine, Section of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of Catania, Viale Andrea Doria-6,
Catania, Italy; 2Department of Neuroscience, Division of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Federico II University of Naples, Via Pansini, 5, Naples, Italy; 3Fondazione
IRCCS SDN, Via Gianturco, Naples, Italy and 4Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Catania, Catania, Italy
*Corresponding author: R Bernardini, Department of Clinical and Molecular Biomedicine, Section of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, University of Catania Medical
School, Viale Andrea Doria-6, Catania 95125, Italy. Tel: +39 0957384090; Fax: +39 0957384229; E-mail: bernardi@unict.it
5
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abbreviations: aCSF, artificial cerebral spinal fluid; DcR1, decoy receptor 1; DR4, death receptor-4; FasL, Fas ligand; JNK, Jun-N-terminal kinase; PC,
preconditioning; tMCAO, transient middle cerebral artery occlusion; TNF-a, tumor necrosis factor-a; TNFR1, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1; TRAIL, TNF-related
apoptosis inducing ligand

Received 04.3.14; revised 26.5.14; accepted 29.5.14; Edited by D Vucic

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

2

Although recent work attempted to establish a relationship
between TRAIL pathway and brain ischemia,17,18 only scant
data are available on the role of TRAIL and its receptors in
focal ischemia,19 and no data are known on the role of TRAIL
in brain PC-induced neuroprotection.
In the present study, we evaluated the role of TRAIL and
its receptors in stroke and ischemic PC and verified the
hypothesis of a potential mode for therapeutic intervention in
stroke, by administrating a specific anti-TRAIL antibody in rats
subjected to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO).
Results
Intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) injection of TRAIL
abrogates beneficial effects of PC in rats subjected to
tMCAO. In order to determine the role of TRAIL in the
neuroprotection exerted by ischemic PC, TRAIL was
administered i.c.v. in rats. When TRAIL was injected both
at 0.2 mg/kg and at 6 mg/kg immediately after tMCAO onset,

it did not induce any significant change in total ischemic
volume compared with vehicle-injected rats (54±4.9 and
47.8±1.9% versus 58.6±3.5%, respectively). Conversely,
when TRAIL was administered i.c.v. at 6 mg/kg in rats
undergone the same surgical procedure preceded by PC, it
was able to induce a significant increase in the ischemic
volume compared with the vehicle-injected rats (54.4±9.1
versus 22.2±2.7%). Ischemic volume did not change when
preconditioned rats were i.c.v. treated with vehicle or with
TRAIL 0.2 mg/kg (22.2±2.8 versus 24±4.8%; Figure 1a).
These data were mirrored by data on neurological scores.
Indeed, a worsening in neurological deficits was observed
in preconditioned animals treated with TRAIL 6 mg/kg
compared with vehicle-treated animals (Figure 1b).
Expression of TRAIL and its death and decoy receptors
is modulated, along with that of inflammatory
molecules, by tMCAO-induced brain ischemia and by
ischemic PC. Expression levels of TRAIL and both classes

Figure 1 Effect of TRAIL administration on neuroprotection elicited by ischemic preconditioning. (a) 6 mg/kg TRAIL i.c.v. administered determines the loss of the
neuroprotection elicited by ischemic PC. Infarct volume in rats subjected to tMCAO þ Vehicle, tMCAO þ 0.2 mg/kg TRAIL, tMCAO þ 6 mg/kg TRAIL, PC þ tMCAO þ Vehicle,
PC þ tMCAO þ 0.2 mg/kg TRAIL, and PC þ tMCAO þ 6 mg/kg TRAIL. Rats were euthanized 24 h after tMCAO. *Po0.05 versus all experimental groups. Each column
represents the mean±S.E.M. (n ¼ 3–7) of the percentage of the infarct volume compared with the ipsilateral hemisphere. (b) A total of 6 mg/kg TRAIL i.c.v. administered
worsens general and focal deficits in rats subjected to PC þ tMCAO. *Po0.05 versus PC þ vehicle-treated animals
Cell Death and Disease

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

3

of its receptors, death DR4 and DR5, and decoy DcR1 and
DcR2 were studied by western blotting analysis in animals
subjected to PC, tMCAO, or PC followed, 72 h later, by
tMCAO. All animals were then allowed to 24-h reperfusion.
Expression of TRAIL increased significantly in rats subjected to tMCAO after 24 h of reperfusion. This increased

expression of TRAIL was dramatically reduced in the
temporoparietal brain cortices of animals exposed to either
PC alone or PC followed by tMCAO.
The increased expression of both DR4 and DR5 death
receptors in the tMCAO experimental group closely paralleled
that of TRAIL. In particular, DR4 and DR5 expression, after

Figure 2 Effect of tMCAO/PC followed by 24 h of reperfusion on either TRAIL and its receptor’s protein expression, as well as on TNF-a, FasL, and their respective
receptors. (a) Representative blots of DR4, DR5, TRAIL, DcR1, and DcR2 protein expression in sham-operated animals (SHAM) or after 100 min tMCAO (tMCAO), 30 min
tMCAO (PC), and 30 min PC, followed, 72 h later, by 100 min tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) in the ipsilateral temporoparietal cortex after 24 h of reperfusion. Tubulin blots: b-tubulin
(respective controls). (b) Representative blots of TNFR1, TNF-a, Fas, and FasL protein expression in sham-operated animals (SHAM) and after 100 min tMCAO (tMCAO),
30 min tMCAO (PC), and 30 min PC, followed, 72 h later, by 100 min tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) in the ipsilateral temporoparietal cortex after 24 h of reperfusion. Tubulin blots:
b-tubulin (respective controls)

Figure 3 Effect of tMCAO/PC followed by 24 h of reperfusion on either caspases-8 and -3, TRAIL pathway-related kinase JNK, and the cell survival-related kinase Akt.
(a) Representative blots of caspase-8 and caspase-3 protein expression in sham-operated animals (SHAM) and after 100 min tMCAO (tMCAO), 30 min tMCAO (PC), and
30 min preconditioning, followed, 72 h later, by 100 min tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) in the ipsilateral temporoparietal cortex after 24 h of reperfusion. Tubulin blots: b-tubulin
(controls). (b) Representative blot of phospho-JNK and phospho-AKT protein expression in sham-operated animals (SHAM) or after 100 min tMCAO (tMCAO), 30 min tMCAO
(PC), and 30 min PC, followed, 72 h later, by 100 min tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) in the ipsilateral temporoparietal cortex after 24 h of reperfusion. Unphosphorylated JNK and AkT
are controls
Cell Death and Disease

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

4

PC, was comparable to normal controls and dramatically
resulted in decrease after PC followed by tMCAO.
Conversely, the expression of both TRAIL-neutralizing
receptors DcR1 and DcR2 was substantially reduced in
animals undergone tMCAO, whereas a significant increase
occurred in animals undergone PC only. The expression of
both DcR1 and 2 was even more intense in animals receiving
both PC and tMCAO (Figure 2a).
As TRAIL is known to significantly increase the expression
of related inflammatory molecules,20 the expression of TNF-a,
Fas ligand (FasL) and their respective death receptors tumor
necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) and Fas was also
measured.
Although tMCAO significantly increased the expression of
all the proteins studied, on the other hand, expression of
TNF-a, FasL, TNFR1 and Fas was decreased by PC and, more
substantially, when applying PC before tMCAO (Figure 2b).
Moreover, as caspase-8 and caspase-3 pathways are both
activated by TRAIL and the resulting increased cell death rate
involves activation of related kinase Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK),
in order to verify whether the molecular mechanisms underlying
the effects of TRAIL were actually set into motion, cleavage of
downstream caspase-8 and caspase-3 was first evaluated in the
same lysates, along with phosphorylation of JNK.
As a consequence of tMCAO, both caspase-8 and caspase-3
were substantially cleaved (i.e., activated), whereas caspase
cleavage was significantly reduced in animals undergone PC,
and almost totally abrogated in rats undergone precondition
procedure before tMCAO (Figure 3a).
In parallel, phosphorylation of JNK, which was significantly
increased in rats undergone tMCAO, was comparable to
basal levels either in rats with PC alone or in rats undergone
PC before tMCAO (Figure 3b). By contrast, to correlate the
increased expression of the TRAIL DcR1 and DcR2 decoy
receptors to the survival kinases AKT, we evaluated the
phosphorylation of the latter. Accordingly with the expression
level of the two decoy receptors, phospho-AKT was substantially reduced in the tMCAO group, whereas PC and PC þ
tMCAO produced its robust increase (Figure 3b).
Confocal immunofluorescence imaging of TRAIL
expression at different time intervals after tMCAO, PC
and PC þ tMCAO in the ipsilateral peri-ischemic region.
TRAIL expression has been evaluated at different time
intervals by immunofluorescence in tissue slices from
ipsilesional temporoparietal cortex of ischemic rats subjected
to 100 min tMCAO, preconditioned rats (30 min þ tMCAO)
and ischemic preconditioned rats (30 min tMCAO,
followed, 72 h later, by 100 min tMCAO).
Double fluorescence immunostaining of both TRAIL and the
neuronal marker NeuN has revealed that, in ischemic rats,
robust TRAIL immunoreactivity is localized mainly in the
cytosol and in the nuclei of neurons. Differently, when rats
were subjected to PC alone or to PC followed by tMCAO,
TRAIL immunoreactivity was expressed only at the cytoplasmatic level.
With regard to TRAIL expression, immunofluorescent data
confirmed those obtained with western blotting, showing an
increase in TRAIL expression when rats were subjected
to harmful ischemia (100 min tMCAO), and a substantial
Cell Death and Disease

Figure 4 Effect of 100 min of transient brain ischemia (tMCAO), ischemic PC,
and PC followed 72 h later by tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) on TRAIL expression.
Confocal microscopic images displaying NeuN (a–l) (green), TRAIL (b–m) (red), and
Merge (c–n) (yellow) in the brain peri-ischemic region of rats after 5 h (A), 24 h (B),
and 72 h (C) of reperfusion. A representative brain slice cartoon indicating the area
of interest is on the left top of the figure. Scale bars in a–i: 50 mm

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

5

reduction of TRAIL expression when the animals were
exposed to PC or to PC followed by tMCAO. These data
were confirmed at all the time intervals considered, 5, 24, and
72 h of reperfusion (Figures 4A–C).
Ischemic PC induces decreased expression of
TRAIL death receptor DR4 and DR5 in parallel to
overexpression of its decoy receptors, DcR1 and DcR2.
In order to establish whether the loss of neuroprotection
observed after TRAIL overexpression could be related to
changes in the expression of DR4-DR5 and DcR1-DcR2, the
expression of these proteins was evaluated by means of
confocal microscopy analysis on coronal brain tissue slices
of rats subjected to tMCAO, ischemic PC, or ischemic PC
followed by 100 min tMCAO at 5, 24, and 72 h of reperfusion.
Interestingly, an inverse relationship between TRAIL death
receptor expression and decoy receptor was observed.
In fact, both DR4 and DR5 protein expression increased
during tMCAO and decreased after PC and after PC
followed by tMCAO, thus indicating that this protein is having
a detrimental role during the ischemic process (Figures 5
and 6A–C).
On the other hand, the expression of DcR1 and DcR2 was
significantly reduced after harmful ischemia, whereas its
expression increased after PC þ tMCAO at all the considered
reperfusion time intervals, suggesting that a possible buffering
role of DcR1-DcR2 is set into motion to counteract TRAILinduced neuronal death (Figures 7 and 8A–C).
Intracerebroventricular injection of an anti-TRAIL
monoclonal antibody induces neuroprotection in rats
subjected to tMCAO. To corroborate the hypothesis of the
detrimental role of TRAIL in brain ischemia, a TRAILneutralizing antibody (CD253, anti-TRAIL) was injected
i.c.v. in rats subjected to 100 min tMCAO, followed by 24 h
reperfusion. Each rat received a total volume of 20 ml, four
times. Although anti-TRAIL at a low dose was not able to
exert any significant effect (51.5±4.1 versus 58.6±3.5%),
when anti-TRAIL was administered at 200 mg/kg, it determined a significant reduction of the ischemic volume in
comparison with ischemic animals treated with the antiidiotype (30.1±5.8 versus 58.6±3.5%). No effects were
observed when scrambled anti-TRAIL was administered
(55.4±3.8 versus 58.6±3.5%; Figure 9a).
To assess whether the decrease in the infarct volume
observed after i.c.v. administration of anti-TRAIL 200 mg/kg in
ischemic rats was accompanied by an amelioration in
neurological deficits, animals were scored for general and
focal neurological deficits immediately before they were killed.
Results demonstrated that anti-TRAIL, injected i.c.v., besides
decreasing the brain infarct volume, was also able to
decrease focal and general neurological scores when
evaluated at 24 h (Figure 9b).
Figure 5 Effect of 100 min of transient brain ischemia (tMCAO), ischemic PC,
and PC followed 72 h later by tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) on DR4 expression. Confocal
microscopic images displaying NeuN (a–l) (green), DR4 (b–m) (red), and Merge
(c–n) (yellow) in the brain peri-ischemic region of rats after 5 h (A), 24 h (B), and 72 h
(C) of reperfusion. A representative brain slice cartoon indicating the area of interest
is on the left top of the figure. Scale bars in a–i: 50 mm
Cell Death and Disease

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

6

Discussion

Figure 6 Effect of 100 min of transient brain ischemia (tMCAO), ischemic PC,
and PC followed 72 h later by tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) on DR5 expression. Confocal
microscopic images displaying NeuN (a–l) (green), DR5 (b–m) (red), and Merge
(c–n) (yellow) in the brain peri-ischemic region of rats after 5 h (A), 24 h (B), and 72 h
(C) of reperfusion. A representative brain slice cartoon indicating the area of interest
is on the left top of the figure. Scale bars in a–i: 50 mm

Cell Death and Disease

This study provides evidence that the neuroprotection
elicited by ischemic PC occurs either through upregulation
of the TRAIL decoy receptor DcR2 and through downregulation of TRAIL and its death receptor DR5. In addition,
here we propose an experimental strategy for inducing stroke
neuroprotection by modulating TRAIL activity by using in vivo
the selective monoclonal antibody anti-TRAIL.
Although the biological importance of TRAIL is not
completely understood, it appears that this protein may
have a critical role in cellular response to environmental
stress.11,21–23 As such, TRAIL signaling also promotes an
array of biological responses associated with cellular growth
and survival.24 In line with these findings, we report novel
evidence here that TRAIL is upregulated in the ischemic
brains of animals subjected to focal ischemia, whereas it
appears dramatically downregulated in the brains of animals
subjected to a sub-lethal ischemia, PC, or an harmful
ischemia preceded by PC. Given that TRAIL represents the
ligand for two death receptors and for two decoy receptors, we
also evaluated the expression profile of these receptors after
stroke, and we observed that the increase in TRAIL would
undoubtedly complement the increase of its death receptors
DR4 and DR5, while its downregulation parallels the
increased expression of its decoy receptors DcR1 and
DcR2, resulting in a substantial increase in TRAIL signaling
following stroke and a substantial decrease in TRAIL pathway
after ischemic PC. Significant increase in the expression of
the DcR1/DcR2 receptors, which is known to bind TRAIL not
bringing about any signal transduction,15 appears to be of
special interest in the ischemic context, as it represents a
modality of neutralizing a part of TRAIL and its effects, which
include sustained cell death rates.25 Such hypothesis is
supported by the parallel increase of the cell survival-related
kinase AkT,5 indicating that PC prevents detrimental effects of
TRAIL and sets into motion the cell survival machinery to
rescue neurons to death.
At any rate, detrimental effects of TRAIL appeared
mediated through activation of caspase-8 and -3, as well as
phosphorylation of the stress kinase JNK, both key elements
involved in transduction of the TRAIL-dependent cell death
signaling,26,27 thus corroborating the hypothesis that TRAIL
could represent a substantial contributor to poststroke
neurodegeneration processes.
Consistent with the findings that TRAIL overexpression is
deleterious, whereas TRAIL reduction is neuroprotective
following stroke,17 our data provide evidence that TRAIL
downregulation is, indeed, crucial to stroke recovery. This
represents an important finding, as, so far, few studies have
investigated the role of TRAIL in cell death induced by
ischemia,17–19,28 and no one investigated about the possible
involvement of TRAIL in the neuroprotective phenomenon
known as ischemic PC.
In fact, the overexpression of TRAIL and its death
receptors after hypoxia–ischemia has been underlined in
some seminal papers.18,28 Indeed, TRAIL and DR5 are
upregulated in the immature rat brain after perinatal
hypoxia–ischemia18 as well as after transient global
ischemia.17 In addition, it has been shown that blocking

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

7

TRAIL by soluble DR5 mitigate selective neuronal death after
transient global ischemia–reperfusion in mice.17
In addition, increased TRAIL expression was paralleled by
the increased levels of proinflammatory molecules, such as
TNF-a and its death receptor TNFR1 or FasL and its receptor
Fas. It is known that one of the biological properties displayed
by cytokines, regardless of their biological role, is redundancy,29 and we have shown that the increase of tissue TRAIL
expression in a murine model of spinal cord injury is paralleled
by an increase of both tissue TNF-a and FasL expression.20
Thus it is plausible that such potent effects of TRAIL in
inducing poststroke neuronal death is also related to
redundancy with two cytokines, TNF-a and FasL, possessing
similar properties,30 therefore potentiating TRAIL-induced
neuronal death, via binding to their own death receptors.
Thus we went on and proposed a feasible therapeutic
strategy for stroke, based on the use of a monoclonal antibody
against TRAIL as a potential compound to be used in stroke
intervention. In particular, we mimicked the protective effect
mediated by ischemic PC by administering anti-TRAIL to
ischemic rats and proposed new insights into the putative
mechanisms by which ischemic PC exerts its protective effect,
with restored functional parameters.
Concerning a possible mechanism by which PC influences
the expression of TRAIL and its receptor, it is possible to
hypothesize that the two transcriptional factors NFkB and HIF,
involved in PC neuroprotection,31,32 may have a fundamental
role. Interestingly, recent findings demonstrated that both these
factors are tightly linked to TRAIL and its receptors. Indeed, the
C-terminal element of DcR2 has signaling capacity similar to
that of DR4 and DR5 with respect to NFkB activation33 but is
unable to induce apoptosis. Thus increased expression of
TRAIL decoy receptors by IPC may activate a secondary
complex-linked survival kinase pathway. Studies implicating
NFkB in TRAIL-induced apoptosis are few in number and
conflicting. NFkB expression is shown to be involved in
protection against TRAIL,34 but a functional NFkB binding site
is located in the promoter region of DR4.35 NFkB has been
reported to enhance TRAIL-induced apoptosis through intronic
regulation of DR5.36 In addition, DcR2 expression can be
induced by the other above mentioned transcription factor HIF37
that is strongly upregulated by ischemic PC.32
In conclusion, we detected upregulation of TRAIL and its
death receptors, DR4 and DR5, as well as a reduction in the
expression of the decoy receptors, DcR1 and DcR2, in the
postischemic brain, whereas an opposite expression behavior
was observed for the same proteins in the protected
preconditioned brain, thus demonstrating, in vivo, their
potency to mediate cell death or protection.
Our data shed new light on the mechanisms that propagate
ongoing neuronal damage after ischemia in the adult
mammalian brain and provide new molecular targets for
therapeutic intervention. Strategies aimed to repress either
Figure 7 Effect of 100 min of transient brain ischemia (tMCAO), ischemic PC,
and PC followed 72 h later by tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) on DcR1 expression.
Confocal microscopic images displaying NeuN (A–L) (green), DcR1 (b–m) (red),
and Merge (c–n) (yellow) in the brain peri-ischemic region of rats after 5 h (A), 24 h
(B), and 72 h (C) of reperfusion. A representative brain slice cartoon indicating the
area of interest is on the left top of the figure. Scale bars in a–i: 50 mm
Cell Death and Disease

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

8
Materials and methods
Animals. One hundred and fifteen male Sprague Dawley rats (250–270 g;
Charles River, Lecco, Italy) housed five per cage under diurnal lighting conditions
(12 h dark–light cycle) were used in the present study. Experiments were
performed in full accordance with the international guidelines for animal research
and humane care. The experimental protocol was approved by the Animal Care
Committee of the ‘Federico II’ University of Naples, Italy.
Experimental groups and surgical procedures. Transient focal
ischemia was induced as previously described38 by suture occlusion of the
MCA in male rats anesthetized using 1.5% sevoflurane, 70% N2O, and 28.5% O2.
Achievement of ischemia was confirmed by monitoring regional cerebral blood flow
through laser Doppler (PF5001; Perimed, Jarfalla, Sweden). Animals not showing
a cerebral blood flow reduction of at least 70% were excluded from the study.
Before treatment, rats were randomly divided into three main experimental groups:
(1) preconditioned, (2) ischemic, and (3) preconditioned ischemic rats (undergone
PC þ tMCAO). The sham-operated animals underwent the same experimental
conditions except that the occluding filament was not introduced in the vessel
lumen; in the ischemic group, the MCA was occluded for 100 min; in the
preconditioned ischemic group, rats were subjected to 30 min of tMCAO 72 h
before 100 min of tMCAO. All animals were killed by decapitation 24 h after 100 min
of tMCAO to quantify the infarct volume. Rectal temperature was maintained at
37±0.5 1C. Blood gas analysis was carried out in all animals, and no differences in
pH, pCO2 and PO2 was detected among all the experimental groups.
Intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) administration. In rats positioned on a
stereotaxic frame, a 23-g stainless steel guide cannula was implanted into the right
lateral ventricle using the stereotaxic coordinates from the bregma: 0.4 mm caudal,
2 mm lateral and 2 mm below the dura.39 TRAIL at doses ranging from 0.2 to
6 mg/kg was administered in a final volume of 5 ml, either immediately after tMCAO
induction or after PC þ ischemia. Conversely, anti-TRAIL (20 and 200 mg/kg,
respectively) was injected four times, dissolved in artificial cerebral spinal fluid
(aCSF) at a final volume of 20 ml, at 24 and 12 h before ischemia induction, as well
as immediately after ischemia onset and 6 h after. Vehicle-injected rats undergoing
tMCAO or PC þ tMCAO received i.c.v. aCSF in the same volume and on the
same time schedule as TRAIL- or anti-TRAIL-treated animals. Animals were
randomly allocated to each experimental group. The number of animals excluded
because they died during the surgery procedures or because the reduction in the
CBF was o70% was the following: tMCAO vehicle-treated group: 2, 3; tMCAO
20 mg/kg anti-TRAIL: 1, 2; tMCAO 200 mg/kg anti-TRAIL: 0, 3; tMCAO 200 mg/kg
scrambled anti-TRAIL: 1, 2; tMCAO 0.2 mg/kg TRAIL: 0, 3; tMCAO 6 mg/kg TRAIL:
1, 2; PC followed by tMCAO vehicle-treated group: 0, 1; PC followed by tMCAO
0.2 mg/kg TRAIL: 1, 3; and PC followed by tMCAO 6 mg/kg TRAIL: 2, 4.

Figure 8 Effect of 100 min of transient brain ischemia (tMCAO), ischemic PC,
and PC followed 72 h later by tMCAO (PC þ tMCAO) on DcR2 expression.
Confocal microscopic images displaying NeuN (a–l) (green), DcR2 (b–m) (red), and
Merge (c–n) (yellow) in the brain peri-ischemic region of rats after 5 h (A), 24 h (B),
and 72 h (C) of reperfusion. A representative brain slice cartoon indicating the area
of interest is on the left top of the figure. Scale bars in a–i: 50 mm

the death-inducing ligands TRAIL, to antagonize death
receptor, DR5, or to activate the decoy receptor, DcR2, open
new perspectives for the treatment of stroke.
Cell Death and Disease

Evaluation of the infarct volume and of neurological deficit
scores. Animals were killed by decapitation 24 h after 100 min. Brains were quickly
removed, sectioned coronally at 1-mm intervals, and stained by immersion in the vital
dye (2%) 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium hydrochloride. The infarct volume was calculated
by summing the infarction areas of all sections and by multiplying the total by slice
thickness. To avoid that edema could affect the infarct volume value, it has been
chosen to express the infarct volume as a percentage of the infarct, calculated by
dividing the infarct volume by the total ipsilateral hemispheric volume.40,41
Neurological scores were evaluated 24 h after reperfusion according to two scales: a
general neurological scale and a focal neurological scale. In the general score, the
following six general deficits were measured: (1) hair conditions, (2) position of ears,
(3) eye conditions, (4) posture, (5) spontaneous activity, and (6) epileptic behavior.
For each of the six general deficits measured, animals received a score ranging
between 0 and 12 depending on the severity of signs. The scores of investigated items
were then summed to provide a total general score. In the focal score, the following
seven areas were assessed: (1) body symmetry, (2) gait, (3) climbing, (4) circling
behavior, (5) front limb symmetry, (6) compulsory circling, and (7) whisker response.
For each of these items, animals were rated between 0 and 4 depending on severity.
The seven items were then summed to give a total focal score. Infarct volumes,
neurological scores, and animal survival were evaluated in a blinded manner.
Western blotting analysis. In the western blotting experiments, lysates
were obtained from rats subjected to tMCAO, ischemic PC, or ischemic PC
followed by 100 min tMCAO 24 h of reperfusion (n ¼ 3 per group; 2 were excluded
because of death and 3 excluded because CBF did not reach a reduction of at
least 70%). The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined by the

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

9

Figure 9 Effect of anti-TRAIL administration on ischemic damage elicited by 100 min of transient middle cerebral occlusion followed by 24 hours of reperfusion. (a) In all,
200 mg/kg antiTRAIL, i.c.v. injected, induces neuroprotection in rats subjected to tMCAO followed by 24 h reperfusion. Infarct volume in rats subjected to tMCAO þ Vehicle,
tMCAO þ 20 mg/kg anti-TRAIL, tMCAO þ 200 mg/kg anti-TRAIL, and tMCAO þ 200 mg/kg scrambled anti-TRAIL. *Po0.05 versus all experimental groups. Each column
represents the mean±S.E.M. (n ¼ 5–7) of the percentage of the infarct volume compared with the ipsilateral hemisphere. (b) In all, 200 mg/kg antiTRAIL injected i.c.v.
ameliorates general and focal deficits in rats subjected to PC þ tMCAO. *Po0.05 versus vehicle-treated animals
Bradford method.42 Equal amounts of protein (50 mg) were subjected to sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on 8 and 12% gels and then
transferred onto Hybond ECL nitrocellulose membranes (Amersham Life Science,
Buckinghamshire, UK). The membranes were blocked with 5% milk in PBST
and then incubated overnight at 4 1C with a rabbit anti-DR4 polyclonal antibody
(ProSci Inc., Poway, CA, USA) or a rabbit anti-DR5 polyclonal antibody (Abcam,
Cambridge, UK) or a rabbit anti-TRAIL polyclonal antibody (Abcam) or a rabbit
anti-DcR1 (ProSci) polyclonal antibody or a rabbit anti-DcR2 polyclonal antibody
(Abcam) or a rabbit anti-TNFRI polyclonal antibody (Abcam) or a rabbit anti-TNF
alpha polyclonal antibody (Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO, USA) or a mouse
anti-Fas monoclonal antibody (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) or a rabbit
anti-FasL polyclonal antibody (Abcam) or a mouse anti-Caspase-8 monoclonal
antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) or a rabbit anti-Caspase-3
monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) or a mouse anti-Phospho-JNK
monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) or a rabbit
anti-JNK polyclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or a rabbit anti-PhosphoAkt monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) or a rabbit anti-Akt
monoclonal antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) and horseradish peroxidaseconjugated anti-rabbit or anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (Amersham Life
Science). b-Tubulin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was used as an internal control to
validate the right amount of protein loaded in the gels. Detection was performed by
means of ECL chemiluminescence assay (Amersham Life Science).
Immunohistochemistry. In immunofluorescence experiments, rats were
subjected to tMCAO, ischemic PC, or ischemic PC followed by 100 min tMCAO at

5, 24, and 72 h of reperfusion (n ¼ 3 per group; 1 excluded because of death
and 2 excluded because CBF did not reach a reduction of at least 70%).
Immunostaining and confocal immunofluorescence procedures were performed as
previously described.43 Rats were anesthetized with chloral hydrate (300 mg/kg,
intraperitoneally) and perfused transcardially with 4% paraformaldehyde and 15%
picric acid in phosphate buffer. The brains were sectioned coronally at 40 mm on a
vibratome. After blocking, sections were incubated with the following primary
antisera: mouse monoclonal anti-NeuN (1 : 1000, Millipore, Milan, Italy), rabbit
polyclonal anti-TRAIL (1 : 200; Abcam), rabbit polyclonal anti-DcR2 (1 : 200;
Abcam), rabbit polyclonal anti-DcR1 (1 : 200; ProSci), rabbit polyclonal anti-DR4
(1 : 200; ProSci), and rabbit polyclonal anti-DR5 (1 : 200; Abcam). The sections
were incubated with the corresponding fluorescent-labeled secondary antibodies
(Alexa 488/Alexa 594-conjugated antimouse/antirabbit IgGs). Images were
observed using a Zeiss LSM510 META/laser scanning confocal microscope.
Single images were taken with an optical thickness of 0.7 m and a resolution of
1024  1024.
In double-labeled sections, the pattern of immunoreactivity for both antigens was
identical to that seen in single-stained material.
Controls of the methods in the double immunofluorescence experiments included
replacement of the primary antisera with normal serum. To control for a possible
cross-reactivity between IgGs in double immunolabeling experiments, some
sections were processed through the same immunocytochemical sequence except
that primary antisera were replaced with normal serum or only one primary antibody
was applied, but the full complement of secondary antibodies was maintained. In
addition, the secondary antibodies utilized were highly preadsorbed to the IgGs of
Cell Death and Disease

Role of TRAIL in focal ischemia
G Cantarella et al

10
numerous species. Tissue labeling without primary antibodies was also tested to
exclude autofluorescence. No specific staining was observed under these control
conditions, thus confirming the specificity of the immunosignals.
Statistical analysis. For the statistic ananlysis of the effect of TRAIL and
anti-TRAIL on the infarct volume, data were expressed as mean±S.E., and statistical
analysis was performed with two-way ANOVA followed by Newman–Keuls test.
The data related to focal and general neurological deficits, being non-parametric
data, were analyzed using the non-parametric Kruskal–Wallis test, followed by the
Nemenyi test for the non-parametric multiple comparison. Statistical significance
was accepted at the 95% confidence level (Po0.05).

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
1. Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA. Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities in stroke. Nat
Rev Neurosci 4: 399–415.
2. Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M, Davis SM. Stroke. Lancet 2008; 371: 1612–1623.
3. Muir KW, Tyrrell P, Sattar N, Warburton E. Inflammation and ischaemic stroke. Curr Opin
Neurol 2007; 20: 334–342.
4. Gidday JM. Cerebral preconditioning and ischaemic tolerance. Nat Rev Neurosci 2006; 7:
437–448.
5. Nakajima T, Iwabuchi S, Miyazaki H, Okuma Y, Kuwabara M, Nomura Y et al.
Preconditioning prevents ischemia-induced neuronal death through persistent Akt
activation in the penumbra region of the rat brain. J Vet Med Sci 2004; 66: 521–527.
6. Karikó K, Weissman D, Welsh FA. Inhibition of toll-like receptor and cytokine signaling–a
unifying theme in ischemic tolerance. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2004; 24: 1288–1304.
7. Ceulemans A-G, Zgavc T, Kooijman R, Hachimi-Idrissi S, Sarre S, Michotte Y. The dual
role of the neuroinflammatory response after ischemic stroke: modulatory effects of
hypothermia. J Neuroinflammation 2010; 7: 74.
8. Barone FC, Feuerstein GZ. Inflammatory mediators and stroke: new opportunities for novel
therapeutics. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1999; 19: 819–834.
9. Lucas S-M, Rothwell NJ, Gibson RM. The role of inflammation in CNS injury and disease.
Br J Pharmacol 2006; 147(Suppl 1): S232–S240.
10. Cantarella G, Risuglia N, Lombardo G, Lempereur L, Nicoletti F, Memo M et al.
Protective effects of estradiol on TRAIL-induced apoptosis in a human oligodendrocytic
cell line: evidence for multiple sites of interactions. Cell Death Differ 2004; 11: 503–511.
11. Cantarella G, Lempereur L, D’Alcamo MA, Risuglia N, Cardile V, Pennisi G et al. Trail
interacts redundantly with nitric oxide in rat astrocytes: potential contribution to
neurodegenerative processes. J Neuroimmunol 2007; 182: 41–47.
12. Cantarella G, Uberti D, Carsana T, Lombardo G, Bernardini R, Memo M. Neutralization of
TRAIL death pathway protects human neuronal cell line from beta-amyloid toxicity. Cell
Death Differ 2003; 10: 134–141.
13. Wang J, Shen J, Gao Q, Ye Z, Yang S, Liang H et al. Ischemic postconditioning protects
against global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion-induced injury in rats. Stroke J Cereb Circ
2008; 39: 983–990.
14. Sheikh MS, Fornace AJ Jr. Death and decoy receptors and p53-mediated apoptosis.
Leukemia 2000; 14: 1509–1513.
15. Pan G, Ni J, Wei YF, Yu G, Gentz R, Dixit VM. An antagonist decoy receptor and a death
domain-containing receptor for TRAIL. Science 1997; 277: 815–818.
16. Walczak H, Degli-Esposti MA, Johnson RS, Smolak PJ, Waugh JY, Boiani N et al.
TRAIL-R2: a novel apoptosis-mediating receptor for TRAIL. EMBO J 1997; 16: 5386–5397.
17. Cui M, Wang L, Liang X, Ma X, Liu Y, Yang M et al. Blocking TRAIL-DR5 signaling with
soluble DR5 reduces delayed neuronal damage after transient global cerebral ischemia.
Neurobiol Dis 2010; 39: 138–147.
18. Huang Z, Song L, Wang C, Liu J-Q, Chen C. Hypoxia-ischemia upregulates TRAIL and
TRAIL receptors in the immature rat brain. Dev Neurosci 2011; 33: 519–530.
19. Panneerselvam M, Patel PM, Roth DM, Kidd MW, Chin-Lee B, Head BP et al. Role of
decoy molecules in neuronal ischemic preconditioning. Life Sci 2011; 88: 670–674.
20. Cantarella G, Di Benedetto G, Scollo M, Paterniti I, Cuzzocrea S, Bosco P et al.
Neutralization of tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand reduces spinal
cord injury damage in mice. Neuropsychopharmacology 2010; 35: 1302–1314.
21. Park S-Y, Billiar TR, Seol D-W. Hypoxia inhibition of apoptosis induced by tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL). Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2002;
291: 150–153.
22. Cantarella G, Di Benedetto G, Pezzino S, Risuglia N, Bernardini R. TRAIL-related
neurotoxicity implies interaction with the Wnt pathway in human neuronal cells in vitro.
J Neurochem 2008; 105: 1915–1923.

Cell Death and Disease

23. Cantarella G, Di Benedetto G, Martinez G, Loreto C, Clementi G, Cantarella A et al. Amylin
prevents TRAIL-mediated apoptotic effects of reserpine in the rat gastric mucosa. Peptides
2009; 30: 1466–1472.
24. Sancilio S, Di Giacomo V, Quaglietta AM, Iacone A, Angelucci D, Tatasciore U et al. TRAIL
promotes a pro-survival signal in erythropoietin-deprived human erythroblasts through the
activation of an NF-kB/IkBalpha pathway. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents 2011; 25: 375–386.
25. LeBlanc HN, Ashkenazi A. Apo2L/TRAIL and its death and decoy receptors. Cell Death
Differ 2003; 10: 66–75.
26. Crowder RN, El-Deiry WS. Caspase-8 regulation of TRAIL-mediated cell death. Exp Oncol
2012; 34: 160–164.
27. Fu L, Lin Y-D, Elrod HA, Yue P, Oh Y, Li B et al. c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase-dependent
upregulation of DR5 mediates cooperative induction of apoptosis by perifosine and TRAIL.
Mol Cancer 2010; 9: 315.
28. Martin-Villalba A, Herr I, Jeremias I, Hahne M, Brandt R, Vogel J et al. CD95 ligand
(Fas-L/APO-1 L) and tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand mediate
ischemia-induced apoptosis in neurons. J Neurosci 1999; 19: 3809–3817.
29. Ozaki K, Leonard WJ. Cytokine and cytokine receptor pleiotropy and redundancy. J Biol
Chem 2002; 277: 29355–29358.
30. Croft M, Benedict CA, Ware CF. Clinical targeting of the TNF and TNFR superfamilies.
Nat Rev Drug Discov 2013; 12: 147–168.
31. Lanzillotta A, Pignataro G, Branca C, Cuomo O, Sarnico I, Benarese M et al. Targeted
acetylation of NF-kappaB/RelA and histones by epigenetic drugs reduces post-ischemic brain
injury in mice with an extended therapeutic window. Neurobiol Dis 2012; 49C: 177–189.
32. Valsecchi V, Pignataro G, Del Prete A, Sirabella R, Matrone C, Boscia F et al. NCX1 is a
novel target gene for hypoxia-inducible factor-1 in ischemic brain preconditioning. Stroke J
Cereb Circ 2011; 42: 754–763.
33. Degli-Esposti MA, Dougall WC, Smolak PJ, Waugh JY, Smith CA, Goodwin RG. The novel
receptor TRAIL-R4 induces NF-kappaB and protects against TRAIL-mediated apoptosis,
yet retains an incomplete death domain. Immunity 1997; 7: 813–820.
34. Travert M, Ame-Thomas P, Pangault C, Morizot A, Micheau O, Semana G et al. CD40
ligand protects from TRAIL-induced apoptosis in follicular lymphomas through NF-kappaB
activation and up-regulation of c-FLIP and Bcl-xL. J Immunol 2008; 181: 1001–1011.
35. Mendoza FJ, Ishdorj G, Hu X, Gibson SB. Death receptor-4 (DR4) expression is regulated
by transcription factor NF-kappaB in response to etoposide treatment. Apoptosis 2008; 13:
756–770.
36. Chen J-J, Chou C-W, Chang Y-F, Chen C-C. Proteasome inhibitors enhance TRAILinduced apoptosis through the intronic regulation of DR5: involvement of NF-kappa B and
reactive oxygen species-mediated p53 activation. J Immunol 2008; 180: 8030–8039.
37. Pei G-T, Wu C-W, Lin W-W. Hypoxia-induced decoy receptor 2 gene expression is
regulated via a hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha-mediated mechanism. Biochem Biophys
Res Commun 2010; 391: 1274–1279.
38. Pignataro G, Meller R, Inoue K, Ordonez AN, Ashley MD, Xiong Z et al. In vivo and in vitro
characterization of a novel neuroprotective strategy for stroke: ischemic postconditioning.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2008; 28: 232–241.
39. Paxinos G, Watson C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates: Hard Cover Edition.
Academic Press: New York, 2007.
40. Pignataro G, Gala R, Cuomo O, Tortiglione A, Giaccio L, Castaldo P et al.
Two sodium/calcium exchanger gene products, NCX1 and NCX3, play a major role in
the development of permanent focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke 2004; 35: 2566–2570.
41. Pignataro G, Boscia F, Esposito E, Sirabella R, Cuomo O, Vinciguerra A et al.
NCX1 and NCX3: two new effectors of delayed preconditioning in brain ischemia.
Neurobiol Dis 2012; 45: 616–623.
42. Bradford MM. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of
protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding. Anal Biochem 1976; 72: 248–254.
43. Pignataro G, Esposito E, Cuomo O, Sirabella R, Boscia F, Guida N et al. The NCX3 isoform
of the Na þ /Ca2 þ exchanger contributes to neuroprotection elicited by ischemic
postconditioning. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2011; 31: 362–370.

Cell Death and Disease is an open-access journal
published by Nature Publishing Group. This work is
licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivs 3.0 Unported License. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is
not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need to
obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To
view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/3.0/

