Clinical Science (2014) 127, 77–89 (Printed in Great Britain) doi: 10.1042/CS20130565
Circulating miRNA profiles provide a biomarker for
severity of stroke outcomes associated with age
and sex in a rat model
Amutha SELVAMANI∗, Madison H. WILLIAMS∗, Rajesh C. MIRANDA∗ and Farida SOHRABJI∗
∗Women’s Health in Neuroscience Program, Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Texas A&M College of Medicine, Bryan, TX 77807, U.S.A.
Abstract
Small non-coding RNA [miRNA (microRNA)] found in the circulation have been used successfully as biomarkers and
mechanistic targets for chronic and acute disease. The present study investigated the impact of age and sex on
miRNA expression following ischaemic stroke in an animal model. Adult (6 month) and middle-aged (11–12 months)
female and male rats were subject to MCAo (middle cerebral artery occlusion) using ET-1 (endothelin-1). Circulating
miRNAs were analysed in blood samples at 2 and 5 days post-stroke, and brain miRNAs were analysed at 5 days
post-stroke. Although stroke-associated infarction was observed in all groups, infarct volume and sensory-motor
deficits were significantly reduced in adult females compared with middle-aged females, adult males or middle-aged
males. At 2 days post-stroke, 21 circulating miRNAs were differentially regulated and PCA (principal component
analysis) confirmed that most of the variance was due to age. At 5 days post-stroke, 78 circulating miRNAs
exhibited significantly different regulation, and most of the variance was associated with sex. A small cohort (five) of
miRNAs, miR-15a, miR-19b, miR-32 miR-136 and miR-199a-3p, were found to be highly expressed exclusively in
adult females compared with middle-aged females, adult males and middle-aged males. Predicted gene targets for
these five miRNAs analysed for KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) pathways revealed that the top
ten KEGG pathways were related to growth factor signalling, cell structure and PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)/Akt
and mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) signalling. Overall, the pattern of circulating miRNA expression
suggests an early influence of age in stroke pathology, with a later emergence of sex as a factor for stroke severity.
Key words: biomarker, microRNA, middle cerebral artery occlusion, principal component analysis, small non-coding RNA, sex difference, stroke
INTRODUCTION
Stroke is the third leading cause of death and a leading cause of
long-term disability. The risk for stroke and poor outcomes due
to stroke can be affected by several factors, including age and
sex. Age is the greatest risk factor for stroke [1], and stroke rates
double every decade after the age of 55 years [2]. Sex differences
are also observed in the epidemiology of stroke [3]. Clinically,
paediatric stroke appears to be more common in boys irrespective
of age [4]. In the elderly, women have a higher incidence of
stroke compared with age-matched men and also suffer poorer
outcomes and higher mortality [5–7]. Since age and sex are important
risk factors for stroke severity, biomarkers associated
with these populations provide a unique opportunity to develop
diagnostic profiles for stroke severity and, importantly, uncover
potential mechanisms that influence stroke severity.
Abbreviations: CAD, coronary artery disease; FDR, false discovery rate; GSEA, Genesifter® Analysis Edition; KEGG, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes; LNA, locked nucleic
acid; MCA, middle cerebral artery; MCAo, MCA occlusion; miRNA (miR), microRNA; mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin; PCA, principal component analysis; PI3K, phosphoinositide
3-kinase; PPARγ, peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor γ; qPCR, quantitative real-time PCR; TTC, triphenyl tetrazolium chloride.
Correspondence: Dr Farida Sohrabji (email sohrabji@medicine.tamhsc.edu).
microRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs of
∼25 nucleotides long that regulate gene expression posttranscriptionally
by binding to complementary sequences in the
3-UTR of multiple target mRNAs [8]. miRNAs are abundantly
present in all human cells, target∼60% of all genes, and are each
able to repress hundreds of targets [9]. miRNAs exhibit functional
dysregulation in almost all aspects of human pathology, including
cancer, cardiovascular diseases, metabolic disorders and neurodegenerative
diseases. They form tissue-specific molecular profiles
that further define significant pathological features. Although initially
thought to be exclusively intracellular, miRNAs are now
found in virtually all body fluids and are virtually indestructible
in blood [10].
Recent studies reported distinct miRNA expression patterns
in the stroke pathogenic process, including hyperlipidaemia, hypertension
and plaque rupture [11], and atherosclerosis [12].
www.clinsci.org 77
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1551672927)
A. Selvamani and others
Specific stroke-induced miRNA expression profiles have been
reported in the blood and brain in both experimental models
and patients as a function of different reperfusion times
[9,13,14]. Altered inflammation-related miRNA profiles following
intracerebral haemorrhage have been reported in plasma
[15]. In addition, miRNA expression patterns have been used
to predict subtypes of stroke [14]. However, to date, no studies
have examined the effects of age and sex on miRNA expression
patterns post-stroke, either using brain or circulating
miRNA.
The present study has investigated the impact of age and
sex on miRNA expression following ischaemic stroke. We report
that the expression profiles of circulating miRNAs during
the post-stroke period reflect both age and sex differences,
with a unique temporal pattern, such that age differences are
observed earlier than sex differences. Moreover, the expression
profiles of brain miRNAs at 5 days post-stroke are dissimilar
to circulating miRNAs at 5 days post-stroke. A small
cohort of five miRNAs were significantly up-regulated in adult
females compared with middle-aged females, adult males and
middle-aged males. As the adult female group had the smallest
infarct volume and the least amount of sensory-motor deficit
, this cohort of miRNAs may represent a neuroprotective
profile.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
All animals were purchased from Harlan Laboratories. Females
were purchased as proven adults (6–7 months, 230–320 g,
n= 12) and middle-aged (10–12 months, 280-360g, n= 12),
while adult males (n= 12) and middle-aged males (n= 12)
were age-matched to females. All animals were maintained in
a constant 12-h dark/12-h light cycle in AAALAC (Association
for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care)-
accredited vivarium facilities. Food and water were available ad
libitum. Within each age and sex, animals were assigned randomly
to the stroke and intact groups
Middle cerebral artery occlusion
Intact animals (n= 6 in each group) used in the study were not
subject to surgery. All other animals were subjected to stereotaxic
surgery to occlude the left MCA (middle cerebral artery) as reported
previously [16–18]. Briefly, MCAo (MCA occlusion) was
induced by microinjecting 3 µl of ET-1 (endothelin-1) (0.5 ml
in 1 ml of PBS; American Peptide Company). Animals were
randomly assigned to treatment groups. Rats were maintained
at 37◦C throughout surgery. All animals were killed on day 5
post-MCAo. At termination, the brain was rapidly removed and
processed for TTC (triphenyl tetrazolium chloride) staining to
assess infarct volume. For molecular analyses, brain tissue was
dissected and stored at − 80◦C.
Infarct volume
Infarct volume estimation was performed on six rats in each experimental
group. Brain slices (2-mm-thick) between − 2.00 mm
and + 4.00 mm from Bregma were incubated in a 2% TTC
solution at 37◦C for 20 min and later photographed using a Nikon
E950 digital camera attached to a dissecting microscope. Infarct
volume was determined from digitized images using the Quantity
One software package (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Three such slices
were used for analysis, since the infarct was restricted to only
three slices in all of the animals analysed. Only the superior face
of each slice, which was clearly stained by TTC, was analysed.
The area of the infarct was measured in all slices, as well as the
total area of the contralateral hemisphere. In each case, the infarct
area of two adjacent slices was averaged and then multiplied by
the thickness of the slice, and values across all slices were added
to derive the volume of the infarct. A similar approach was used
to determine the volume of the non-occluded hemisphere. The
volume of the infarct was then expressed as a percentage of
the contralateral (non-occluded) hemisphere [16]. To ensure a
reliable, consistent and unbiased estimation of the infarct zone,
all images were first coded. Images were digitally converted into
black and white and magnified, and all traces were performed by
one investigator, who was blinded to the codes. Application of
the volume algorithm and statistical analysis was performed by a
separate investigator, also blind to experimental conditions. In
a subset of animals (eight out of 24), the infarct zone and
contralateral hemisphere was traced by another investigator (also
blinded to the experimental groups). The correlation between
the infarct volume estimated by the two independent traces was
+ 0.96.
Behavioural assays
Motor impairment following MCAo was assessed using the
vibrissae-evoked forelimb placement task, as well as the Stickytape
test. The vibrissae-elicited forelimb placement test was used
both before and after the MCAo surgery. Animals were subject to
same-side placing trials and cross-midline placing trials elicited
by stimulating the ipsi- and contra-lesional vibrissae. During the
same-side forelimb placing trials, the animal was gently held such
that all four limbs were free to move. The animal’s ipsilesional
vibrissae were brushed against the edge of a table to elicit a forelimb
placing response, which typically consisted of the forelimb
ipsi-lateral to the stimulated vibrissae. Ten trials were performed
before the same was repeated for the contralesional vibrissae. In
the cross-midline placing trials, the animal was held gently by the
upper body such that the ipsilesional vibrissae lie perpendicular
to the table top and the forelimb on that side is gently restrained
as the vibrissae was brushed on the top of the table to evoke
a response from the contralateral limb and vice versa. Between
each trial the animal was allowed to rest all four limbs briefly on
the table top to help relax its muscles. Trials in which the animal
seemed to struggle or make premature forelimb movements were
not counted [16].
The adhesive tape test was performed both before and
after surgery. Two pieces of adhesive-backed foam tape
(2.5 cm×1.3 cm) were used as bilateral tactile stimuli attached
to the palmar surface of the paw of each forelimb. For each
forelimb, the time it took to remove each stimulus (tape) from
the forelimbs was recorded during three trials per day for each
78 C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
(8.0.0.2542,174717208 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
forepaw. Animals were allowed to rest for 1 min between sessions
, and each test session had a maximum time limit of
120 s.
Sample collection and miRNA analyses
miRNAs were analysed in plasma and brain samples, n= 6in
each experimental group for 2 day serum, 5 day serum and 5 day
brain. A saphenous blood draw was obtained at 2 days post-stroke
and trunk blood was collected at termination on day 5 post-stroke.
Blood was centrifuged at 1300g for 30 min to obtain serum.
Brain tissue (cortex and striatum from ipsilateral hemisphere)
was obtained from animals killed at 5 days post-stroke.
RNA extraction
To each tube, containing either 200 µl of serum or 175 mg of
brain tissue, 750 µl of QIAzol master mix [800 µlofQIAzoland
1.25 µl of 0.8 µg/µl MS2 (carrier) RNA per sample] was added.
Following a 5-min incubation at room temperature (21–22◦C),
200 µl of chloroform was added to each sample. Following a
2-min incubation at room temperature, samples were centrifuged
at 12000g for 15 min at 4◦C. The aqueous phase was then transferred
to a fresh tube and mixed with ethanol (1.5 vol). The
sample was then loaded on to an RNeasy Mini Spin Column
and centrifuged at 13000g for 30 s at room temperature. After
sequential washes in RWT and RPE buffers, the columns were
transferred to a fresh tube and RNA was eluted with 50 µl of 
DNase/RNase-free water. Sample purity was assessed by Nanodrop
technology and a ratio of 1.8 was considered acceptable.
Samples were stored at − 20◦C until use.
PCR amplification
Template RNA (25 ng of total RNA per sample) was incubated
with reverse transcriptase for 60 min at 42◦C, followed by heatinactivation
of the enzyme (5 min at 95◦C) and was used immediately.
cDNA was diluted 80-fold and then incubated with SYBR®
Green master mix. A portion (10 µl) was dispensed to each
well of the 384-well PCR plate. Plates were centrifuged at 192g
for 1min at 25◦C before insertion into the thermalcycler (ABI
Thermal Cycler 7900HT). An activation/denaturation step (95◦C
for 10 min) precedes 40 amplification cycles each at 95◦C, 10 s,
60◦C, 1 min, ramp-rate 1.6◦C/s. Each microplate consists of 168
LNA (locked nucleic acid)-miRNA primer sets of serum/plasma
relevant human miRNAs and seven reference miRNAs, for use
with the ABI 7900HT instrument. miRNA primers in this proprietary
panel (Exiqon) were selected from extensive profiling
of miRNA from healthy individuals, as well as individuals with
diseases including various cancers, neurological disorders, allergies
, diabetes and inflammatory disease. All primers are LNA-
modified which allows for uniform Tm, and confers greater specificity
, allowing for discrimination between miRNA sequences
with single nucleotide differences. A subset of samples (three
to four) from each group was further subjected to PCR amplification
of U6. For confirmation, a subset of miRNAs from the
5 day serum samples was subject to qPCR (quantitative real-time
PCR) analysis. They were miR-15a, miR-19b, miR-32, miR-136,
miR-199a-3p and miR-363, using LNA-miRNA primer sets from
Exiqon
Data analysis
Normalization
Cycle thresholds (CT) were determined for each miRNA in each
sample. CT values for five reference miRNAs in each sample
were averaged and then subtracted from each of the 168 miRNAs
of interest (CT). miRNA profiles were obtained from the CT
values.
Internal controls
To determine whether the serum samples were contaminated by
haemolysis, we employed the test described by Blondal et al.
[19]. For each sample, the CT values for miR-451 (enriched in
erythrocytes) were subtracted from the CT values for miR-23a
(enriched in plasma). Difference values that were less than 5 were
considered not contaminated by haemolysis. Additionally, both
brain and serum samples were analysed for U6 as an additional
control of cell lysis as a contaminant of circulating miRNA.
miRNA profile analysis
CT values of target miRNAs were obtained by subtracting each
target miRNA CT value from the average of five reference
miRNA controls (miR-103, miR-425, miR-423-5p, miR-93 and
miR-191). Reference miRNAs are stably expressed in all groups
at relatively high levels. miRNA expression data (CT) obtained
from focus panels were uploaded into the GSEA (Genesifter®
Analysis Edition) software program (Geospiza). Differences in
miRNA expression were identified using a two-way ANOVA
using age and sex as two independent factors, with Benjamini
and Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons at a cut-off
α = 0.05. miRNAs that were significantly regulated at each time
point in the blood and brain were graphically represented as heat
maps, and Euclidean clustering was used to visualize patterns of
the molecular interaction networks of the differentially expressed
genes. PCA (principal component analysis) was included to estimate
the source of the variance in the data.
Further in silico analysis was performed using DIANA-
miRPath v2.0 [20], with the microT-CDS algorithm. Predicted
and validated gene targets and the associated KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes) pathways were identified
using a modified Fischer’s exact test with an FDR (false discovery
rate) (Benjamini and Hochberg)-corrected P value threshold
of <0.05.
Data analysis for infarct volume and behaviour
For infarct volume, a two-way ANOVA (coded for age and sex was
used). For behavioural tests, a paired Student’st test was used for
each group, comparing the values obtained pre- and post-stroke.
Group differences were considered significant atP< 0.05 in each
case. The statistical package SPSS (version 21, IBM) was used
for these analyses.
RESULTS
Effect of age and sex on post-stroke infarct volume
Adult and middle-aged female and male rats were subject
to MCAo using ET-1. ET-1 delivered to the MCA causes a
www.clinsci.org 79
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm
A. Selvamani and others
Figure 1 Sex difference in cortical and striatal infarct in adult and middle-aged rats
Adult and middle-aged female and male rats were subject to ET-1-induced MCAo. Infarct volume was assessed using
TTC-stained brain sections and quantitative morphometry. (A) Adult female rats had significantly smaller cortical and
striatal infarct volumes compared with middle-aged females, adult males and middle-aged males. (B) Quantification of the
infarct size. ∗P<0.05, n=6 per group. a, main effect of age; b, main effect of sex; and c, sex ×age interaction effect.
cerebrocortical and striatal infarct [16,17,21], typical of other
MCAo models, including the filament model [22–24]. TTC-
stained brain slices from animals in each group were analysed
for infarct volume. Figure 1(A) shows a representative TTC-
stained coronal section from each group, with the quantification
of the infarct volume normalized to the non-ischemic hemisphere
in Figure 1(B). As shown in Figure 1(A), cortical and striatal
infarction was observed in all of the groups; however, the extent
of cell death was significantly affected by age [F(1,20), 5.37;
P< 0.05] and sex [F(1,20), 11.94; P< 0.05] (Figure 1B). Adult
females had significantly smaller infarct volumes compared with
middle-aged females and adult and middle-aged males (interaction
effect F(3,20), 5.23; P< 0.05). At 5 days post-stroke, the extent
of stroke-induced infarction in adult females was approximately
less than one-third of the infarct volume in middle-aged females
and approximately a quarter of that observed in young and
middle-aged males (Figure 1). These data confirm the neuroprotection
observed in young females compared with older females
and age-matched males reported previously [14,16–18,25–28].
Behavioural assays
Sensory motor deficits are commonly observed in MCAo stroke
models and the adhesive tape test is a sensitive measure of this
deficit [29]. Specifically, a longer latency to remove an adhesive
affixed to the paw is indicative of sensory-motor deficits.
As expected, there were no significant differences between the
groups in the average latency for tape removal from the ipsilesional
paw either pre- or post-stroke. However latency for tape
removal was significantly affected in the contralesional paw after
stroke. As shown in Figure 2, middle-aged males and females,
as well as adult males, took 6–8 times longer to remove the tape
from the contralesional paw compared with the pre-test duration
(P< 0.05). However, adult females showed no significant difference
in the latency of tape removal pre- and post-stroke, consistent
with the smaller infarct volume observed in this group.
Although less effective than the adhesive tape test at discriminating
between infarct sizes, the vibrissae-evoked forelimb
placement task is a good marker for corticostriatal damage.
Using the ‘same side’ version of this test, males and females
both showed significant post-stroke deficits in paw-placement
on the contralesional side, but not on the ipsilesional side. On
the ‘cross-midline’ test, males and females respectively showed
significant post-stroke deficit in paw-placement on both ipsilesional
and the contralesional side (Supplementary Figure S1 at
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm).
miRNA regulation in serum
Test for haemolysis
Circulating miRNAs were amplified from serum samples obtained
from adult and middle-aged male and female rats using
the Exiqon LNA focus panel. This panel consists of
168 miRNAs that are known to be expressed in circulation
and in biological fluids, culled from a variety of disease and
normal samples. One potential confounding element in the
80 C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm
[Link]
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm
[Link]
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
Figure 2 Test for sensory motor function
Sensory motor function was evaluated by the adhesive tape test by
the latency to tape removal from the forepaw. The latency (in s) to
tape removal from the palmar surface of the ipsilesional and contralesional
paw for each group is shown. (A) Post-stroke performance
was significantly impaired on the contralesional paw in middle-aged females
, but not in adult females compared to pre-stroke performance.
(B) Post-stroke performance was significantly impaired in adult males
and middle-aged males compared with pre-stroke performance. Values
are means+
−S.E.M. (n=6/group), ∗P<0.05.
determination of miRNAs in serum samples is contamination
from haemolysis. To test for haemolysis, we compared the
level of miR-451a, which is highly expressed in erythrocytes,
with miR 23a, a miRNA that is enriched in plasma. The average CT value is shown in Supplementary Table S1(A) (at
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm). Mean values
for all groups were well below 7, which indicates a low probability
of haemolytic contamination. We also assessed the expression
of U6, a well-known reference miRNA for cellular miRNA.
As shown in Supplementary Table S1(B), brain U6 CT values
ranged from 21 to 24, whereas in serum samples the CT
value ranged from 32 to 35, indicating a very low expression
of U6 in serum. Intragroup variation in qPCR analysis was low,
ranging from 1.2 to 6.7% of the mean CT, with an average variation
of 4.8% of the mean, indicating reliable miRNA estimates.
Circulating miRNA profiles
To determine circulating miRNA profiles, serum samples from
adult and middle-aged females and males were collected at days
2 and 5 post-stroke, and subject to qPCR analysis using a focus
panel with 168 LNA-miRNA primer sets of serum/plasmarelevant
human miRNAs. Expression of each miRNA of interest
was normalized to a set of control miRNA that are enriched in
serum. Normalized expression (CT) was analysed using the
GSEA program to determine group differences in miRNA expression
, using 2-way ANOVA with the Benjamini–Hochberg
correction for false discovery (α = 0.05). In each case, the adult
female group was considered as the control. Expression patterns
of miRNAs that reached statistical significance are represented as
heat maps in Figure 3, where fold increases in miRNA expression
are colour-coded in green, and decreases are in red.
Circulating miRNAs revealed unique age- and sex-related
patterns at day 2 (Figure 3A) and day 5 (Figure 3B) poststroke
respectively. At 2 days post-stroke, 21 miRNAs were
differentially regulated (adjusted P< 0.05; miRNA names are
listed in Supplementary Table S2 at http://www.clinsci.org/cs/
127/cs1270077add.htm). In each case, there was a main effect
of age, indicating a significant difference in miRNA expression
between adult and middle-aged animals, irrespective of sex. In
contrast, at 5 days post-stroke, the expression of 78 miRNAs was
significantly altered (adjusted P< 0.05; miRNA names listed in
Supplementary Table S2). Moreover, at the 5 day time point, the
majority of the significantly regulated circulating miRNA (67 out
of 78; 86%) exhibited a main effect of sex, whereas a smaller
cohort (12 out of 78; 15%) showed a main effect of age. Approximately
15% (12 out of 78) exhibited an interaction effect
between age and sex (Figure 3B). Overall, the pattern of circulating
miRNA expression suggests an early emergence (2 days
post-stroke) of the influence of age in stroke pathology, with a
later emergence (5 days post-stroke) of sex as a factor for stroke
severity.
The ANOVA analysis is supported further by unsupervised
hierarchical cluster analysis (Figure 4), where the agglomerative
clustering reveals two major clusters defined by age (Figure 4A).
Furthermore, PCA was used to visualize the overall response of
gene expression, using Eigen values of covariance. The x- and 
y-axis values are arbitrary units for Eigen values and specific
miRNAs are represented by dots along each component continuum
(Figure 5). At 2 days post-stroke, the greatest proportion
of the variance, shown as Component 1 (Comp. 1) is attributed to
age, whereas little variance was observed in component 2 (sex).
PCA for circulating miRNAs at 5 days post-stroke, on the other
hand, showed that the greatest proportion of variance (Comp. 1)
can be attributed to sex, and a lesser proportion due to age (Comp.
2) (Figure 5B). These results uncover key patterns of change in
miRNA expression as a function of time and their modulation by
sex and age.
A small subset of 13 miRNAs was found to be differentially
regulated at both 2 and 5 days post-stroke (Table 1). Within
this cohort, all significantly regulated miRNAs showed a main
effect of age at the 2 day time point; however, at 5 days poststroke
, 12 of these 13 miRNAs displayed a main effect of sex,
where miRNA expression was significantly elevated in females
compared with males. One miRNA (miR-363) was regulated by
both age and sex at the 5 day time point, and only one (miR-495)
was regulated by age at both 2 and 5 days post-stroke. In view
of the sex and age difference in infarct volume, miRNAs that
discriminate along these two variables as a function of time may
critically influence stroke outcome.
www.clinsci.org 81
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1013029282)
A. Selvamani and others
Figure 3 miRNA regulation in serum obtained 2 and 5 days post-stroke
miRNA expression was subjected to ANOVA and miRNAs that were significantly regulated (adjusted for FDR) are represented
in heat map format. Within each heat map, adult females were used as ‘controls’ and are represented in black, whereas
all other groups are depicted in relation to adult females (columns). miRNAs that were up-regulated in comparison with
adult females are shown in green, whereas down-regulated miRNAs are shown in red (rows). Main effects of age (a),
sex (b) and age×sex interaction (c) is shown for each miRNA. (A) Heat map depicts miRNA expression in serum for adult
and middle-aged females and males at 2 days post-stroke. (B) Heat map depicts miRNA expression in serum for adult and
middle-aged females and males at 5 days post-stroke.
82 C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
( 8.0.0.2542.1783557210 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
Figure 4 Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed serum miRNAs at 2 and 5 days post-stroke
Clustering was based on miRNAs found to be differentially expressed by ANOVA corrected for FDR. (A) At 2 days post-stroke,
differentially expressed miRNA showed two major clusters based on age (adult compared with middle-aged). (B) Serum
miRNAs assessed 5 days post-stroke clustered into two major groups, which were segregated by sex (males compared with
females). Green indicates up-regulated miRNAs in comparison with adult females, whereas red indicates down-regulation.
miRNA regulation in the brain
To determine whether miRNA profiles in the ischaemic brain displayed
similar patterns to circulating miRNAs, total RNA isolated
from cortex and striatal tissue from adult and middle-aged
females and males was also interrogated with the same focus
panel. Two-way FDR-corrected ANOVA with age and sex as independent
variables revealed that 19 miRNAs were significantly
altered by stroke (Figure 6A), of which ten miRNAs were significantly
modified by age (main effect of age, P< 0.05) and
nine miRNA were significantly modified by sex (main effect of
sex, P< 0.05). Cluster analysis showed that significantly regulated
miRNAs were segregated by age (Figure 6B). PCA for
brain miRNA expression at 5 days post-stroke also confirmed
that middle-aged females and males clustered separately from
adult females and males (Figure 6C). Thus the pattern of the
brain miRNAs at 5 days post-stroke was similar to the pattern of
circulating miRNAs observed at 2 days post-stroke. Interestingly,
one miRNA (miR-424) was significantly regulated in the brain
and at both time points in serum.
miRNAs exhibiting an interaction effect of age and
sex
A central goal for the present study was the identification of
miRNAs that broadly discriminate the adult female group, which
has the smallest infarct volumes and least amount of sensorymotor
deficit, from older females, as well as young and older
www.clinsci.org 83
( 8.0.0.2542.1783557210 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm
A. Selvamani and others
Figure 5 PCA of FDR-corrected statistically significant circulating
miRNAs from serum at 2 (A) and 5 (B) days post-stroke
PCA of 21 FDR-corrected statistically significant miRNAs at 2 days
post-stroke showed that component 1 (Comp. 1) separated miRNAs
expressed in serum of adult animals from middle-aged animals, and
almost all of the variance was explained by this component. At 5 days
post-stroke, PCA of 78 FDR-corrected statistically significant miRNAs
showed that component 1 separated miRNAs from males and females,
whereas component 2 (Comp. 2) separated miRNAs differentially expressed
in adult and middle-aged animals.
males. The latter groups have significantly worse stroke outcomes
than the adult female. To identify miRNAs that would discriminate
between these groups, we focused on those miRNAs where
there was a significant age×sex interaction effect. miRNAs with
a significant age×sex interaction effect were only observed in
circulating miRNAs at 5 days post-stroke (ANOVA and hierarchical
cluster analysis (Figures 3B and 4B). Among the 12
miRNAs that were thus identified, post hoc Student’s t tests indicated
that five of these miRNAs distinguished the adult female
group from all of the other groups. As shown in Figure 7,
CT values were significantly lower in adult females for miR-
15a, miR-19b, miR-32, miR-136 and miR-199a-3p. Raw CT values
of these miRNAs are shown in Supplementary Table S3
(at http://www.clinsci.org/cs/127/cs1270077add.htm). In every
Table 1 Commonalities among circulating miRNAs at 2 and
5 days post-stroke
miRNAs that are significantly regulated (as determined by ANOVA corrected
for FDR) at both 2 and 5 days post-stroke are shown. At 2 days
post-stroke, all miRNAs were regulated by age, whereas at 5 days
post-stroke all of the miRNAs were differentially expressed by sex. Only
one miRNA that was regulated by age at 2 days post-stroke was also
regulated by age and sex at 5 days post-stroke.
Main effect in serum
miRNAs common in
serum at 2 and
5 days post-stroke
At 2 days
post-stroke
At 5 days
post-stroke
miR-127-3p Age Sex
miR-335 Age Sex
miR-543 Age Sex
miR-139-5p Age Sex
miR-33a Age Sex
miR-338-3p Age Sex
miR-222 Age Sex
miR-15b-15b∗ Age Sex
miR-92a Age Sex
miR-92a Age Sex
miR-424 Age Sex
miR-495 Age Sex
miR-363 Age Age and sex
case, these miRNAs were highly expressed in adult females compared
with middle-aged females, adult males and middle-aged
males, suggesting a pivotal role for these miRNAs in regulating
the severity of stroke. This cohort of miRNAs was subject
to an additional qPCR analysis, which confirmed the significant
age×sex interaction effect. Fold changes in miRNA expression
for the five miRNAs are shown in Figure 7. To ensure that these
miRNAs did not simply reflect constitutive differences between
adult and middle-aged males and females, a set of non-stroke
animals was also analysed for circulating miRNAs. None of the
above miRNAs were up-regulated in non-stroke young females
compared with the other groups (results not shown).
In silico analysis tools (DIANA-miRPath v2.0, and target
database microT-CDS) were utilized to obtain predicted gene
targets and associated KEGG pathways of miR-15a, miR-19b,
miR-32, miR-136 and miR-199a-3p. The total number of predicted
and validated target genes and genes implicated in KEGG
pathways are shown in Figure 8(A). In total, 64 KEGG pathways
were identified and, from these, a set of ten KEGG pathways are
shown in Figure 8(B). The top ten pathways were selected based
on the following criteria: smallestP values for the union of common
pathways targeted by all miRNAs and the largest number of
genes represented in those pathways. The top ten KEGG pathway
thus included growth factor signalling pathways, such as insulin
and neurotrophin, cell survival and cell death pathways, including
p53, PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)/Akt and mTOR (mammalian
target of rapamycin) signalling pathways, cell structurerelated
pathways, such as focal adhesion, actin cytoskeleton
and cell function pathways, including ubiquitin proteolysis and
endocytosis.
84 C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
(8.0.0.2542,55229600 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
Figure 6 Brain miRNA expression profile at 5 days post-stroke
(A) The heat map depicts significantly regulated miRNA expression values for adult and middle-aged males and females
in the ischaemic brain at 5 days post-stroke. miRNA expression was considered significantly regulated based on ANOVA
with FDR correction. Within the heat map, adult females were used as ‘controls’ and are represented in black, whereas all
other groups are depicted in relation to adult females (columns). miRNAs that are up-regulated in comparison with adult
females are shown in green, whereas down-regulated miRNAs are shown in red (rows). Main effects of age (a), sex (b) and
age×sex interaction (c) are shown for each miRNA. (B) Hierarchical clustering of differentially expressed brain miRNAs
reveal two major clusters: a larger one that discriminates animals by age (adult compared with middle-age; red bar) and
the second smaller cluster which discriminates by sex (blue bar). (C) Three-dimensional PCA of differentially expressed
genes shows a global view of the 19 significant miRNAs expressed in the brain 5 days post-stroke. Each dot represents
the loading of a composite expression profile of one miRNA on to the first and second components. Component 1 (Comp.
1) segregated animals by age, whereas component 2 (Comp. 2) segregated animals by sex.
DISCUSSION
The present study reports unique circulating miRNA expression
profiles following cerebral ischaemia in adult and middle-aged
female and male rats. Of the 168 circulating miRNAs examined,
21 miRNAs were significantly regulated at 2 days post-stroke,
whereas at 5 days post-stroke 78 miRNAs were significantly regulated.
Furthermore, a small cohort of five miRNAs (miR-15a,
miR-19b, miR-32, miR-136 and miR-199a-3p) were found to be
highly expressed exclusively in adult females, a group that, as
a whole, exhibited significantly less cortical and striatal damage
, and the least amount of sensory-motor deficit. This five
miRNA cohort needs to be investigated further as a collective
biomarker for stroke outcome. Although sex and age differences
in stroke severity have been shown reliably in animal stroke models
, to the best of our knowledge this is the first study to demonstrate
miRNAs profiles associated with sex and age differences
in ischaemic pathophysiology.
The extent of stroke severity, as measured by infarct volume,
showed that the corticostriatal infarct was worse in the middleaged
females compared with the adult females, which is consistent
with our previous work [16,17] and other reports [14,26–28].
Furthermore, females as a group had smaller infarct volumes
compared with males, consistent with other studies where similar
sex differences have been reported in infarct volume and cerebral
blood flow [25]. The female advantage, observed in young-age
demographics, as well as in animal models, may be related to
the major ovarian hormone oestrogen. This is supported by evidence
that the extent of ischaemic damage is inversely related to
circulating levels of oestrogen [30] and that replacement with
17β-oestradiol [31,32] reduces infarct volume in young ovariectomized
female animals. Declining levels of oestrogen with age
may also underlie the larger infarct volume observed in middleaged
and older female rats [16]. With respect to age, disparity
in stroke outcomes has been associated with age-related downregulation
of several proteins including NKCC (Na+ –K+ –Cl−
co-transporter) [33], BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor),
bFGF (basic fibroblast growth factor) [34] and neuron-specific intermediate
filaments, NFs (neurofilaments) [35]. In clinical studies
, NO was shown to be reduced in serum of aged stroke patients
www.clinsci.org 85
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-825757528)
A. Selvamani and others
Figure 7 Group differences in the expression of miRNA that displayed a significant age × sex interaction at 5 days
post-stroke
Group differences in the expression patterns of miRNAs miR-15a, miR-19b, miR-32, miR-136 and miR-199a-3p, which were
significantly up-regulated in the adult female group compared with the middle-aged females, adult males and middle-aged
males. Values (means+
−S.E.M.; n=6/group) are expressed as CT, where an increased value indicates decreased
expression.
Figure 8 KEGG pathways associated with predicted target genes
(A) miRNAs with significant age×sex interaction effects at 5 days post-stroke were subject to in silico analysis (DIANA
/miRPATH, see the Materials and methods section). Predicted gene targets for each miRNA were identified. The Table
represents the number of predicted target genes for each miRNA in this cohort. (B) The top 10 KEGG pathways represented
by these predicted targets are shown. Each slice represents the number of predicted target genes in the pathway,
indicated within the slice. Each pathway is labelled adjacent to the chart. The top ten pathways were selected based on
the smallest ‘P ’ value and the largest number of target genes in the pathway.
86 C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.474385637)
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
compared with younger patients, whereas IL-6 (interleukin-6)
was elevated in aged patients with a poor outcome [36]. Thus, although
biomarkers have been sought for each factor individually,
the present study has attempted to integrate markers for both age
and sex differences.
Our data show that the complex interaction of age and sex in
stroke outcomes is well captured by circulating miRNA profiles.
Originally thought to be exclusively intracellular, miRNA are
now known to be stably expressed in many body fluids, including
blood, saliva and tears [37,38], where their resistance to endonuclease
degradation, low/high pH, extreme temperatures, extended
storage and freeze–thaw cycles [10,39,40] make them superior
biomarkers in comparison with proteins. Hence diseases targeting
inaccessible tissue, such as the brain, can now be assessed using
surrogate tissues, such as blood. This is a particularly valuable
option for stroke, which affects cells in several critical systems,
including the brain and its support cells (astrocytes, endothelial
cells and microglia), as well as vascular and immune systems.
Circulating miRNAs have been widely investigated as biomarkers
to distinguish disease from non-disease cases [10], especially
in cardiovascular disease, where specific miRNA signatures
have been shown to distinguish stable documented CAD
(coronary artery disease) patients [41] or peripheral artery disease
patients [42] from controls. Moreover, miRNA profiles are
also being used to make more subtle discriminations of disease
states as in distinguishing between stable CAD and acute coronary
syndrome [43] and grades of severity of myocardial infarction
[44]. In the case of stroke, only two studies have examined
circulating miRNA expression profiles. One experimental study
reported a time course profile of stroke-induced miRNA at 24 and
48 h post-MCAo [9]. That study focused on adult male rats only,
hence few overlapping miRNAs were detected with the present
study. A clinical study of young (18–49 years of age) stroke patients
reported that specific patterns of circulating miRNAs were
associated with stroke outcomes (good or poor), although specific
miRNAs associated with stroke severity were not identified
[14]. Specific miRNAs have also been associated with stroke outcomes
, as in miR-120, which is decreased in patients with poor
outcomes after 7 and 14 days [45], time points in the progression
of stroke further from the ones addressed in the present study.
The present study uncovered a two-step process in miRNA
profiles underlying the age/sex difference in stroke outcomes.
At 2 days post-stroke, PCA indicated that age was the principal
source of variance at this time point. At the 5 day time point, the
largest proportion of variance was accounted for by the sex of
the animal. Thus the temporal change in the circulating miRNA
expression profile is primarily influenced by age at the earlier
time point and later by the sex of the animal.
Despite the large differences in brain infarct volume observed
among the groups, there were a surprisingly limited number of
differentially expressed miRNAs in the ischaemic brain at 5 days
post-stroke. It should be noted, however, that this study interrogated
ischaemic brain tissue with the circulating miRNA panel,
thus it is possible that many brain-specific or brain-enriched
miRNAs were not captured by this process. Our goal in using the
circulating miRNA panel was to identify commonalities between
the target tissue and circulation, and the present study shows,
interestingly, that six differentially regulated miRNAs were represented
in both the brain and circulation at 5 days post-stroke.
This cohort may therefore serve as a proxy marker for brain responses
to stroke. Of these, a smaller subset was regulated in the
same pattern in both tissues, suggesting that the profiles of brain
parenchymal miRNAs are quite different from those in circulation.
Such mismatches in miRNA profiles have been reported
for other diseases as well, such as cancer, where less than 30%
of tumour miRNAs were captured in the circulation [46]. This
discrepancy between brain and circulatory miRNAs underscores
the multi-factorial nature of stroke, where central and peripheral
responses involving the cardiovascular system and the immune
system are simultaneously co-ordinated. These data suggest that
peripheral tissues such as blood would be a more global representation
of the overall stroke response than local events in
the brain. Similarly, only a few miRNAs were regulated in common
at the 2 and 5 day time-point in serum (Table 1). However,
in most of these cases, miRNAs were regulated by age at one
point and sex at the other. Only miR-363 was regulated by age at
2 days and by age and sex at 5 days post-stroke, and the direction
of change is the same at both time points. Fewer overlaps between
the two time points may be indicative of the evolving infarct, and
the temporal lag between vascular, brain and immune systems,
which are the main contributors to the post-stroke miRNA pool.
A related goal of the present study was to identify a miRNA
profile that can predict stroke severity. Since infarct volume analysis
indicates that adult females had the best outcome in terms
of a small infarct volume and virtually no loss of sensory motor
performance, we focused on miRNAs that discriminate this
group from the others (middle-aged females, adult males and
middle-aged males). Our analysis revealed that a small cohort
of five miRNA (miR-15a, miR-19b, miR-32, miR-136 and miR-
199a-3p) were significantly up-regulated in adult females compared
with all of the other groups, and may represent a signature
for stroke severity. These miRNAs showed high-to-modest
abundance in serum, as indicated by the raw CT values shown
in Supplementary Table S3. Furthermore, this cohort represents
stroke-induced miRNAs and is not constitutively up-regulated in
non-stroke adult females. Although, the role ofmiR-32,miR-136
and miR-199a-3p in stroke aetiology is unknown, miR-15a and
miR-19b are reported to be implicated in cerebrovascular protection
and cell proliferation respectively. PPARγ (peroxisomeproliferator-activated
receptor γ ) and a co-activator of PPARγ -
mediated transcriptional suppression of miR-15a are implicated
in cerebrovascular protection following MCAo [47]. miR-19b,
which is part of the miR17-92 cluster, is known to stimulate stem
cell proliferation in the subventricular zone of ischaemic animals
[48], as well as promote OPC (oligodendrocyte precursor cell)
survival by activating Akt signalling [49].
Since several miRNAs in this cohort have an unknown role
in stroke, putative and validated targets of the five miRNAs were
subject to KEGG analysis. Among the top ten pathways identified
by KEGG analysis were two major signalling pathways that transduce
response to stress and injury, namely the PI3K/Akt pathway
and the mTOR pathway, both of which are mutually involved with
stroke neuroprotection [50,51]. Similarly, miRNAs that target the
Wnt/β-catenin signalling pathway have also been implicated in
www.clinsci.org 87
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.893541674)
A. Selvamani and others
stroke recovery [52], as well as the inhibition of the endothelial
actin cytoskeleton [53]. Finally the insulin signalling pathway,
also identified as a target of these miRNAs, is strongly implicated
in post-stroke outcomes, with hyperglycaemia contributing
to poorer outcomes [54,55].
In conclusion, these studies show that specific miRNA profiles
are associated with age and sex differences in stroke-associated
infarct volume and sensorimotor deficits. At an early time point,
miRNA profiles segregate exclusively based on age, whereas at
the later time point miRNA profiles show a preponderant regulation
by sex. Thus, although both age and sex eventually influence
miRNA expression, each of these variables prevails at different
times in the evolution of the serum miRNA response to the infarct.
Through this analysis, naturally occurring differences in infarct
volume due to age and sex can also be exploited to develop an
miRNA profile that is associated with a better outcome. A small
cohort of miRNAs identified by this manner aligned with several
pathways that are well-associated with stroke, suggesting that
these miRNAs may also have significant potential as therapeutic
targets.
CLINICAL PERSPECTIVES

Clinical and experimental studies indicate that stroke severity
is modulated by age and sex.

The present study shows that circulating miRNA profiles can
predict age- and sex-dependent stroke severity in an animal
model.

Furthermore, five miRNA are highly expressed exclusively in
adult females, and these miRNA may represent a neuroprotective
profile as well as therapeutic targets.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTION
Amutha Selvamani performed the stroke surgeries, behavioural assays
and miRNA analyses, and was involved with writing the paper;
Madison Williams assisted with miRNA analyses; Rajesh Miranda
was involved in statistical analyses and writing the paper; and
Farida Sohrabji conceived the study, and was involved with statistical
analyses and writing the paper.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant
numbers NS074895, AG042189] and the Texas A&M Health Sciences
Center Vice President for Research [Women’s Health in Neuroscience
Program pilot grant (to F.S.)].
REFERENCES
1 Rosamond, W., Flegal, K., Furie, K., Go, A., Greenlund, K.,
Haase, N., Hailpern, S. M., Ho, M., Howard, V., Kissela, B. et al.
(2008) Heart disease and stroke statistics–2008 update: a
report from the American Heart Association Statistics Committee
and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation 117, e25–e146
2 Rojas, J. I., Zurr´ u, M. C., Romano, M., Patrucco, L. and Cristiano,
E. (2007) Acute ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack in
the very old–risk factor profile and stroke subtype between
patients older than 80 years and patients aged less than 80
years. Eur. J. Neurol. 14, 895–899
3 Turtzo, L. C. and McCullough, L. D. (2010) Sex-specific
responses to stroke. Future Neurol. 5, 47–59
4 Cheong, J. L. and Cowan, F. M. (2009) Neonatal arterial
ischaemic stroke: obstetric issues. Semin. Fetal Neonatal Med
14, 267–271
5 Roquer, J., Segura, T., Serena, J. and Castillo, J. (2009)
Endothelial dysfunction, vascular disease and stroke: the
ARTICO study. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 27, 25–37
6 Niewada, M., Kobayashi, A., Sandercock, P . A., Kami ´ nski, B. and 
Członkowska, A. (2005) Influence of gender on baseline features
and clinical outcomes among 17,370 patients with confirmed
ischaemic stroke in the international stroke trial.
Neuroepidemiology 24, 123–128
7 Fukuda, M., Kanda, T., Kamide, N., Akutsu, T. and Sakai, F.
(2009) Gender differences in long-term functional outcome after
first-ever ischemic stroke. Intern. Med. 48, 967–973
8 Ambros, V. (2001) MicroRNAs: tiny regulators with great
potential. Cell 107, 823–826
9 Jeyaseelan, K., Lim, K. Y. and Armugam, A. (2008) MicroRNA
expression in the blood and brain of rats subjected to transient
focal ischemia by middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 39,
959–966
10 Chen, X., Ba, Y., Ma, L., Cai, X., Yin, Y., Wang, K., Guo, J., Zhang,
Y., Chen, J., Guo, X. et al. (2008) Characterization of microRNAs
in serum: a novel class of biomarkers for diagnosis of cancer
and other diseases. Cell Res. 18, 997–1006
11 Rink, C. and Khanna, S. (2011) MicroRNA in ischemic stroke
etiology and pathology. Physiol. Genomics 43, 521–528
12 Cipollone, F., Felicioni, L., Sarzani, R., Ucchino, S., Spigonardo,
F., Mandolini, C., Malatesta, S., Bucci, M., Mammarella, C. et al.
(2011) A unique microRNA signature associated with plaque
instability in humans. Stroke 42, 2556–2563
13 Dharap, A., Bowen, K., Place, R., Li, L. C. and Vemuganti, R.
(2009) Transient focal ischemia induces extensive temporal
changes in rat cerebral microRNAome. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 29, 675–687
14 Tan, K. S., Armugam, A., Sepramaniam, S., Lim, K. Y., Setyowati,
K. D., Wang, C. W. and Jeyaseelan, K. (2009) Expression profile
of microRNAs in young stroke patients. PLoS One 4, e7689
15 Guo, D., Liu, J., Wang, W., Hao, F., Sun, X., Wu, X., Bu, P ., Zhang,
Y., Liu, Y., Liu, F., Zhang, Q. and Jiang, F. (2013) Alteration in
abundance and compartmentalization of inflammation-related
miRNAs in plasma after intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke 44,
1739–1742
16 Selvamani, A., Sathyan, P ., Miranda, R. C. and Sohrabji, F. (2012)
An antagomir to microRNA Let7f promotes neuroprotection in an
ischemic stroke model. PLoS One 7, e32662
17 Selvamani, A. and Sohrabji, F. (2010) The neurotoxic effects of
estrogen on ischemic stroke in older female rats is associated
with age-dependent loss of insulin-like growth factor-1. J.
Neurosci. 30, 6852–6861
18 Selvamani, A. and Sohrabji, F. (2010) Reproductive age
modulates the impact of focal ischemia on the forebrain as well
as the effects of estrogen treatment in female rats. Neurobiol.
Aging 31, 1618–1628
19 Blondal, T., Jensby Nielsen, S., Baker, A., Andreasen, D.,
Mouritzen, P ., Wrang Teilum, M. and Dahlsveen, I. K. (2013)
Assessing sample and miRNA profile quality in serum and
plasma or other biofluids. Methods 59, S1–S6
20 Vlachos, I. S., Kostoulas, N., Vergoulis, T., Georgakilas, G.,
Reczko, M., Maragkakis, M., Paraskevopoulou, M. D., Prionidis,
K., Dalamagas, T. and Hatzigeorgiou, A. G. (2012) DIANA
miRPath v.2.0: investigating the combinatorial effect of
microRNAs in pathways. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, W498–W504
21 Biernaskie, J., Corbett, D., Peeling, J., Wells, J. and Lei, H.
(2001) A serial MR study of cerebral blood flow changes and
lesion development following endothelin-1-induced ischemia in
rats. Magn. Reson. Med. 46, 827–830
88 C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1664069602)
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
22 Longa, E. Z., Weinstein, P . R., Carlson, S. and Cummins, R.
(1989) Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without
craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20, 84–91
23 Nagasawa, H. and Kogure, K. (1989) Correlation between
cerebral blood flow and histologic changes in a new rat model of
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 20, 1037–1043
24 Popp, A., Jaenisch, N., Witte, O. W. and Frahm, C. (2009)
Identification of ischemic regions in a rat model of stroke. PLoS
One 4, e4764
25 Alkayed, N. J., Harukuni, I., Kimes, A. S., London, E. D.,
Traystman, R. J. and Hurn, P . D. (1998) Gender-linked brain injury
in experimental stroke. Stroke 29, 159–166
26 DiNapoli, V. A., Huber, J. D., Houser, K., Li, X. and Rosen, C. L.
(2008) Early disruptions of the blood-brain barrier may contribute
to exacerbated neuronal damage and prolonged functional
recovery following stroke in aged rats. Neurobiol. Aging 29,
753–764
27 Kelly, K. A., Li, X., Tan, Z., VanGilder, R. L., Rosen, C. L. and
Huber, J. D. (2009) NOX2 inhibition with apocynin worsens stroke
outcome in aged rats. Brain Res. 1292, 165–172
28 Liu, F., Akella, P ., Benashski, S. E., Xu, Y. and McCullough, L. D.
(2009) Sex differences in caspase activation after stroke. Stroke
40, 1842–1848
29 Martino, G., Pluchino, S., Bonfanti, L. and Schwartz, M. (2011)
Brain regeneration in physiology and pathology: the immune
signature driving therapeutic plasticity of neural stem cells.
Physiol. Rev. 91, 1281–1304
30 Liao, S., Chen, W., Kuo, J. and Chen, C. (2001) Association of
serum estrogen level and ischemic neuroprotection in female
rats. Neurosci. Lett. 297, 159–162
31 Simpkins, J. W., Rajakumar, G., Zhang, Y. Q., Simpkins, C. E.,
Greenwald, D., Yu, C. J., Bodor, N. and Day, A. L. (1997)
Estrogens may reduce mortality and ischemic damage caused by
middle cerebral artery occlusion in the female rat. J. Neurosurg.
87, 724–730
32 Dubal, D. B., Kashon, M. L., Pettigrew, L. C., Ren, J. M.,
Finklestein, S. P ., Rau, S. W. and Wise, P . M. (1998) Estradiol
protects against ischemic injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 18,
1253–1258
33 Liu, F., Akella, P ., Benashski, S. E., Xu, Y. and McCullough, L. D.
(2010) Expression of Na-K-Cl cotransporter and edema formation
are age dependent after ischemic stroke. Exp. Neurol. 224,
356–361
34 Arumugam, T. V., Phillips, T. M., Cheng, A., Morrell, C. H.,
Mattson, M. P . and Wan, R. (2010) Age and energy intake interact
to modify cell stress pathways and stroke outcome. Ann. Neurol.
67, 41–52
35 Schroeder, E., Vogelgesang, S., Popa-Wagner, A. and Kessler, C.
(2003) Neurofilament expression in the rat brain after cerebral
infarction: effect of age. Neurobiol. Aging 24, 135–145
36 Shakarishvili, R. and Beridze, M. (2008) Proinflammatory
reactants as determinants of stroke severity in elderly. Georgian
Med. News 162, 23–27
37 Weber, J. A., Baxter, D. H., Zhang, S., Huang, D. Y., Huang, K. H.,
Lee, M. J., Galas, D. J. and Wang, K. (2010) The microRNA
spectrum in 12 body fluids. Clin. Chem. 56,
1733–1741
38 Etheridge, A., Lee, I., Hood, L., Galas, D. and Wang, K. (2011)
Extracellular microRNA: a new source of biomarkers. Mutat. Res.
717, 85–90
39 Gilad, S., Meiri, E., Yogev, Y., Benjamin, S., Lebanony, D.,
Yerushalmi, N., Benjamin, H., Kushnir, M., Cholakh, H.,
Melamed, N. et al. (2008) Serum microRNAs are promising novel
biomarkers. PLoS One 3, e3148
40 Kosaka, N., Iguchi, H. and Ochiya, T. (2010) Circulating
microRNA in body fluid: a new potential biomarker for cancer
diagnosis and prognosis. Cancer Sci. 101, 2087–2092
41 Fichtlscherer, S., De Rosa, S., Fox, H., Schwietz, T., Fischer, A.,
Liebetrau, C., Weber, M., Hamm, C. W., R¨ oxe, T., M¨ uller-Ardogan,
M. et al. (2010) Circulating microRNAs in patients with coronary
artery disease. Circ. Res. 107, 677–684
42 Li, T., Cao, H., Zhuang, J., Wan, J., Guan, M., Yu, B., Li, X. and
Zhang, W. (2011) Identification of miR-130a, miR-27b and
miR-210 as serum biomarkers for atherosclerosis obliterans.
Clin. Chim. Acta 14, 66–70
43 Diehl, P ., Olivier, C., Bode, C. and Moser, M. (2013) Editorial
comment: Reduction of oxidative stress: a new indication for
acetylsalicylic acid in coronary artery bypass surgery. Eur. J.
Cardiothorac Surg. 43, 1163–1164
44 Gidl¨ of, O., Smith, J. G., Miyazu, K., Gilje, P ., Spencer, A.,
Blomquist, S. and Erlinge, D. (2013) Circulating cardio-enriched
microRNAs are associated with long-term prognosis following
myocardial infarction. BMC Cardiovasc. Disord. 13, 12 
45 Zeng, L., Liu, J., Wang, Y., Wang, L., Weng, S., Tang, Y., Zheng,
C., Cheng, Q., Chen, S. and Yang, G. Y. (2011) MicroRNA-210 as
a novel blood biomarker in acute cerebral ischemia. Front.
Biosci. (Elite Ed) 3, 1265–1272
46 Pigati, L., Yaddanapudi, S. C., Iyengar, R., Kim, D. J., Hearn, S.
A., Danforth, D., Hastings, M. L. and Duelli, D. M. (2010)
Selective release of microRNA species from normal and
malignant mammary epithelial cells. PLoS One 5, e13515
47 Yin, K. J., Fan, Y., Hamblin, M., Zhang, J., Zhu, T., Li, S., Hawse,
J. R., Subramaniam, M., Song, C. Z., Urrutia, R. et al. (2013)
KLF11 mediates PPARγ cerebrovascular protection in ischaemic
stroke. Brain 136, 1274–1287
48 Liu, X. S., Chopp, M, Wang, X. L., Zhang, L., Hozeska-Solgot, A.,
Tang, T., Kassis, H., Zhang, R. L., Chen, C., Xu, J. and Zhang, Z.
G. (2013) MicroRNA-17–92 cluster mediates the proliferation
and survival of neural progenitor cells after stroke. J. Biol. Chem.
288, 12478–12488
49 Budde, H., Schmitt, ,S., Fitzner, D., Opitz, L., Salinas-Riester, G.
and Simons, M. (2010) Control of oligodendroglial cell number
by the miR-17–92 cluster. Development 137, 2127–2132
50 Zhang, L., Zhao, H., Zhang, X., Chen, L., Zhao, X., Bai, X. and
Zhang, J. (2013) Nobiletin protects against cerebral ischemia via
activating the p-Akt, p-CREB, BDNF and Bcl-2 pathway and
ameliorating BBB permeability in rat. Brain Res. Bull. 96, 45–53
51 Xie, R., Cheng, M., Li, M., Xiong, X., Daadi, M., Sapolsky, R. M.
and Zhao, H. (2013) Akt isoforms differentially protect against
stroke-induced neuronal injury by regulating mTOR activities. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33, 1875–1885
52 Liu, F. J., Lim, K. Y., Kaur, P ., Sepramaniam, S., Armugam, A.,
Wong, P . T. and Jeyaseelan, K. (2013) MicroRNAs involved in
regulating spontaneous recovery in embolic stroke model. PLoS
One 8, e66393
53 Laufs, U., Endres, M., Stagliano, N., Amin-Hanjani, S., Chui, D.
S., Yang, S. X., Simoncini, T., Yamada, M., Rabkin, E., Allen, P . G. 
et al. (2000) Neuroprotection mediated by changes in the
endothelial actin cytoskeleton. J. Clin. Invest. 106, 15–24
54 Weir, C. J., Murray, G. D., Dyker, A. G. and Lees, K. R. (1997) Is
hyperglycaemia an independent predictor of poor outcome after
acute stroke? Results of a long-term follow up study. BMJ 314,
1303–1306
55 Muir, K. W., McCormick, M., Baird, T. and Ali, M. (2011)
Prevalence, predictors and prognosis of post-stroke
hyperglycaemia in acute stroke trials: individual
patient data pooled analysis from the Virtual International
Stroke Trials Archive (VISTA). Cerebrovasc. Dis. Extra 1, 17–27
Received 6 September 2013/10 January 2014; accepted 15 January 2014
Published as Immediate Publication 15 January 2014, doi: 10.1042/CS20130565
www.clinsci.org 89
(8.0.0.2542,2083225639 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
Clinical Science (2014) 127, 77–89 (Printed in Great Britain) doi: 10.1042/CS20130565
SUPPLEMENTARY ONLINE DATA
Circulating miRNA profiles provide a biomarker for
severity of stroke outcomes associated with age
and sex in a rat model
Amutha SELVAMANI∗, Madison H. WILLIAMS∗, Rajesh C. MIRANDA∗ and Farida SOHRABJI∗
∗Women’s Health in Neuroscience Program, Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Texas A&M College of Medicine, Bryan, TX 77807, U.S.A.
Figure S1 Behavioural assessment post-stroke
Vibrissae-elicited forelimb placement test. All animals were assessed on the vibrissae-evoked forelimb placement task
pre- and post-stroke, using a paired Student’s t test. (A and C) Same-side test on females and males respectively
showed significant deficit in paw-placement on the contra-lesional side (∗P<0.05), but not on the ipsi-lesional side when
compared with prior performance. The percentage correct responses as means+S.E.M. (n=6/group) are shown. (B
and D) Cross-midline test on females and males respectively showed significant deficit in paw placement on both the
ipsi-lesional and contra-lesional side (∗P<0.05) when compared with prior performance. The percentage correct responses
as means+S.E.M. (n=6/group) are shown.
Correspondence: Dr Farida Sohrabji (email sohrabji@medicine.tamhsc.edu).
www.clinsci.org
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
A. Selvamani and others
Table S1 Tests for haemolysis
Two tests were performed to determine the extent of haemolysis in serum samples. (A) Mean+S.E.M. CT values of
miR23a−miR451 for each group at 2 and 5 days post-stroke. In all groups, the difference score is well below 7, indicative
of low haemolytic contamination. (B) Expression of U6 miRNA shown as mean+S.E.M. CT values in the brain and serum
samples of all of the groups. Compared with brain tissue, where the average CT ranges from 20 to 24, U6 expression in
serum was markedly lower with a mean CT ranging from 32 to 35. An increased CT value indicates decreased expression.
n=6/group.
(A)
CT
Group Serum Serum at 2 days post-stroke Serum at 5 days post-stroke
Stroke
Adult females − 3.04+0.83 2.76+0.47
Middle-aged females − 3.55+0.49 −0.59+0.47
Adult males − 2.66+1.25 −0.76+0.49
Middle-aged males − 3.85+0.70 0.79+0.43
Non-stroke
Adult females −2.29+0.38 − − 
Middle-aged females 1.89+0.39 − − 
Adult males −4.43+0.28 − − 
Middle-aged males −3.03+0.39 − − 
(B)
CT
Group Brain Serum
Non-Stroke
Adult male 24.90+2.92 34.49+1.91
Middle-aged male 21.08+0.66 34.29+1.76
Adult female 20.30+0.41 33.11+1.29
Middle-aged female 24.19+1.49 35.41+1.47
Stroke
Adult male 22.25+0.49 33.02+0.99
Middle-aged male 21.38+0.37 35.22+1.89
Adult female 23.97+1.87 32.48+1.82
Middle-aged female 21.25+2.82 34.17+1.26
C  The Authors Journal compilation C  2014 Biochemical Society
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.354898029)
Circulating miRNA profiles in experimental ischaemic stroke
Table S2 Summary of the miRNAs that are significantly differentially regulated in serum at 2 and 5 days post-stroke and
in brain at day 5 as shown in the heat maps in Figures 3 and 6 in the main text
Tissue type/time points Significantly regulated miRNAs
Serum
Day 2 miR-1974, miR-374a, miR-885-5p, miR-500a, miR-95, miR-151-3p, miR-584, miR-335,
miR-543, miR-139-5p, miR-20a∗, miR-151-5p, miR-222, miR-106b∗, miR-363,
miR-424, miR-20b, miR-495, miR-92a, miR-301a and miR-30e∗
Day 5 miR-551b, miR-136, miR-let-7i∗, miR-338-3p, miR-32, miR-127-3p, miR-154, miR-29b,
miR-33a, miR-1, miR-133a, miR-424, miR-199a-5p, miR-409-3p, miR-29a∗, miR-let-7g,
miR-221, miR-101, miR-125b, miR-15a, miR-34a, miR-376a, miR-19b,
miR-miR-486-5p, miR-335, miR-15b, miR-122, miR-222, miR-25, miR-99b, miR-148b,
miR-181a, miR-195, miR-132, miR-328, miR-125a-5p, miR-99a, miR-let 7e, miR-15b,
miR-18a, miR-26a, miR-199a-3p, miR-142-3p, miR-30b, miR-139-5p, miR-let-7c,
miR-324-5p, miR-18b, miR-185, miR-let-7f, miR-145, miR-14-2-5-p, miR-30c,
miR-133b, miR-532-3p, miR-23b, miR-140-5p, miR-92a, miR-363, miR-186, miR-652,
miR-342-3p, miR-152, miR-126, miR-192, miR-30d, miR-let-7d∗, miR-23a, miR-374b,
miR-543, miR-let-7b, miR-let-7d, miR-92b, miR-26b, miR-346, miR-16-2∗, miR-297 and
miR-197
Brain
Day 5 miR-374a, miR-151-5p, miR-18a, miR-1974, miR-590-5p, miR-660, miR-885-5p,
miR-629, miR-194, miR-376a, miR-136, miR-720, miR-30a, miR-29c, miR-22,
miR-34a, miR-15b, miR-424 and miR-21
Table S3 RawCT values of each of the five miRNAs that showed a sex×age interaction in the four experimental groups
Values are means+
−S.D.
Group
miRNA Adult females Middle-aged females Adult males Middle-aged males
miR-15a 20.90+
−1.45 29.26+
−1.54 26.47+
−1.17 28.65+
−2.78
miR-19b 21.01+
−1.07 29.98+
−2.25 27.31+
−1.59 29.17+
−2.58
miR-32 25.97+
−1.27 35.26+
−0.56 33.04+
−3.11 33.63+
−3.35
miR-136 34.26+
−1.32 35.05+
−1.11 36.76+
−2.73 37.17+
−4.02
miR-199a-3p 26.51+
−0.41 33.07+
−1.22 30.69+
−1.22 32.46+
−2.62
Received 6 September 2013/10 January 2014; accepted 15 January 2014
Published as Immediate Publication 15 January 2014, doi: 10.1042/CS20130565
www.clinsci.org
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
