[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.09.003
[Link]
mailto:eric.wassermann@nih.gov
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.09.003
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/01637258
Associate editor: M. Mouradian
Transcranial magnetic brain stimulation: Therapeutic promises and scientific gaps
Eric M. Wassermann⁎, Trelawny Zimmermann
Behavioral Neurology Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA
a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e  i n f o 
Keywords:
Brain stimulation
Neuromodulation
Neurology
Psychiatry
Depression
Since its commercial advent in 1985, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), a technique for stimulating
neurons in the cerebral cortex through the scalp, safely and with minimal discomfort, has captured the imaginations
of scientists, clinicians and lay observers. Initially a laboratory tool for neurophysiologists studying
the human motor system, TMS now has a growing list of applications in clinical and basic neuroscience.
Although we understand many of its effects at the system level, detailed knowledge of its actions, particularly
as a modulator of neural activity, has lagged, due mainly to the lack of suitable non-human models. Nevertheless,
these gaps have not blocked the therapeutic application of TMS in brain disorders. Moderate success has been
achieved in treating disorders such as depression, where the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has cleared a
TMS system for therapeutic use. In addition, there are small, but promising, bodies of data on the treatment of
schizophrenic auditory hallucinations, tinnitus, anxiety disorders, neurodegenerative diseases, hemiparesis,
and pain syndromes. Someother nascent areas of studyalsoexist. While the fate of TMS as a therapeutic modality
depends on continued innovation and experimentation, economic and other factors may be decisive.
Published by Elsevier Inc.
Contents
1. Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  98 
2. Basic mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  98 
3. Therapeutic applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  98 
4. Discussion and conclusions on the clinical outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  99 
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  99 
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  100 
1. Introduction
Since becoming widely available in the late 1980s, transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) has evolved from an almost magical curiosity
and a simple tool for neurophysiologists to a mainstay of noninvasive
neuromodulation, gaining acceptance as a candidate treatment in psychiatry
, neurology, and perhaps, other clinical specialties. This evolution has
come as the result of some very interesting research, but with surprisingly
little direct understanding of how TMS produces lasting physiological, let
alone behavioral, effects. This review will cover the points necessary for a
basic understanding of how TMS causes neuronal firing and resulting
simple phenomena, as well as the theories for how it alters neural states
and behaviors in a lasting way. It also identifies the widest gaps in our
knowledge of how this actually occurs. This is followed by a survey of
the clinical literature, focusing on areas where there are sufficient data
to form an impression of its therapeutic potential. We also encourage
the curious reader to look into the literature on other forms of transcranial
stimulation currently in vogue, but with long and interesting histories, i.e.,
transcranial direct current stimulation and its alternating counterpart,
cranial electrotherapy stimulation.
2. Basic mechanisms
2.1. Physical considerations
Put simply, TMS harnesses the principle of induction to transport
electrical current across the resistive layers of the scalp, skull, and
Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
Abbreviations: DLPFC, Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; FDA, (US) Food and Drug
Administration; LTP, Long term potentiation; MEP, Motor evoked potential; OCD,
Obsessive compulsive disorder; PTSD, Posttraumatic stress disorder; PD, Parkinson
disease; rTMS, Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation; TMS, Transcranial
magnetic stimulation.
⁎ Corresponding author at: 10 CENTER DR MSC 1440, Bethesda, MD 20892-1440,
USA. Tel.: 301 496 0151; fax: 301 480 2909.
E-mail address: eric.wassermann@nih.gov (E.M. Wassermann).
101
104
105
105
0163-7258/$ – see front matter. Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.09.003
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Pharmacology & Therapeutics
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/pharmthera
( 8.0.0.2542.1010841603 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
meninges, into the brain, where it can alter the electrical environment
of neurons, causing them tofire. The basic apparatus consists of a wire
coil encased in plastic, which is placed on the subject's head over the
brain target. The coil is attached by an electric cable to a box containing
one or more large capacitors, charged by a power source and discharged
through the coil when the device is triggered. Thefirst coils were large
rings, which, when centered near the vertex, could stimulate the hand
motor areas in either or both hemispheres, depending on whether the
current pulse was uni- or biphasic. An early advance was to use two
adjacent coils forming a figure-8 where the junction contains twice
the number of windings as the “wings”.Thispermitsfocalstimulation
when the junction is placed tangentially over the cortical target. Some
designs, including that of the only U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)-cleared device for TMS treatment, increase the efficiency of
stimulation and reduce the power demand by adding a solid, ferromagnetic
core to the coil. Firing of neurons by induction requires a
strong and very brief current pulse in the stimulating coil, because,
according to Faraday's law, the induced current is proportional to the
rate of change of the stimulating magnetic field. This places stringent
demands on stimulator design and was one reason why TMS became
commercially available many decades after the principles were understood
and why the technology remains relatively expensive (on the
order of tens of thousands of U.S. dollars).
While the underlying principles are simple and the magneticfield
is not affected significantly by passing through the tissues of the head,
the topology of the induced electricalfield in the brain is determined by
the complex shape and variable conductivity of the cranial contents.
This complexity greatly hinders an anatomically precise understanding
of where TMS acts to produce any of its behavioral effects. Ohm's law
states that the current induced in the head is divided among the infinite
number of possible pathways according to their conductances. This
means, for instance, that regardless of where the current is “aimed”,it
will flow preferentially through areas containing cerebrospinal fluid,
which has a much higher conductance than brain. Therefore, the
current may concentrate at points that do not lie directly below the
coil. It has also been observed that holes in the low-conductance cranial
bone, i.e., neural foramina, the orbits, etc., concentrate current and may
direct it in unanticipated ways. Finite element models (Wassermann
et al., 1996; Silva et al., 2008) provide detailed predictions of current
flow under given conditions, but definitive biological validation
would require intracranial recordings during TMS. Aspects of brain
ultrastructure can determine where TMS acts. For instance, axons
are especially susceptible to stimulation at bends in their courses
(Amassian et al., 1992). Given these sources of uncertainty, it is
sometimes surprising how well effects can be targeted in practice.
2.2. Single-pulse stimulation
The first TMS systems (Barker et al., 1985) were able to charge
their capacitors only once every few seconds. This proved sufficient
for simple experiments in the central motor system, analogous to
clinical nerve conduction studies. The electrically recorded muscle
twitch, or compound motor action potential, in response to cortical
stimulation is called the motor evoked potential (MEP). MEPs were
first produced by stimulating the motor cortex through the head
with electrical shocks (Merton & Morton, 1980). This technique,
while simpler than TMS, is painful and has been largely relegated to
monitoring during spinal surgery.
Single-pulse TMS of the motor cortex proved a fertile area for
research on the human corticospinal motor system. Cleverly designed
experiments (e.g., Rothwell et al., 1991)permittedstronginferences
about elements of the system between the stimulated cortex and
twitching muscle. The most important and relevant principle to come
from this work is that theamplitude of the MEP is an aggregate measure
of the excitation state of output cells in the motor cortex, assuming
spinal activity is held constant. This principle underlies virtually all
of the physiological research on which therapeutic TMS is based.
Inferences from physical and physiological data have also established
that firing of axons by TMS occurs in the cerebral cortex, within 1–2cm
from the coil (Epstein et al., 1990).Itmaybepossibletostimulatedeeper
structures when they lie adjacent to cerebrospinal fluid-containing
spaces, e.g., the ventricles, whose high conductance could provide
privileged current pathways, but only one potential instance of 
this has been reported (Marg & Rudiak, 1994). Some have implied
that specially constructed coils can reach deeper into the brain because
they can produce MEPs when displaced further from the scalp than
conventional coils (Zangen et al., 2005). However, these experiments
failed to consider the extent of the cortical area stimulated by each coil
type and a careful comparison with conventional coils (Fadini et al.,
2009) showed no evidence of deeper stimulation, such as the shift in
MEP latency expected with subcortical stimulation of the pyramidal
tract.
Among other basic discoveries with implications for the therapeutic
use of TMS is the fact that it preferentially depolarizes axons running in
the plane of the stimulating current, which is, in turn parallel to the
plane of the coil. Consequently, TMS has a preference for tangentially
oriented axons, whereas radially oriented cortical output (pyramidal)
neurons tend to be activated indirectly. This fact and the evidence that
TMS activates axons quite near the brain surface, make it safest
to assumethatany effects of TMS on deep structuresorradially oriented
fibers result mainly from synaptic transmission of the stimulus. Another
consequence is that the figure-8 coil, energized with a monophasic
pulse, permits differential targeting of axon populations simply by
rotating the coil around the center of the junction (Werhahn et al.,
1994). This property has not been exploited or often considered in
therapeutic trials.
The advent of paired-pulse techniques, using two stimulators
discharging through the same coil, allowed investigators to examine
excitatory and inhibitory processes within the cortex itself (Ziemann
et al., 1996) and to explore the effects of drugs and the correlates of
genes and behavioral traits in cortical physiology (Kapogiannis &
Wassermann, 2008).
Single magnetic pulses delivered to the occiput produce phosphenes
(Marg & Rudiak, 1994) and, although this has never been explored,
motor cortex stimulation produces a powerful somatosensory phenomenon
, independent of the muscle twitch (personal observation). Single
pulses can disrupt sensory processes very briefly( Amassian et al.,
1998), and produce facilitatory and disruptive effects in cognitive
domains, such as language (Devlin & Watkins, 2008). However, because
of the uniquely quantifiable nature of the MEP, virtually all we know
about the local brain effects of TMS comes from studies in the human
motor cortex where, within a few years, easy, inexpensive neurophysiological
experimentation produced important additions to a literature
arduously gathered in surgically prepared animals over previous
decades.
2.3. Repetitive TMS (rTMS)
The advent, in the late 1980s, of stimulators able to deliver long
trains of closely spaced pulses increased the scope of TMS from a
neurophysiological probe to a tool with the potential for altering
cortical activity and connectivity. The first published use of rTMS
was an unsuccessful attempt to activate epileptic foci in patients being
evaluated for surgical resection for intractable epilepsy (Dhuna et al.,
1991). However, it did produce a focal seizure in an uninvolved area of
cortex. The first unique effect was arrest of ongoing speech in
healthy subjects when stimulation in the 10 Hz range was applied
near the motor speech area of the language-dominant hemisphere
(Pascual-Leone et al., 1991). This did not outlast the stimulating
train. Insights into the mechanisms of these acute effects of rTMS on
cortical function came, unsurprisingly, from rTMS studies in the motor
99 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 2
cortex (Pascual-Leone et al., 1994b) where the physiological effects of
stimulus trains could be observed in the amplitude of the MEP.
2.3.1. Disruptive effect
Motor cortex data suggested that speech arrest and related
disruptive phenomena result from hypersynchrony of output cell
firing, produced when stimuli are delivered at multiples of the
MEP recovery cycle (about 200 ms). That is, when a strong stimulus
causes a large fraction of the output neuron pool tofire, it synchronizes
their refractory periods. A subsequent stimulus delivered during the refractory
period causes little response,but when the neurons haverecovered
, they are artificially synchronized and ready tofire simultaneously.
In the motor cortex, strong trains of pulses at 10 Hz (every 100 ms or
about one-half the MEP recovery cycle) produce huge MEPs alternating
with little or no response (Pascual-Leone et al., 1994b). Induced hypersynchrony
likely prevents normal processing in the stimulated area.
These disruptive phenomena were mainly interesting to investigators
of cognitive processesand have beenlargely replacedwith“offline”paradigms
(see Inhibitory effect, below) for reasons of subject safety and
comfort.
2.3.2. Facilitatory effect
The observation responsible for the first adoption of rTMS as a
treatment was that trains of stimuli delivered at about 5 Hz or more
caused MEP amplitude to increase, either late in the train, when the
stimuli were delivered above MEP threshold, or to subsequent test
stimulation (Fig. 1), implying an increase in the excitability of the
output cells. This was presumably related to the epileptic phenomena
produced when the safe limits on stimulus intensity, frequency, and
train length were exceeded (Wassermann, 1998). The effect underlying
the increase in MEP amplitude with high-frequency rTMS was thought
to be a change in the sensitivity of the motor cortex output cells to
excitatory influences (Wassermann & Lisanby, 2001), perhaps via a
change in the efficacy of excitatory synapses, i.e., an early stage of
long-term synaptic potentiation (LTP; McNaughton, 1982). While
this is a sensible conjecture, there is only circumstantial evidence
to support the theory. A key piece of this comes from experiments
showing that rTMS, delivered with the so-called theta burst pattern
of stimulation (Larson et al., 1986) is effective for altering cortical
excitability (Huang et al., 2005). This frequency-modulated stimulation
pattern, where high frequency bursts (in this case at 50 Hz) are
delivered at a lower carrier frequency (in this case 5 Hz), is particularly
potent both for inducing LTP in animal synapses and increased
MEP amplitude in humans, suggesting that the two phenomena
are closely related (Huang et al., 2007). Perhaps the best thing
about theta burst stimulation is that it is effective when delivered
at intensities below the MEP threshold and is, therefore, considered less
likely to produce epileptic seizures than other rTMS paradigms for
increasing cortical excitability. At the time of this writing, no seizures
have been reported from theta burst TMS below the MEP threshold.
An implication of the foregoing is that excitatory rTMS should
produce facilitatory effects on behavior. This idea formed the basis for
rTMS treatment in depression (George et al., 1995b and, indeed, there
are reports of improved cerebral functions after high-frequency rTMS
in healthy subjects (e.g.,Boroojerdi et al., 2001).
2.3.3. Inhibitory effect
Another important effect of rTMS on the motor cortex was
depression of the MEP after trains of stimuli delivered at frequencies
in the 1 Hz range (Fig. 2;Wassermann et al., 1996). Because the seizure
induction was not a concern with this technique (Wassermann, 1998),
strong stimulation could be delivered for long periods to produce
relatively robust and long-lasting inhibitory effects (Chen et al.,
1997). Just as the facilitatory effect of high frequency rTMS was
considered analogous to LTP, this opposite phenomenon with low
frequency stimulation was inevitably compared to synaptic long-term
depression. Again, there is indirect evidence in favor of the analogy: A
prominent characteristic of long-term depression is that it is easier to
produce in synapses treated previously with very subtle potentiating
stimulation (Holland & Wagner, 1998), an instance of the phenomenon
referred to as“metaplasticity”(Abraham & Bear, 1996). The depressant
effect of low-frequency rTMS on the MEP shows metaplasticity; i.e.,
“priming” with 6 Hz rTMS greatly increases the depth and duration of
the MEP depression from 1 Hz rTMS delivered immediately afterward
(Iyer et al., 2003). “Continuous” theta burst rTMS, where the 50 Hz
bursts are delivered continuously every 200 ms, also effectively
depresses cortical excitability (Di Lazzaro et al., 2005). Interestingly,
these dramatic physiological effects on the motor cortex do not come
with clinically apparent changes in measures, such as simple reaction
time (Iyer et al., 2003), although they have been employed to good
effect in treatment studies, as described below.
Inhibitory effects of rTMS have also been of great interest to
investigators of cognition and perception. Low frequency and
continuous theta burst rTMS have provided a means of safely, focally
and temporarily disabling cortical areas in order to define their role in
behavior. Appropriately designed rTMS paradigms have proven useful
in resolving uncertainties in the interpretation of functional brain
imaging studies (Cohen et al., 1997).
Fig. 1. The effect of a short train of high frequency rTMS on MEP amplitude. Baseline
MEP amplitude is measured by giving test stimuli, once every 10 s; then a 2 s train of
20 Hz rTMS is delivered (arrow). After a brief pause, test stimulation is resumed
every 10 s. MEP amplitude is shown on the y-axis.
Fig. 2.The effect of low frequency rTMS on MEP amplitude. In thefirst panel, test stimuli
are delivered every 10 s (0.1 Hz). Then rTMS is delivered at 1 Hz (second panel);
MEP amplitude decreases gradually during the stimulus train. 0.1 Hz stimuli are then
resumed (third panel) and MEPs remain suppressed. The sequence of traces is from
top to bottom in each panel.
100 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-982477871)
2.4. (Lack of) Animal and in vitro data
One of the historical features of TMS that distinguish it from most
other scientifically and clinically accepted treatments is the near absence
of non-human data. There are several reasons for this, the
most important of which is that the technique is fundamentally
noninvasive and was first adopted by a community of basic and
clinical neurophysiologists who had decades long tradition of shocking
and needling experimental subjects, including themselves. The basic,
single-pulse technique was thereby demonstrated to be safe enough
even for casual experimentation long before it was considered as a
treatment for disease. Animal safety studies were further obviated by
the fact that magnetic stimulators were approved for peripheral nerve
stimulation in the U.S., greatly smoothing the regulatory path to
experimental and off-label clinical use on the brain. Another reason is
that the animal models are not reliable: For basic physical reasons,
human TMS equipment, techniques and paradigms do not scale down
easily to smaller brains because of greatly decreased electrical coupling
in smaller volumes (Weissman et al., 1992) and it is a matter of
common sense that standard, human-sized, stimulating coils would
deliver stimulation, not only to the entire brain of a small animal,
but to an appreciable portion of the body, making generalizations to
focal cortical stimulation in humans invalid.
One theoretically possible approach to studies in small animals
would be to construct appropriately sized coils, but, particularly
with repetitive stimulation, the problems of heat dissipation and
mechanical stability are not easily surmounted (Cohen & Cuffin,
1991) and miniaturization to anything approaching rat size has
not been accomplished. Nevertheless, there are many studies on
the effects of TMS with human coils on rats. Appropriately sized
coils have been made for use in monkeys (e.g., Lisanby et al., 2001a),
but the circumstances and purposes of the experiments in which they
have been used did not permit much exploration. To complicate the
issue further, definitive answers to detailed questions about which
neuronal populations are activated by TMS would certainly involve
intracerebral recordings, but breachingtheskull might affectthecurrent
distribution, if coil position was not tightly controlled. Highly valuable
recordings of TMS-evoked activity in the human corticospinal tract
have been made in patients undergoing spinal surgery (Nakamura et
al., 1997; Di Lazzaro et al., 2002) and cranial neurosurgery for resection
of tumors and epileptic foci provides another potential opportunity to
obtain direct neural recordings; however, this has not yet been done.
While neurophysiologists speculated about the underlying
mechanisms of neural modulation by TMS, it was being adopted
infields, such as clinical psychiatry and cognitive neuroscience, where
users were motivated more by pragmatic concerns than curiosity
about how it works. Adoption of conservative dosing guidelines for
rTMS (Wassermann, 1998) reduced accidental seizures to a level that
most investigators and ethics panels found acceptable even for purely
experimental uses. Encouraging data from therapeutic trials created
enthusiasm in the clinical community and attracted public notice.
The recent clearance of an rTMS device by the FDA to treat depression
without animal safety data further decreased the incentive for animal
studies that might reveal its mode of action.
Many assume that TMS techniques have been developed and
optimized in animals and humans by a large, well-funded enterprise
and are surprised to hear how insubstantial the scientific founding of
the technique remains. Thus, users, particularly of rTMS, operate on
assumptions and incomplete knowledge, which are often propagated
uncritically by users unfamiliar with its history. One might ask,
“What's the problem, as long as it's safe and it works?” However,
the apparent success of TMS may ensure that the full potential of
this promising technology is never exploited: It would be surprising
if current techniques, particularly for clinical treatment, were optimal,
but without a basic understanding of the physical and physiological
mechanisms, significant advances are less likely.
3. Therapeutic applications
3.1. Depression
Treatment of depression was the first major therapeutic goal set
for TMS. In targeting a phenotypically heterogeneous, spontaneously
remitting behavioral disorder with no biological surrogate markers
or agreed-upon anatomical or physiological basis, and where the clinical
endpoints are subject to subtle behavioral influences, pioneering
investigators subjected therapeutic TMS to a very hard first test.
The era of TMS treatment opened in 1993, when an Austrian group
reported a beneficial effect in two profoundly depressed patients who
underwent a course of repeated single-pulse TMS before electroconvulsive
therapy (Höflich et al., 1993). They followed up with a singleblind
trial of 0.3 Hz TMS, delivered with a round coil centered at
the vertex, (Kolbinger et al., 1995), producing additional encouraging
results. George et al. (1995b) were thefirst to try rTMS in depression:
They delivered rTMS at 20 Hz, a frequency in the range for increasing
motor cortex excitability, to a location on the scalp estimated to lie
over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). This area showed
decreased metabolic activity in positron emission tomography studies
of induced sadness (George et al., 1995a and the rationale was that
repeated administration of a treatment able to increase the excitability
of the motor cortex should have a tonic effect on the frontal circuitry
whose apparent sluggishness was thought to underlie the disorder. In
healthy subjects, similar treatment had produced small but significant
mood elevations (George et al., 1996; Pascual-Leone et al., 1996). The
stimulation frequency range, putative cortical target, and technique
for estimating its scalp location (measuring 5 cm on the scalp, anterior
to the location for causing a twitch in the hand), and the 2–3week
duration of treatment became standard procedures for a large number
of trials following up on these results (seeGeorge, 2010for review).
While studies have used low-frequency (e.g., 1 Hz) rTMS, some with
the goal of reducing right prefrontal activity (e.g., Kauffmann et al.,
2004), single pulse and low-frequency TMS have been essentially
abandoned for depression treatment. However, apart from small trials
comparing high and low stimulation frequencies and right vs. left
DLPFC targeting (Wassermann & Lisanby, 2001), there have been very
few attempts to validate the somewhat arbitrary paradigm. While
there is convincing evidence (see below) that this treatment is effective
in certain patient populations, in our opinion, the rationale and its
supporting scientific and clinical evidence are insufficient to justify
freezing the paradigm at this point. However, systematically exploring
the multi-dimensional stimulation parameter space (frequency, intensity
, pulse train duration, train number, inter-train interval, duration
of treatment, etc.) and the many potential brain targets would be a
task of discouraging magnitude. Attempts to optimize the paradigm
would be greatly aided by biological surrogates for the brain response
to rTMS and there is at least one viable candidate: rTMS of the DLPFC
releases dopamine, measured as displacement of the dopamine radioligand
, raclopride, in the putamen in healthy subjects (Strafella et al.,
2001) and this has been proposed as a mechanism for its effect on
mood. Other methodological challenges and considerations in rTMS
trial design are outlined by Demitrack and Lisanby (2008).
Despite the uncertainties surrounding the paradigm and mechanism
, there is a growing body of evidence that rTMS improves
mood in depression, at least in patients not on antidepressant medication.
In a 2003 meta-analysis (Martin et al., 2003) of 14 randomized
, controlled trials, rated by the authors as low quality, found an
effect size of 0.35, which was statistically significant, for 2 weeks of
left DLPFC treatment vs. sham. However, the effect was nonsignificant
2 weeks later. However, in a more recent meta-analysis of 34 randomized
, sham-controlled studies (Slotema et al., 2010), rTMS delivered
to the DLPFC produced a mean effect size of 0.55 (Pb0.001),
regardless of hemisphere stimulated or concurrent antidepressant
medications. Trials in patients not on drug treatment yielded a higher
101 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
mean effect size (0.96,Pb0.001) than those where rTMS was added to
existing pharmacotherapy (0.51, Pb0.001) or started concurrently
with antidepressants (0.37, Pb0.03). This meta-analysis is the only
one to include either of the two, large, longer-term, multicenter trials
that have been influential in acceptance of rTMS depression treatment
by the clinical community and regulators. The first of these
(O'Reardon et al., 2007; included in Slotema et al., 2010), industrysponsored
study, randomized 301 antidepressant medication-free,
previously treatment-resistant, patients to sham TMS or 10 Hz rTMS
at 120% of hand twitch threshold, delivered to the left prefrontal
area in seventy-five 4 second trains,five times a week for 4–6 weeks.
Outcome was assessed with the Montgomery–Asberg Depression
Rating Scale (MADRS) and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale
(17 and 24 question versions; HAMD). Active rTMS was significantly
superior to sham on the MADRS at week 4 and on the HAMD scales
at weeks 4 and 6. Response rate, defined as a 50% reduction in scale
score, was significantly higher with active TMS on all scales at weeks
4 and 6. Remission rate was also significantly higher in the active
rTMS group. The second study (George et al., 2010), randomized 199,
antidepressant-free, moderately treatment-resistant, patients to sham
or active treatment similar to that used by O'Reardon et al. (2007).
All patients underwent a fixed, 3-week period of treatment. In a
second, 3-week period, patients showing evidence of remission
were routed to an unblinded, tapering, rTMS treatment regimen
and initiation of pharmacotherapy. Non-remitting patients were
given another 3 weeks of unblinded, active treatment, screened for
remission in a second variable treatment period and, if in remission,
routed to the tapering regimen. HAMD score, the primary outcome
measure, indicated remission in 14% of the active group and 5% in
the sham group after blinded treatment. However, approximately
30% of both groups remitted in the open treatment phase. The
study included an important innovation in the delivery of sham
rTMS: that is, adding electrodes under the sham coil to produce a
somatosensory artifact roughly matching that of the active coil.
Blinding was assessed carefully and shown to be effective for
both patients and experimenters. Both of the multi-center studies
employed the Neurostar® TMS system, which has been cleared by the
FDA, but whose use is not yet widely reimbursed by third-party payers
in the U.S.
It is noteworthy that not a single patient in either of these studies
or, indeed in the vast majority of those before suffered a seizure or
any other serious adverse event unrelated to the underlying disease.
Seizures are certainly dangerous and undesirable. However, all of
the 17 or so reported seizures with rTMS (Rossi et al., 2009; Gomez
et al., 2011) have occurred under observation and resolved rapidly
and spontaneously without serious sequelae. Therefore, we question
whether the optimal risk–benefit balance for a severely depressed
population undergoing rTMS treatment requires a seizure rate of virtually
zero and substantially less than that of conventional antidepressant
medications (Mula et al., 2008). We urge the cautious
easing of guidelines on rTMS for therapeutic applications, especially
where there are convincing indications of efficacy.
rTMS-induced seizures may, in fact, be therapeutic. So-called,
magnetic seizure therapy (Lisanby et al., 2001b)wasconceivedas
a way to produce the antidepressant effect of traditional electroconvulsive
therapy with milder side effects by producing seizures with a
focal origin and partially controlled spread (Rowny et al., 2009).
Clinical experience with this technique is limited; however, results
indicate that it does produce milder seizures and side effects and
that its antidepressant efficacy may be comparable to that of electroconvulsive
therapy (Lisanby et al., 2003; Kirov et al., 2008).
3.2. Schizophrenic hallucinations and tinnitus
One of the earliest and most successful applications of inhibitory,
low frequency rTMS was to treat schizophrenic auditory hallucinations.
Functional neuroimaging shows activity in the temporoparietal cortex
during auditory hallucinations (Silbersweig et al., 1995), providing an
accessible target and a compelling physiological rationale for a treatment
producing local neural depression. Hoffman et al. (2000, 2005)
were the first to show that repeated sessions of 1 Hz rTMS delivered
to the left temporoparietal area suppressed auditory hallucinations, in
some cases for weeks after stopping treatment. Largely overlapping
meta-analyses (Tranulis et al., 2008; Slotema et al., 2010) found average
effect sizes of just over 0.5 (Pb0.001, in both cases). TMS has also been
tried therapeutically for the so-called negative symptoms of schizophrenia
, e.g., impaired performance on neuropsychological tests of
frontal lobe function (Hoffman & Stanford, 2008) that are thought to
be causally associated with signs of hypofunction seen on functional
imaging (Andreasen et al., 1997). There, however, the motivating
rationale and results (Slotema et al., 2010) are less convincing.
Like schizophrenic auditory hallucinations, tinnitus is associated
with activity in temporoparietal cortex on functional imaging studies
(Moller, 2003), providing a similar target and rationale for intervention
with inhibitory rTMS. However, 10 Hz rTMS was chosen for a trial in 14
tinnitus patients, comparing stimulation of various scalp sites, with procedures
to control for the auditory and somatosensory effects of rTMS
(Plewnia et al., 2003). While the results were not dramatic, transient reductions
in tinnitus were significantly greater when rTMS was delivered
to temporal and temporoparietal than to frontal and parietal
sites. One Hertz rTMS was later tested in a crossover trial where active
or sham rTMS was targeted at each of 14 patients' individual locus of activation
in auditory cortex (left hemisphere in 12), using a frameless
stereotactic procedure (Kleinjung et al., 2005). After 5 days of active
treatment, there was significant improvement of symptoms, which
was still present at 6 months. Sham did not produce statistically significant
effects, but, unfortunately, the authors did not report a direct statistical
comparison between the effects of sham and active treatment. A
study in 62 patients (Khedr et al., 2010) found that rTMS, delivered to
the temporoparietal cortex contralateral to the symptomatic ear, was
more effective than arbitrary left-sided treatment and that it did not
seem to matter whether the stimulation was delivered at 1 or 25 Hz.
The latterfinding is somewhat surprising, given the dogma of frequency-specific effects and the putative mechanism of rTMS treatment for
tinnitus. It should create some skepticism in the minds of clinical investigators.
Continuous theta burst rTMS and “primed”1HzrTMS(Iyer et
al., 2003) produce enhanced inhibitory effects, which may be effective
in hallucinations and tinnitus.
3.3. Anxiety: obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD)
Somewhat better understood than depression (Menzies et al.,
2008), OCD also provided an early target for rTMS. Greenberg et al.
(1997),in fluenced by the initial success in depression, were the first
to try it in an acute, “challenge” study, intended more as a physiological
probe than a therapeutic trial. Their anatomical target, based on
functional imaging studies in OCD (Menzies et al., 2008), was the
DLPFC, where they delivered single sessions of 20 Hz rTMS to each
side on different days. Occipital stimulation was used as a control.
Right DLPFC treatment significantly reduced patient-rated compulsions
, but not obsessions, for several hours and improved mood transiently
in this non-depressed sample. The authors' interpretation was
that right DLPFC stimulation might have disrupted activity related to
the generation of compulsive urges. Several subsequent therapeutic
trials of frontal rTMS (Alonso et al., 2001; Sachdev et al., 2001; Prasko
et al., 2006; Sachdev et al., 2007) failed tofind beneficial effects. However
, a study targeting the supplementary motor area, a cortical region
found hyperactive in OCD, with inhibitory, 1 Hz rTMS in 21
patients found a significant improvement, relative to sham, after
4 weeks of daily treatment (Mantovani et al., 2010). It may be possible
to target and activate the supplementary motor area, a paired
102 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
structure lying on the medial surfaces of the hemispheres in the interhemisphericfissure, with a conventional coil placed on the overlying
scalp “15% of the distance between inion and nasion anterior to [the]
vertex”, the procedure described in this study. However, independent
evidence of this ability does not exist. So, while the therapeutic effects
may be real, clinically valuable, and spatially selective, the nominal
target in this and many other otherwise well-conceived trials should
be taken as representing a procedure and a scalp location, rather than
anatomical reality. This is particularly true when only one or even a
few scalp sites are tested and critical when such studies are cited in
support of pathogenetic theories.
PTSD has also been treated with 1 Hz rTMS delivered to the right
prefrontal area with the goal of reducing hyperactivity seen there
on functional imaging studies of patients recalling triggering events
(McCann et al., 1998). An open trial in two patients produced encouraging
results, but thefindings of a subsequent controlled study by the
same group proved less impressive (Osuch et al., 2009). In a trial in 24
PTSD patients (Cohen et al., 2004) comparing 1 Hz, 10 Hz, and sham
rTMS, there was a reduction of symptoms with 10 Hz relative to
1 Hz and sham. These investigators, however, used a circular coil,
whose center hole was apparently placed over the target in the
right prefrontal area, virtually ensuring that the stimulus was delivered
somewhere else. Finally, in a study of 30 PTSD patients randomized
to receive 20 Hz rTMS delivered to the right or the left prefrontal
area or sham (Boggio et al., 2010), investigators found a stronger
therapeutic effect on anxiety with treatment delivered to the right
side after 10 sessions delivered over 2 weeks. Beneficial effects were
reported to persist at 3-month follow-up.
One potentially important consideration, which seems largely to
have escaped psychiatrists, but not neurorehabilitation specialists
(see below), is that the best use of rTMS may be to augment the benefit of behavioral treatment by promoting the desired neural change,
rather than remodeling brain pathways on its own. Anxiety spectrum
disorders are typically and successfully treated with behavioral techniques
, e.g., cognitive-behavioral and exposure therapy, aimed at altering
maladaptive responses to internal and environmental stimuli.
The combination of rTMS, as a modulator of plasticity, with a proven
behavior modification technique might yield useful synergy. The concept
of enhancing the effects of exposure therapy pharmacologically
has already been proven in acrophobia (Ressler et al., 2004).
3.4. Neurodegenerative disorders: Parkinson disease (PD) and Alzheimer
disease (AD)
Neurophysiological models of PD indicate decreased excitatory
drive on the motor cortex from the basal ganglia, via thalamic relays
(DeLong, 1990). This was part of the rationale for directing high frequency
rTMS to the motor cortex in PD patients (Pascual-Leone
et al., 1994). Using continuous 5 Hz rTMS of the motor cortex below
the MEP threshold, this group found beneficial effects on reaction
time, movement time, and performance on the Grooved Pegboard
test, a measure of fine finger control and psychomotor speed, in six
PD patients. These effects were smaller, absent, or reversed in a larger
group of elderly controls. Others (Ghabra et al., 1999), however, could
not replicate this finding. Mally & Stone (1999) were the first to report
a lasting beneficial effect of “offline” TMS in PD patients. In an
open trial, they delivered 30, single TMS pulses, at a range of very
moderate intensities, either once or twice a day, for 7–10 days.
Their twice-a-day groups showed statistically significant, intensitydependent
improvements that persisted for months after treatment,
a phenomenon difficult to explain in physiological terms. There are
no large or definitive studies in this area, where pharmacological
and surgical approaches have been comparatively successful. However
, these and several other trials of varying quality, where TMS was
delivered at assorted frequencies and intensities with round or 8-
shaped coils, are reviewed in a meta-analysis (Fregni et al., 2005),
which found an effect size of 0.62 on Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating
Scale scores and concluded that TMS might be an effective treatment
for PD. A later study of intermittent theta-burst rTMS of the
motor cortex (Benninger et al., 2011) found no effect on motor measures
, but a beneficial effect on mood. The same group (Benninger
et al., 2009) completed a safety study of 50 Hz rTMS in PD patients, laying
the groundwork, perhaps, for a new generation of rTMS treatment
studies. Interestingly, rTMS of the motor cortex, like the DLPFC, can
stimulate dopamine secretion in the caudate nucleus (Strafella et al.,
2003), providing a plausible explanation for at least some beneficial effects
in PD and a potential surrogate outcome measure.
rTMS has also been tried as an “online” intervention in dementia
(Cotelli et al., 2006, 2008). These investigators applied brief trains of
20 Hz rTMS during presentation of a picture stimulus, which the patients
were asked to name. Facilitatory effects on naming were
found with stimulation of the left and right DLPFC, but not with
sham. Given the non-lateralized effect and the fact that the sham
was delivered with the coil held with its narrow edge to the top of
the head, greatly reducing its somatosensory effect, caution is required
in interpreting the results: sensory stimulation in multiple
channels can facilitate behavior, a phenomenon called, intersensory
facilitation (Nickerson, 1973) and the sensory artifact of TMS can produce
the effect (Terao et al., 1997).
In a later, “offline”study (Cotelli et al., 2011), 10 AD patients were
assigned to 20 Hz rTMS delivered in 20 sessions over 4 weeks or 10
sessions of sham, followed by 10 sessions of the active treatment. At
the 2-week point, the active group had improved significantly from
baseline on a measure of auditory sentence comprehension and
there was a smaller, but significant, performance difference between
the groups at that point. The effect on naming, found in the on-line
studies, was not present, nor did other cognitive measures appear
to improve. The increase in comprehension appeared to last for
12 weeks in the active group. Another group (Bentwich et al., 2011),
combined 10 Hz rTMS, delivered to a number of scalp sites, with cognitive
training in 8 AD patients in an open study. No significant improvements
were found after 6 weeks or 4.5 months of treatment.
3.5. Neurorehabilitation
Based on its potential to produce plastic change in synapses (see
sections on facilitatory and inhibitory effects, above), researchers
and clinicians have wondered whether rTMS could be used to drive
or augment adaptive plasticity, aiding the process of recovery from
brain damage. Interestingly, the most successful experiments in this
area used 1 Hz rTMS to reduce neural “competition” from the intact
hemisphere, presumably liberating suppressed capacity on the injured
side. This principle was tested in a study of 10 hemiparetic,
chronic stroke patients and 10 healthy controls (Mansur et al.,
2005). All subjects underwent three sessions each of 1 Hz rTMS and
sham, delivered to the primary motor and premotor cortex, contralateral
to the lesion, in a single day. Outcome measures, including reaction
time, finger-tapping speed, and the Purdue Pegboard Test were
administered after each treatment session. In contrast to the healthy
group, the stroke patients' performance improved after active motor
cortex stimulation. In a case-controlled trial (Kirton et al., 2008), 10
very carefully selected children and young adults, aged 9–20 years,
with chronic ischemic hemipareses involving the upper extremity,
were paired for age and severity and randomized to 1 Hz rTMS over
the motor cortex contralateral to the lesion, 10 minutes a day for
8 days, or sham. At 10 days, there was a significant increase in grip
strength in the active rTMS group, which persisted at day 17. A
more global test of function, the Melbourne Assessment of Upper Extremity
Function, showed improvements, which did not persist after
the end of treatment. In another trial in 23 chronic stroke patients
(Takeuchi et al., 2008), physiological measures were added to the
clinical outcome variables: One Hertz rTMS of the motor cortex
103 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1590972593)
[Link]
http://www.neuronetics.com
[Link]
http://www.neuronetics.com/Prod-Components.aspx?q=senstar
[Link]
http://www.neuronetics.com/Prod-Components.aspx?q=senstar
contralateral to the stroke produced increased excitability (tested
with TMS) in the affected motor cortex along with statistically significant
clinical improvements. In a rare, subacute study, stroke patients,
treated 7–20 days after onset of hemiparesis with 5 days of 1 or 3 Hz
rTMS, performed better on motor testing 3 months later than patients
treated with sham and there appeared to be an advantage of 1 Hz
treatment (Khedr et al., 2009). The inhibitory approach has also
been taken in nonfluent aphasia after stroke, where inhibitory rTMS
was delivered to the homolog of the motor speech area in the intact
hemisphere with encouraging results (Naeser et al., 2010).
A different strategy suggested by the laboratory data is to use the
putative ability of higher frequency rTMS to strengthen synaptic connections
, to promote remodeling of pathways on the affected side
and/or boost the effect of concurrent behavioral treatment. This has
been tried with some success, as well (e.g., Kim et al., 2006). There,
10 Hz rTMS or sham was delivered to the affected motor cortex immediately
before a motor training task involving the paretic fingers.
rTMS produced an increase in MEP amplitude, which was associated
with improved motor performance in the active stimulation group.
3.6. Migraine and chronic pain
The results of an industry-funded, multi-center, randomized, double-blind
, sham-controlled trial (Lipton et al., 2010) indicate that single
TMS pulses, delivered by patients to their own occiputs with a
battery-powered device, can abort migraine attacks. Theoretical support
for this treatment comes from evidence that TMS can disrupt the
phenomenon of cortical spreading depression, which is believed to be
a precursor of pain in the disorder (Lipton & Pearlman, 2010). These
authors also present data indicating that TMS-based migraine prophylaxis
may be feasible.
The observation that epidural stimulation of the motor cortex can
reduce chronic pain (Tsubokawa et al., 1993) stimulated interest in
doing the same procedure noninvasively with rTMS. Surprisingly, no
large trials have been run in this area where the need for new treatments
would seem to be great. A meta-analysis of five controlled
studies of motor cortex rTMS (Leung et al., 2009), including 149 patients
with pain from a variety of sources, found a significant overall
beneficial, effect. Lower frequencies (≤ 10 Hz) seemed to be most effective
and the techniques in general seemed better for pain of central
than peripheral origin. However, a more recent meta-analysis of 17
rTMS studies in chronic pain (O'Connell et al., 2011) found evidence
of no effectiveness of low frequency (b5 Hz) rTMS in providing
even short-term relief from chronic pain; whereas, single treatments
with rTMS at N5 Hz may have had a short-term beneficial effect. Still
more recently, and to conclude on an encouraging note, thefirst trial
of prolonged rTMS treatment for pain (Mazzoni et al., 2007) was
reported. These investigators randomized 40fibromyalgia patients either
to 10 Hz rTMS or sham treatment,first delivered daily for 5 days,
then weekly for 3 weeks, bi-weekly for 6 weeks, and then monthly for
3 months. Thirty patients completed the trial and the analysis was on
the intent-to-treat cohort. Pain ratings in the sham and active groups
began to diverge after the first treatment and remained significantly
different 1 month after the last treatment. Secondary outcome measures
related to mood, quality of life, and disease impact showed parallel
and significant treatment effects.
4. Discussion and conclusions on the clinical outlook
In the 25 years since TMS has been commercially available, it has
gained prominence as a research tool for noninvasive stimulation and
neuromodulation of the human cortex. However, despite some solid
therapeutic successes, many encouraging leads, and the clearance of a
device for therapeutic use, its future in the clinic is uncertain. A major
consideration is the appropriate business model for a durable medical
device, potentially able to deliver thousands of treatments. One case is
the device tested for migraine (Lipton et al., 2010), where one or two
single pulses appear sufficient to abort an attack and there is little danger
of harm from inappropriate use. A simple device capable of delivering
isolated pulses could be disseminated among sufferers of a common
disorder, such as migraine, where conventional pharmacological therapies
have significant side effects and risks. In contrast, there is depression
treatment, where rTMS, with its complex equipment and risks of
seizures and even, theoretically, abuse, is required. There, a device is
sold or leased to the provider, who could, potentially, use it to treat hundreds
of patients with little further return to the supplier. The vendor of
the FDA-cleared system (www.neuronetics.com)hasadoptedthefollowing
strategy: in addition to purchasing or leasing a suite of equipment
, including a chair and a computer and proprietary clinical data
management system, the provider is required to place a pad, containing
electronic components, between the coil housing and the patient's
head, in order to operate the device. Each pad permits only a limited
number of pulses, after which it must be replaced and returned to the
manufacturer; several are required for each course of treatment.
According to company material, this item provides “contact sensing to
ensure the treatment coil is properly positioned; magneticfield confirmation
to ensure patient receives desired treatment; surfacefield cancellation
to reduce stimulation of the scalp, and a hygiene barrier from
patient to patient” (www.neuronetics.com/Prod-Components.aspx?
q=senstar). These technical merits have not been subjected to independent
evaluation. Resort to such a design suggests that the business
analysis did not find sufficient commercial potential in therapeutic
rTMS without such enhancement, even for a common disease, inadequately
treated by conventional therapies. It is indicative of current
health care economicsthat aneffectivetreatment, which could bedelivered
at a low cost per patient, must be made more costly in order to be
commercially viable. Three economic comparisons have been made between
ECT and rTMS treatment for depression, one in the United States
(Kozel et al., 2004), which found a cost advantage for rTMS, and two in
the United Kingdom (McLoughlin et al., 2007; Knapp et al., 2008), both
of which found an advantage for ECT.
As mentioned above, magnetic stimulators, including those able to
deliver rTMS, are FDA approved for peripheral nerve stimulation,
making them legal to use “off-label” for other purposes. However,
without specific clearance or approval, third party reimbursement is
generally unavailable and providers providing off-label treatment
are exposed to greater liability and regulatory burdens. Manufacturers
, in turn, are unlikely to pursue approval or clearance for new
indications without solid indications of profitability. The same considerations
apply, at least in part, to adoption by providers. Thus, in our
opinion, there is no reason to expect widespread adoption of therapeutic
TMS, at least in the U.S., without a structural change in the
health care market or a spectacular demonstration of efficacy in a
common disorder.
Nevertheless, we expect TMS to continue attracting the interest of
innovative clinicians and scientists and to continue to advance. There
are many potential opportunities to improve TMS treatment, in addition
to those mentioned above. For instance:
• Analysis of the local sulcation and fiber directions in cortical target
areas would allow optimization of coil placement and current
direction.
• Adopting theta burst paradigms or primed low-frequency rTMS, instead
of conventional, unpatterned stimulation, would increase the
effectiveness and safety of rTMS treatments.
These are among the easiest innovations to implement in existing
clinical paradigms. Other more speculative possibilities include the
following:
• While hyper-focal coils are difficult to produce, there may be simpler
ways to improve the spatial and functional focality of TMS: experiments
in visual cortex have shown that behavioral pre-
104 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
activation and adaptation of particular populations of neurons
within the stimulated area can alter the response to single pulse
(Silvanto et al., 2007b) and theta burst (Silvanto et al., 2007a)
TMS. This could be a way of refining the targeting of therapeutic interventions
without changing the hardware.
• Endophenotypes for neurobehavioral disease and surrogate
markers for clinical endpoints are actively being sought and discovered.
These should improve the ability to define the most effective
protocols for TMS treatment.
This is but a sample of the potential ways in which TMS treatment
might be improved. Given the opportunities, new interventions are
sure to be attempted and one may yet provide that spectacular
demonstration.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NINDS intramural funding. The authors
thank Ms. D. Schoenberg for her skillful editing.
References
Abraham, W. C., & Bear, M. F. (1996). Metaplasticity: the plasticity of synaptic plasticity.
Trends Neurosci 19,126 –130.
Alonso, P., Pujol, J., Cardoner, N., Benlloch, L., Deus, J., Menchon, J. M., et al. (2001). Right
prefrontal repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in obsessive-compulsive
disorder: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Am J Psychiatry 158,
1143–1145.
Amassian, V. E., Cracco, R. Q., Maccabee, P. J., Cracco, J. B., Rudell, A. P., & Eberle, L.
(1998). Transcranial magnetic stimulation in study of the visual pathway. J Clin
Neurophysiol 15, 288–304.
Amassian, V. E., Eberle, L., Maccabee, P. J., & Cracco, R. Q. (1992). Modelling magnetic
coil excitation of human cerebral cortex with a peripheral nerve immersed in a
brain-shaped volume conductor: the significance of fiber bending in excitation.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 85, 291–301.
Andreasen, N. C., O'Leary, D. S., Flaum, M., Nopoulos, P., Watkins, G. L., Boles Ponto, L. L.,
et al. (1997). Hypofrontality in schizophrenia: distributed dysfunctional circuits in
neuroleptic-naive patients. Lancet 349, 1730–1734.
Barker, A. T., Jalinous, R., & Freeston, I. L. (1985). Noninvasive magnetic stimulation of
the human motor cortex. Lancet i, 1106–1107.
Benninger, D. H., Berman, B. D., Houdayer, E., Pal, N., Luckenbaugh, D.A., Schneider, L., et al.
(2011). Intermittent theta-burst transcranial magnetic stimulation for treatment of
Parkinson disease.Neurology 76,601 –609.
Benninger, D. H., Lomarev, M., Wassermann, E. M., Lopez, G., Houdayer, E., Fasano, R. E.,
et al. (2009). Safety study of 50 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in
patients with Parkinson's disease. Clin Neurophysiol 120, 809–815.
Bentwich, J., Dobronevsky, E., Aichenbaum, S., Shorer, R., Peretz, R., Khaigrekht, M., et al.
(2011). Beneficial effect of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation combined
with cognitive training for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease: a proof of concept
study.J Neural Transm 118,463 –471.
Boggio, P. S., Rocha, M., Oliveira, M. O., Fecteau, S., Cohen, R. B., Campanha, C., et al.
(2010). Noninvasive brain stimulation with high-frequency and low-intensity
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation treatment for posttraumatic stress
disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 71, 992–999.
Boroojerdi, B., Phipps, M., Kopylev, L., Wharton, C. M., Cohen, L. G., & Grafman, J. (2001).
Enhancing analogic reasoning with rTMS over the left prefrontal cortex. Neurology
56, 526–528.
Chen, R., Classen, J., Gerloff, C., Celnik, P., Wassermann, E. M., Hallett, M., et al. (1997).
Depression of motor cortex excitability by low frequency transcranial magnetic
stimulation. Neurology 48, 1398–1403.
Cohen, L. G., Celnik, P., Pascual-Leone, A., Corwell, B., Faiz, L., Dambrosia, J., et al. (1997).
Functional relevance of cross-modal plasticity in blind humans. Nature 389,
180–183.
Cohen, D., & Cuffin, B. N. (1991). Developing a more focal magnetic stimulator. Part I:
Some basic principles. J Clin Neurophysiol 8, 102–111.
Cohen, H., Kaplan, Z., Kotler, M., Kouperman, I., Moisa, R., & Grisaru, N. (2004). Repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in
posttraumatic stress disorder: A double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Am J
Psychiatry 161,515 –524.
Cotelli,M.,Calabria,M.,Manenti,R.,Rosini,S.,Zanetti,O.,Cappa,S.F.,etal.(2011).
Improved language performance in Alzheimer disease following brain stimulation.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 82,794 –797.
Cotelli, M., Manenti, R., Cappa, S.F., Geroldi,C., Zanetti, O., Rossini,P. M., et al. (2006). Effect
of transcranial magnetic stimulation on action naming in patients with Alzheimer
disease. Arch Neurol 63,1602 –1604.
Cotelli,M.,Manenti,R.,Cappa,S.F.,Zanetti,O.,&Miniussi,C.(2008).Transcranial
magnetic stimulation improves naming in Alzheimer disease patients at different
stages of cognitive decline.Eur J Neurol 15,1286 –1292.
DeLong, M. R. (1990). Primate models of movement disorders of basal ganglia origin.
Trends Neurosci 13, 281–285.
Demitrack, M. A., & Lisanby, S. H. (2008). Methodological issues in clinical trial design
for TMS. In E. M. Wassermann, C. M. Epstein, S. H. Lisanaby, T. Paus, V. Walsh, &
U. Ziemann (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of transcranial stimulation Vol. 622–631,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Devlin, J. T., & Watkins, K. E. (2008). Investigating language organization with TMS. In
E. M. Wassermann, C. M. Epstein, S. H. Lisanaby, T. Paus, V. Walsh, & U. Ziemann
(Eds.),The Oxford handbook of transcranial stimulation Vol. 479–499, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dhuna, A. K., Gates, J. R., & Pascual-Leone, A. (1991). Transcranial magnetic stimulation
in patients with epilepsy. Neurology 41, 1067–1071.
Di Lazzaro, V., Oliviero, A., Berardelli, A., Mazzone, P., Insola, A., Pilato, F., et al. 
(2002). Direct demonstration of the effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation on the excitability of the human motor cortex. Exp Brain Res 144,
549–553.
Di Lazzaro, V., Pilato, F., Saturno, E., Oliviero, A., Dileone, M., Mazzone, P., et al. 
(2005). Theta-burst repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation suppresses
specific excitatory circuits in the human motor cortex. J Physiol 565,945 –950.
Epstein, C. M., Schwartzenberg, D. G., Davey, K. R., & Sudderth, D. B. (1990). Localizing
the site of magnetic brain stimulation in humans. Neurology 40, 666–670.
Fadini, T., Matthaus, L., Rothkegel, H., Sommer, M., Tergau, F., Schweikard, A., et al.
(2009). H-coil: Induced electricfield properties and input/output curves on healthy
volunteers, comparison with a standardfigure-of-eight coil. Clin Neurophysiol 120,
1174–1182.
Fregni, F., Simon, D. K., Wu, A., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2005). Non-invasive brain stimulation
for Parkinson's disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 76,1614 –1623.
George, M. S. (2010). Transcranial magnetic stimulation for the treatment of depression.
Expert Rev Neurother 10,1761 –1772.
George, M. S., Ketter, T. A., Parekh, P. I., Horwitz, B., Herscovitch, P., & Post, R. M. (1995).
Brain activity during transient sadness and happiness in healthy women. Am J
Psychiatry 152, 341–351.
George, M. S., Lisanby, S. H., Avery, D., McDonald, W. M., Durkalski, V., Pavlicova, M.,
et al. (2010). Daily left prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation therapy for
major depressive disorder: A sham-controlled randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry
67,507 –516.
George, M. S., Wassermann, E. M., Williams, W. A., Callahan, A., Ketter, T. A., Basser, P.,
et al. (1995). Daily repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) improves
mood in depression. Neuroreport 6, 1853–1856.
George, M. S., Wassermann, E. M., Williams, W. A., Steppel, J., Pascual-Leone, A., Basser,
P., et al. (1996). Changes in mood and hormone levels after rapid-rate transcranial
magnetic stimulation (rTMS) of the prefrontal cortex.J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci
8,172 –180.
Ghabra, M. B., Hallett, M., & Wassermann, E. M. (1999). Simultaneous repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation does not speed fine movement in PD. Neurology
52,768 –770.
Gomez, L., Morales, L., Trapaga, O., Zaldivar, M., Sanchez, A., Padilla, E., et al. 
(2011). Seizure induced by sub-threshold 10-Hz rTMS in a patient with multiple
risk factors. Clin Neurophysiol 122,1057 –1058.
Greenberg, B. D., George, M. S., Martin, J. D., Benjamin, J., Schlaepfer, T. E., Altemus, M.,
et al. (1997). Effect of prefrontal repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in
obsessive-compulsive disorder: A preliminary study.Am J Psychiatry 154, 867–869.
Hoffman, R. E., Boutros, N. N., Hu, S., Berman, R. M., Krystal, J. H., & Charney, D. S. (2000).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation and auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia
[letter]. Lancet 355, 1073–1075.
Hoffman, R. E., Gueorguieva, R., Hawkins, K. A., Varanko, M., Boutros, N. N., Wu, Y. T.,
et al. (2005). Temporoparietal transcranial magnetic stimulation for auditory
hallucinations: Safety, efficacy and moderators in a fifty patient sample. Biol
Psychiatry 58,97 –104.
Hoffman, R. E., & Stanford, A. D. (2008). TMS clinical trials involving patients with
schizophrenia. In E. M. Wassermann, C. M. Epstein, U. Ziemann, V. Walsh, T. Paus,
& S. H. Lisanby (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of transcranial stimulation
(pp. 671–684). Oxford: Oxford University press.
Höflich, G., Kasper, S., Hufnagel, A., Ruhrmann, S., & Müller, H. -J. (1993). Application of
transcranial magnetic stimulation in treatment of drug-resistant major depression—
A report of two cases. Hum Psychopharmacol 8,361 –365.
Holland, L. L., & Wagner, J. J. (1998). Primed facilitation of homosynaptic long-term
depression and depotentiation in rat hippocampus. J Neurosci 18 ,887 –894.
Huang, Y. Z., Chen, R. S., Rothwell, J. C., & Wen, H. Y. (2007). The after-effect of human
theta burst stimulation is NMDA receptor dependent. Clin Neurophysiol 118,
1028–1032.
Huang, Y. Z., Edwards, M. J., Rounis, E., Bhatia, K. P., & Rothwell, J. C. (2005). Theta burst
stimulation of the human motor cortex. Neuron 45, 201–206.
Iyer, M. B., Schleper, N., & Wassermann, E. M. (2003). Priming stimulation enhances the
depressant effect of low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.
J Neurosci 23, 10867–10872.
Kapogiannis, D., & Wassermann, E. M. (2008). Transcranial magnetic stimulation in
clinical pharmacology. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem 8, 234–240.
Kauffmann, C. D., Cheema, M. A., & Miller, B. E. (2004). Slow right prefrontal
transcranialmagnetic stimulation as a treatmentfor medication-resistant depression:
A double-blind, placebo-controlled study.Depress Anxiety 19,59 –62.
Khedr,E.M.,Abdel-Fadeil,M.R.,Farghali,A.,&Qaid,M.(2009).Roleof1and3Hz
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on motor function recovery after
acute ischaemic stroke. Eur J Neurol 16, 1323–1330.
Khedr, E. M., Abo-Elfetoh, N., Rothwell, J. C., El-Atar, A., Sayed, E., & Khalifa, H. (2010).
Contralateral versus ipsilateral rTMS of temporoparietal cortex for the treatment of
chronic unilateral tinnitus: Comparative study. Eur J Neurol 17, 976–983.
105 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.199835008)
Kim, Y. H., You, S. H., Ko, M. H., Park, J. W., Lee, K. H., Jang, S. H., et al. (2006). Repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation-induced corticomotor excitability and associated
motor skill acquisition in chronic stroke.Stroke 37,1471 –1476.
Kirov, G., Ebmeier, K. P., Scott, A. I., Atkins, M., Khalid, N., Carrick, L., et al. (2008). Quick
recovery of orientation after magnetic seizure therapy for major depressive disorder.
Br J Psychiatry 193,152 –155.
Kirton, A., Chen, R., Friefeld, S., Gunraj, C., Pontigon, A. M., & Deveber, G. (2008).
Contralesional repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation for chronic hemiparesis
in subcortical paediatric stroke: A randomised trial.Lancet Neurol 7,507 –513.
Kleinjung, T., Eichhammer, P., Langguth, B., Jacob, P., Marienhagen, J., Hajak, G., et al.
(2005). Long-term effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
in patients with chronic tinnitus. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 132, 566–569.
Knapp, M., Romeo, R., Mogg, A., Eranti, S., Pluck, G., Purvis, R., et al. (2008). Costeffectiveness
of transcranial magnetic stimulation vs. electroconvulsive therapy
for severe depression: A multi-centre randomised controlled trial.J Affect Disord 109,
273–285.
Kolbinger, H. M., Höflich, G., Hufnagel, A., Möller, H. -J., & Kasper, S. (1995). Transcranial
magnetic stimulation (TMS) in the treatment of major depression—A pilot study.
Hum Psychopharmacol 10,305 –310.
Kozel, F. A., George, M. S., & Simpson, K. N. (2004). Decision analysis of the costeffectiveness
of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation versus electroconvulsive
therapy for treatment of nonpsychotic severe depression.CNS Spectr 9,476 –482.
Larson, J., Wong, D., & Lynch, G. (1986). Patterned stimulation at the theta frequency is
optimal for the induction of hippocampal long-term potentiation. Brain Res 368,
347–350.
Leung, A., Donohue, M., Xu, R., Lee, R., Lefaucheur, J. P., Khedr, E. M., et al. (2009). rTMS
for suppressing neuropathic pain: A meta-analysis. J Pain 10, 1205–1216.
Lipton, R. B., Dodick, D. W., Silberstein, S. D., Saper, J. R., Aurora, S. K., Pearlman, S. H., et al.
(2010). Single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation for acute treatment of
migraine with aura: A randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, sham-controlled
trial. Lancet Neurol 9,373 –380.
Lipton, R. B., & Pearlman, S. H. (2010). Transcranial magnetic simulation in the treatment
of migraine.Neurotherapeutics 7,204 –212.
Lisanby, S. H., Luber, B., Sackeim, H. A., Finck, A. D., & Schroeder, C. (2001). Deliberate
seizure induction with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in nonhuman
primates. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58, 199–200.
Lisanby, S. H., Luber, B., Schlaepfer, T. E., & Sackeim, H. A. (2003). Safety and feasibility
of magnetic seizure therapy (MST) in major depression: Randomized withinsubject
comparison with electroconvulsive therapy. Neuropsychopharmacology 28,
1852–1865.
Lisanby, S. H., Schlaepfer, T. E., Fisch, H. U., & Sackeim, H. A. (2001). Magnetic seizure
therapy of major depression. Arch Gen Psychiatry 58, 303–305.
Mally, J., & Stone, T. W. (1999). Therapeutic and “dose-dependent” effect of repetitive
microelectroshock induced by transcranial magnetic stimulation in Parkinson's
disease. J Neurosci Res 57, 935–940.
Mansur, C. G., Fregni, F., Boggio, P. S., Riberto, M., Gallucci-Neto, J., Santos, C. M., et al.
(2005). A sham stimulation-controlled trial of rTMS of the unaffected hemisphere
in stroke patients. Neurology 64, 1802–1804.
Mantovani, A., Simpson, H. B., Fallon, B. A., Rossi, S., & Lisanby, S. H. (2010).
Randomized sham-controlled trial of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in
treatment-resistant obsessive–compulsive disorder. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 13,
217–227.
Marg, E., & Rudiak, D. (1994). Phosphenes induced by magnetic stimulation over the
occipital brain: Description and probable site of stimulation. Optom Vis Sci 71,
301–311.
Martin, J. L., Barbanoj, M. J., Schlaepfer, T. E., Thompson, E., Perez, V., & Kulisevsky, J.
(2003). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation for the treatment of depression.
Systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry 182,480 –491.
Mazzoni, P., Hristova, A., & Krakauer, J. W. (2007). Why don't we move faster? Parkinson's
disease, movement vigor, and implicit motivation.JNeurosci27 ,7105 –7116.
McCann, U. D., Kimbrell, T. A., Morgan, C. M., Anderson, T., Geraci, M., Benson, B. E., et al.
(1998). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation for posttraumatic stress
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 55,276 –279.
McLoughlin, D. M., Mogg, A., Eranti, S., Pluck, G., Purvis, R., Edwards, D., et al. (2007).
The clinical effectiveness and cost of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
versus electroconvulsive therapy in severe depression: A multicentre pragmatic
randomised controlled trial and economic analysis. Health Technol Assess 11,1 –54.
McNaughton, B. L. (1982). Long-term synaptic enhancement and short-term potentiation
in rat fascia dentata act through different mechanisms.J Physiol (Lond) 324,249–262.
Menzies, L., Chamberlain, S. R., Laird, A. R., Thelen, S. M., Sahakian, B. J., & Bullmore, E. T.
(2008). Integrating evidence from neuroimaging and neuropsychological studies
of obsessive-compulsive disorder: The orbitofronto-striatal model revisited.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 32,525 –549.
Merton, P. A., & Morton, H. B. (1980). Stimulation of the cerebral cortex in the intact
human subject. Nature 285, 227 (letter).
Moller, A. R. (2003). Pathophysiology of tinnitus. Otolaryngol Clin North Am 36,
249–266 (v-vi).
Mula, M., Schmitz, B., & Sander, J. W. (2008). The pharmacological treatment of
depression in adults with epilepsy. Expert Opin Pharmacother 9,3159 –3168.
Naeser, M. A., Martin, P. I., Treglia, E., Ho, M., Kaplan, E., Bashir, S., et al. (2010). Research
with rTMS in the treatment of aphasia.Restor Neurol Neurosci 28,511 –529.
Nakamura, H., Kitagawa, H., Kawaguchi, Y., & Tsuji, H. (1997). Intracortical facilitation and
inhibition after transcranial magnetic stimulation in conscious humans. J Physiol 
(Lond) 498,817 –823.
Nickerson, R. S. (1973). Intersensory facilitation of reaction time: Energy summation or
preparation enhancement? Psychol Rev 80, 489–509.
O'Connell, N., Wand, B., Marston, L., Spencer, S., & Desouza, L. (2011). Non-invasive
brain stimulation techniques for chronic pain. A report of a Cochrane systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 47, 309–326.
O'Reardon, J., Solvason, H. B., Janicak, P., Sampson, S., Isenberg, K., Nahas, Z., et al.
(2007). Efficacy and safety of transcranial magnetic stimulation in the acute
treatment of major depression: A multisite randomized controlled trial. Biol
Psychiatry 62,1208 –1216.
Osuch, E. A., Benson, B. E., Luckenbaugh, D. A., Geraci, M., Post, R. M., & McCann, U.
(2009). Repetitive TMS combined with exposure therapy for PTSD: A preliminary
study. J Anxiety Disord 23,54 –59.
Pascual-Leone, A., Catalá, M. D., & Pascual-Leone Pascual, A. (1996). Lateralized effect of
rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation of the prefrontal cortex on mood.
Neurology 46, 499–502.
Pascual-Leone, A., Gates, J. R., & Dhuna, A. (1991). Induction of speech arrest and counting
errors with rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation.Neurology 41,697 –702.
Pascual-Leone, A., Valls-Sole, J., Brasil-Neto, J. P., Cammarota, A., Grafman, J., & Hallett,
M. (1994). Akinesia in Parkinson's disease. II. Effects of subthreshold repetitive
transcranial motor cortex stimulation. Neurology 44, 892–898.
Pascual-Leone, A., Valls-Solé, J., Wassermann, E. M., & Hallett, M. (1994). Responses to
rapid-rate transcranial stimulation of the human motor cortex.Brain 117, 847–858.
Plewnia, C., Bartels, M., & Gerloff, C. (2003). Transient suppression of tinnitus by
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Ann Neurol 53,263 –266.
Prasko, J., Paskova, B., Zalesky, R., Novak, T., Kopecek, M., Bares, M., et al. (2006). The
effect of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) on symptoms in
obsessive compulsive disorder. A randomized, double blind, sham controlled
study. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 27,327 –332.
Ressler, K. J., Rothbaum, B. O., Tannenbaum, L., Anderson, P., Graap, K., Zimand, E., et al.
(2004). Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts to psychotherapy: Use of D-cycloserine
in phobic individuals to facilitate extinction of fear. Arch Gen Psychiatry 61,
1136–1144.
Rossi, S., Hallett, M., Rossini, P. M., & Pascual-Leone, A. (2009). Safety, ethical considerations,
and application guidelines for the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in clinical
practice and research.Clin Neurophysiol 120,2008 –2039.
Rothwell, J. C., Thompson, P. D., Day, B. L., Boyd, S., & Marsden, C. D. (1991). Stimulation
of the human motor cortex through the scalp. Exp Physiol 76, 159–200.
Rowny, S. B., Benzl, K., & Lisanby, S. H. (2009). Translational development strategy for
magnetic seizure therapy. Exp Neurol 219,27 –35.
Sachdev, P. S., Loo, C. K., Mitchell, P. B., McFarquhar, T. F., & Malhi, G. S. (2007). Repetitive
transcranialmagnetic stimulation for thetreatmentof obsessive compulsive disorder:
A double-blind controlled investigation. Psychol Med 37,1645 –1649.
Sachdev, P. S., McBride, R., Loo, C. K., Mitchell, P. B., Malhi, G. S., & Croker, V. M. (2001).
Right versus left prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation for obsessive–
compulsive disorder: A preliminary investigation. JClinPsychiatry62 ,981 –984.
Silbersweig, D. A., Stern, E., Frith, C., Cahill, C., Holmes, A., Grootoonk, S., et al.
(1995). A functional neuroanatomy of hallucinations in schizophrenia. Nature
378, 176–179.
Silva, S., Basser, P. J., & Miranda, P. C. (2008). Elucidating the mechanisms and loci of
neuronal excitation by transcranial magnetic stimulation using a finite element
model of a cortical sulcus. Clin Neurophysiol 119, 2405–2413.
Silvanto,J.,Muggleton,N.G.,Cowey,A.,&Walsh,V.(2007).Neuralactivationstate
determines behavioral susceptibility to modified theta burst transcranial magnetic
stimulation.Eur J Neurosci 26,523 –528.
Silvanto, J., Muggleton, N. G., Cowey, A., & Walsh, V. (2007). Neural adaptation reveals
state-dependent effects of transcranial magnetic stimulation. Eur J Neurosci 25,
1874–1881.
Slotema, C. W., Blom, J. D., Hoek, H. W., & Sommer, I. E. (2010). Should we expand the
toolbox of psychiatric treatment methods to include Repetitive Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation (rTMS)? A meta-analysis of the efficacy of rTMS in psychiatric
disorders.JClinPsychiatry71 ,873 –884.
Strafella, A. P., Paus, T., Barrett, J., & Dagher, A. (2001). Repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation of the human prefrontal cortex induces dopamine release in the 
caudate nucleus. J Neurosci 21 ,RC157.
Strafella, A. P., Paus, T., Fraraccio, M., & Dagher, A. (2003). Striatal dopamine release
induced by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human motor
cortex. Brain 126, 2609–2615.
Takeuchi, N., Tada, T., Toshima, M., Chuma, T., Matsuo, Y., & Ikoma, K. (2008). Inhibition
of the unaffected motor cortex by 1 Hz repetitive transcranical magnetic stimulation
enhances motor performance and training effect of the paretic hand in patients with
chronic stroke.J Rehabil Med 40,298 –303.
Terao, Y., Ugawa, Y., Suzuki, M., Sakai, K., Hanajima, R., Gemba-Shimizu, K., et al.
(1997). Shortening of simple reaction time by peripheral electrical and
submotor-threshold magnetic cortical stimulation. Exp Brain Res 115, 541–545.
Tranulis, C., Sepehry, A. A., Galinowski, A., & Stip, E. (2008). Should we treat auditory
hallucinations with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation? A metaanalysis.
Can J Psychiatry 53, 577–586.
Tsubokawa, T., Katayama, Y., Yamamoto, T., Hirayama, T., & Koyama, S. (1993). Chronic
motor cortex stimulation in patients with thalamic pain. J Neurosurg 78, 393–401.
Wassermann, E. M. (1998). Risk and safety of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation:
report and recommendations from the International Workshop on the safety of
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation June 5–7, 1996. Electroencephalogr
Clin Neurophysiol 108,1 –16.
Wassermann, E. M., Grafman, J., Berry, C., Hollnagel, C., Wild, K., Clark, K., et al. 
(1996). Use and safety of a new repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulator.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 101,412 –417.
Wassermann, E. M., & Lisanby, S. H. (2001). Therapeutic application of repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation: A review. Clin Neurophysiol 112, 1367–1377.
106 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1038147082)
Weissman, J. D., Epstein, C. M., & Davey, K. R. (1992). Magnetic brain stimulation and
brain size: Relevance to animal studies. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 85,
215–219.
Werhahn, K. J., Fong, J. K., Meyer, B. U., Priori, A., Rothwell, J. C., Day, B. L., et al. (1994).
The effect of magnetic coil orientation on the latency of surface EMG and single
motor unit responses in the first dorsal interosseous muscle. Electroencephalogr
Clin Neurophysiol 93, 138–146.
Zangen, A., Roth, Y., Voller, B., & Hallett, M. (2005). Transcranial magnetic stimulation
of deep brain regions: Evidence for efficacy of the H-coil. Clin Neurophysiol 116,
775–779.
Ziemann, U., Rothwell, J. C., & Ridding, M. C. (1996). Interaction between intracortical
inhibition and facilitation in human motor cortex. J Physiol (Lond) 496, 873–881.
107 E.M. Wassermann, T. Zimmermann / Pharmacology & Therapeutics 133 (2012) 98–107
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1808675010)
