Original Article

Comparison of USPIO-enhanced MRI and
Gd-DTPA enhancement during the
subacute stage of focal cerebral ischemia
in rats

Acta Radiologica
2014, Vol. 55(7) 864–873
! The Foundation Acta Radiologica
2013
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0284185113506140
acr.sagepub.com

Yan Mei Yang1, XiaoYuan Feng1, Le Kang Yin1, Chan Chan Li1,
Jie Jia2 and Zun Guo Du3

Abstract
Background: Being one class of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) contrast agents, ultrasmall superparamagnetic particles of iron oxides (USPIO) bear the potential to study neuroinflammation following stroke, but there is still debate over
whether the iron oxides particles may enter the brain tissue passively over a damaged blood–brain barrier (BBB).
Purpose: To compare the enhancement patterns of USPIO and gadopentate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA) during the
subacute stage of focal cerebral ischemia, to examine the relationship between USPIO enhancement and BBB disturbance, as well as with neuroinflammatory cell response.
Material and Methods: Multiple MR sequences were obtained on days 3 and 6 after transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion induced in rats with and without the application of USPIO and Gd-DTPA. The enhancement patterns of the
two contrast agents were compared and correlated to histology, including IgG for BBB permeability, Prussian Blue
staining for iron particle detection, and CD68 immunohistochemistry staining to identify macrophage/microglia.
Results: Gd-DTPA enhancement depicted BBB breakdown being in line with IgG leakage. The USPIO enhanced images
demonstrated both diffuse and focal signal alteration in ischemic lesions. The diffuse enhanced pattern had a similar
spatial and temporal profile as with Gd-DTPA enhancement. In addition, focal enhanced signal loss was visible on T1-,
T2-, and T2*-weighted images, with a peak tendency of MR signal loss, macrophage/microglia concentration and iron
particle accumulation at a later phase of the study.
Conclusion: After focal cerebral ischemia, Gd-DTPA-enhanced MRI showed a higher sensitivity in detecting BBB
alterations than did USPIO enhancement. USPIO provided complementary information regarding inflammatory cell
activity in neuroinflammatory to cerebral ischemia that had not been visualized using conventional Gd-DTPA. The
assessment using multiple MR parameters may identify intracellular and extracellular USPIO in vivo.

Keywords
Focal cerebral ischemia, neuroinflammation, blood brain barrier, USPIO, Gd-DTPA, magnetic resonance imaging
Date received: 13 July 2013; accepted: 1 September 2013

Introduction
Being a versatile imaging modality, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) enables non-invasive and longitudinal
monitoring of stroke-induced abnormalities in brain
morphology, physiology, and function, both in patients
and in animal models. Furthermore, the additional use
of MR paramagnetic contrast agents allows the complementary assessment of vascular ﬂow, tissue perfusion and blood–brain barrier (BBB) integrity.
Importantly, the potential of MRI to detect cellular

1
Department of Radiology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
PR China
2
Department of Rehabilitation, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, PR China
3
Department of Pathology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
PR China

Corresponding author:
Yan Mei Yang, Department of Radiology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan
University, 12 Wulumuqi Zhong Road, Shanghai 200040, PR China.
Email: yym9876@sohu.com

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Yang et al.

865

and molecular events, which are critically involved in
pathophysiology and plasticity, has become imminent
due to current advancements in contrast agent design
and synthesis. For example, cellular labeling and
molecular targeting with tailored contrast agents may
enable the measurement of neuroinﬂammatory processes such as inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells and
upregulation of markers of endothelial activation. The
potential to image inﬂammatory processes may be of
particular value in elucidating the complex role of neuroinﬂammation in the progression of stroke injury, as
well as in the direct monitoring of anti-inﬂammatory
treatment eﬀects.
Recently, ultrasmall superparamagnetic particles of
iron oxides (USPIO) have evolved as one class of MRI
contrast agents, bearing the potential to study neuroinﬂammation following stroke (1–16). This technique is
based on the in vivo phagocytosis of USPIOs by activated macrophages, as well as on the in situ detection of
strong MR eﬀects induced by iron-loaded macrophages. One limitation of such an approach, though,
is the potentially confounding eﬀects of free iron oxides
nanoparticles on the MR signal. Indeed, there is still
debate over whether the iron oxides particles may enter
the brain tissue passively over a damaged BBB.
Here, we investigate the distribution patterns and
kinetics of USPIO enhancement at the subacute stage
of focal cerebral ischemia, during which the inﬁltration
of macrophage is very strong, in comparison to gadopentate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA) enhanced MRI,
which is widely applied for the visualization of BBB
breakdown in focal cerebral ischemia. The enhancement patterns of the two contrast agents were compared and correlated to histology, including IgG for
BBB permeability, Prussian Blue staining for iron particle detection and CD68 immunohistochemistry staining to identify macrophage/microglia. We aimed to
examine the relationship between USPIO enhancement
and BBB disturbance, as well as with neuroinﬂammatory cell response, and to test the feasibility of multiple
MR sequences to identify intracellular and extracellular
iron particles.

Material and Methods
Animals
All animal procedures were performed in accordance
with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

Protocol
Healthy adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (weight, 180–
230 g) from the Shanghai Medical College of Fudan

University were selected in this study. The rats were
subjected to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO). Three-dimensional (3D) magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA) was used to identify the substance
of the cerebral arteries during MCA occlusion and
repatency. Twelve rats with successful MCAO determined by MRA after stroke induction were selected
for further analysis.
The animals were divided into USPIO day 3, USPIO
day 6, control day 3, and control day 6 stroke groups,
and there were three rats in each group. The MR T1(T1W), T2- (T2W), and T2*-weighted (T2*W) imaging
and T1, T2, and T2* mapping were performed on days
3 and 6 post-stroke, respectively, using a 3.0 Tesla clinical MR scanner. At 24 h before MR examination,
USPIO (SH U 555 C, Bayer Schering Pharma AG,
Berlin, Germany) were injected via the femoral vein
at a dosage of 0.8 mmol Fe/kg of body weight to the
USPIO groups. The same dose of 0.9% sodium chloride was administered intravenously to the control
MCAO rats. All control stroke animals received intravenous injections of Gd-DTPA (0.2 mmol/kg of body
weight, Magnevist, Bayer Schering Pharma AG, Berlin,
Germany) before enhanced T1W imaging. The anesthesia was induced with an intra-peritoneal injection of
chloral hydrate (350–400 mg/kg). Rectal temperature
was monitored and kept at 37  0.5 C using the controlled water ﬂow system throughout the procedure and
MR scanning. After the MRI, brains were removed and
processed for histological examination.

Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
Transient MCAO was induced with an intraluminal
suture under a surgical microscope as previously
described (17). The left external carotid artery (ECA)
was ligated and transected to create an ECA stump
with a length of approximately 5 mm. A nylon ﬁlament
of the diameter 0.24 mm with a rounded tip was introduced into the ECA stump. The suture was advanced
into the internal carotid artery (ICA) around
18.0  1.0 cm beyond the carotid bifurcation to block
the blood ﬂow to MCA until it encountered a mild
resistance. Post-ischemic reperfusion was undergone
at 90 min after MCAO by removing the suture until
its tip reached the ECA stump.

Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI was conducted on a clinical whole-body scanner
(Magnetom Verio system, Siemens, Erlangen,
Germany), which was equipped with a 3.0 Tesla superconducting magnet and a 45 mT/m self-shielding gradient system. The gradient switch rate was 200 mT/m. RF
transmission and reception was performed with a

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

866

Acta Radiologica 55(7)

4-channel phased array coil. MRA, T1W, T2W, and
T2*W imaging, as well as T1, T2, and T2* mapping,
were also performed.
The MRA scanning parameters were as follows: TR,
27 ms; TE, 4.0 ms; ﬂip angle, 30 ; slice thickness, 6 mm;
ﬁeld of view (FOV), 80  80 mm; matrix, 192  320;
and scanning time, 3 min 56 s. The parameters for the
T1W, T2W, and T2*W imaging and T1, T2, T2* mappings were designed to provide the same slice thickness
(2 mm), slice gap (0 mm), FOV (120  100 mm2), matrix
(768  768), and resolution (0.5  0.5 mm2). The T1
TSE FS sequence parameters were as follows: TR,
600 ms; TE, 12 ms; FA, 130 ; average, 10; scanning
time, 3 min 16 s. The T1 FLIP sequence was used for
T1 mapping. The parameters were as follows: TR,
15 ms; TE, 3.5 ms; FA, 5 , 26 ; average, 5; scanning
time, 6 min 7 s. The T2 TSE sequence parameters were
as follows: TR, 5000 ms; TE, 84 ms; FA, 120 ; average,
3; scanning time, 4 min 57 s. The MapIt sequence was
used with ﬁve echoes for T2 mapping. The parameters
were as follows: TR, 800 ms; TE, 11.8, 23.6, 35.4, 47.2,
59 ms; FA, 180 ; average, 2; scanning time, 5 min 30 s.
The T2 Flash 2D sequence parameters for T2*WI were
as follows: TR, 400 ms; TE, 16 ms; FA, 20 ; average, 3;
scanning time, 3 min 52 s. The MapIt sequence was used
with ﬁve echoes for the T2* mapping. The parameters
were as follows: TR, 445 ms; TE, 4.4, 11.9, 19.7, 27.3,
34.8 ms; FA, 60 ; average, 2; scanning time, 5 min 43 s.

MRI analysis
The MR digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM) images were transferred from PACS
(picture archive and communications system) to a separate personal computer (MacPro, Apple, Cupertino,
CA, USA). OsiriX (version 4.1, OsiriX Foundation,
Geneva, Switzerland), a free and open source postprocessing and fusion software tool (free download from
http://www.osirix-viewer.com), was utilized. The
OsiriX volume-rendering algorithm was used to produce the 3D maximum intensity projection (MIP)
reconstruction of the MR angiograms. For the quantiﬁcation analysis, the sync series analyze tool was used
to synchronize the cursor on T2W or T1W imaging to
the T1, T2, and T2* maps on the same slice image,
which was located between þ 0.3 and 0.8 cm from
the bregma. Four regions of interest (ROI) were
drawn on the ischemic and contralateral striatum, as
well as on the ischemic and contralateral cortex. ROIs
were visually matched to perfection between sequences
to avoid the outermost pixels and to minimize partial
volume eﬀects. The ROI analyze tool was used to store
the ROIs and to determine the average T1, T2, and T2*
relaxation time (ms) and standard deviation values
from each region.

Tissue processing and immunohistochemistry
At the conclusion of the ﬁnal imaging experiment,
the rats were deeply anesthetized. Brains were removed
rapidly and immersion-ﬁxed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buﬀer and embedded in
paraﬃn at 4 C until use. Subsequently, coronal sections
corresponding to each MRI slice image were cut by
microtome and stained for CD68 immunohistochemistry, immunoglobulin (IgG), Prussian Blue (PB),
and hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Phagocytes
were detected by standard diaminobenzidine (DAB)
immunohistochemistry with the CD68 monoclonal
antibody (Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA). IgG
immunostaining was performed to visualize plasma
molecules that had entered the brain through a disrupted BBB. For the iron detection, sections were
stained with PB.
The number of CD68 stained cells was counted ( 400)
using a computerized image-analysis system composed of
a NIS camera, installed on an Olympus light microscope
and attached to a personal computer. Data were
expressed as the mean  standard deviation numbers of
cells (i.e. cell numbers per high power ﬁeld/hpf).

Statistical analysis
All results were expressed as group mean  standard
deviation of the mean. P < 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant. The T1, T2, and T2* relaxation time
values and CD68 positive cell density were compared
using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).

Results
Assessment of BBB disruption with Gd-DTPA
enhanced T1W image and diffusion of
immunoglobulins (IgG)
To test the hypothesis of USPIO leakage through a
damaged BBB, BBB disruption was ﬁrst assessed by
Gd-DTPA-enhanced MRI and IgG staining. In the
control MCAO rats without USPIO injection, a reproducible ischemic lesion in the caudate-putamen and
cortex exhibited a slightly hypointense signal (Fig. 1a)
with an increased T1 relaxation time in the ischemic
striatum and cortex. After Gd-DTPA enhancement,
the T1 signal was distinctly increased throughout the
whole lesion both on days 3 (Fig. 1b) and 6 (Fig. 1c),
while the T1 relaxation time was signiﬁcantly decreased
when compared to the corresponding contralateral
region (P < 0.05). On histology, areas of BBB breakdown detected by Gd-DTPA enhancement were consistent with the regions of edema and necrosis on
H&E staining (Fig. 1d), while disruption of the BBB
was conﬁrmed via IgG staining (Fig. 1e, f).

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Yang et al.

867

Fig. 1. MR T1W imaging (a), Gd-DTPA-enhanced T1W imaging (b, day 3; c, day 6), H&E staining (d, day 3) and IgG staining (e, day 3; f,
day 6) of representative post-stroke rats. The T1W imaging demonstrates the hypointensity signal in ischemic striatum and cortex (a).
After Gd-DTPA administration, marked enhancement is visible in the ischemic lesion (b, c), in accordance with the pale area on H&E
staining section (d), and with a significant obvious tendency on day 3 than day 6, which is confirmed by the IgG staining (e, f).

Compared with the diﬀerent time points, Gd-DTPAenhanced T1 relaxation time was signiﬁcantly shorter
on day 3 than on day 6 (P < 0.05). The extent of IgG
leakage was in spatial agreement with the T1-enhanced
hyperintense signal areas, while the degree on day 3
(Fig. 1e) was greater than on day 6 (Fig. 1f).

Delineation of the pattern of USPIO enhancement
and the histological distribution of phagocytes and
iron particles
In MCAO rats with USPIO administration, the T1W
and T2W images on day 3 demonstrated a diﬀuse and
slightly abnormal signal covering the ischemic striatum
and cortex (Fig. 2a, b). The quantitative analysis of the
MRI revealed that the T1 and T2 relaxation times were
shorter with signiﬁcance in the ischemic tissues than in
the corresponding contralateral regions (P < 0.05). The
T2* values (Fig. 2c) were slightly shorter without signiﬁcance than those in the intact regions (P > 0.05).
Compared with the control MCAO rats (Fig. 2d, e,
f), T1 and T2 relaxation times in the ischemia striatum
and cortex were signiﬁcantly reduced after USPIO
injection (P < 0.05). On day 6, the pattern of diﬀuse
alteration in the MR T1 signal was less obvious than
on day 3, while the short T2 eﬀect was similar to that
on day 3 (Fig. 3a–c).
Apart from the diﬀuse pattern of reduced T1 and T2
relaxation times, USPIO induced a focal signal change
in the ischemic lesion as well. On day 3, T1W, T2W,
and T2*W imaging demonstrated signal loss foci with a

patchy appearance in the ischemic territory, especially
in the ischemic cortex, as well as in the striatum near
the cerebral base and corpus callosum (Fig. 2a–c). The
extent of the signal loss was more signiﬁcantly exhibited
on T2*W imaging than on T2W or T1W imaging.
T2*W sequences were most sensitive for the detection
of signal loss. On day 6, there were more signal loss foci
on T1W (Fig. 3a), T2W (Fig. 3b), and T2*W imaging
(Fig. 3c) than on day 3, while the distribution of signal
loss was in agreement with that on day 3.
The histologic distribution of CD68 immunopositive
phagocytes and iron staining at the subacute phase following focal cerebral ischemia is illustrated in Fig. 4. In
the 3-day groups, CD68 positive cells were observed
covering the ischemic region (Fig. 4a). A majority of
these phagocytes showed ramiﬁed processes (Fig. 4b).
The distribution of positive cells was heterogeneous,
with more intensive cell proliferation in the cortex
near the meninges, surrounding the corpus callosum
and in the inner part of the ipsilateral striatum. The
positive cell numbers/hpf of the above regions were signiﬁcantly higher than in the other ischemic region
(P < 0.05). In the 6-day groups, cellular response inﬁltration was more obvious in the ischemic region,
accompanied by local tissue liquefaction (Fig. 4d).
The dominant cell morphology of these phagocytes
was round (Fig. 4e). The distribution of positive cell
proliferation in the ischemic region was similar to the
presentation in the 3-day groups, although CD68 positive cell numbers/hpf of all regions after 6 days were
more than the densities of the corresponding regions

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

868

Acta Radiologica 55(7)

Fig. 2. The T1 map (a, d), T2W imaging (b, e), and T2*W imaging (c, f) on day 3 post-stroke with (a, b, c) and without (d, e, f) USPIO
injection. With USPIO enhancement, diffuse reduced T1 (a) and T2 (b) relaxation time shows throughout the ischemic striatum and
cortex, and focal signal loss exhibits within the ischemic lesion (a, b, c) on day 3 post-stroke. In control MCAO rats, the ischemic lesion
demonstrates the prolonged T1 (d), T2 (e), and T2* (f) relaxation time.

Fig. 3. The T1 map (a, d), T2W imaging (b, e), and T2*W imaging (c, f) on day 6 post-stroke with (a, b, c) and without (d, e, f) USPIO
injection. With USPIO administration, the diffuse enhancement pattern is less significant than that on day 3, but there are more
hypointensity signal foci can be observed on day 6 post-stroke than day 3 all on T1W imaging (a), T2W imaging (b), and T2*W imaging
(c). The ischemic lesion demonstrates the prolonged T1 (d), T2 (e), and T2* (f) relaxation time in control MCAO rats.

after 3 days (P < 0.05). There were no notable CD68
positive cells in the corresponding striatum and cortex
of the contralateral hemisphere in either group.
Between with and without USPIO-injected groups at
the same time points, statistical analysis indicated no

signiﬁcant diﬀerences (P > 0.05). Careful analysis of the
relationship between MR and CD68 staining sections
revealed that the distribution of USPIO-induced signal
loss foci was mostly within the distribution of the compressed areas of CD68 positive cells (Fig. 5).

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Yang et al.

869

Fig. 4. The CD68 immunohistochemistry (a, b, d, e) and Prussian Blue (c, f) staining sections on day 3 (a, b, c) and day 6 (d, e, f). The
CD68 immunopositive cells cover the ischemic lesion with a compressed zone in the cortex near the meninges, surrounding the
corpus callosum and in the inner part of the ipsilateral striatum. The positive cell density on day 6 (d, e) was more than day 3 (a, b). In
the Prussian Blue staining section on MCAO 3 days with USPIO administration, only a few single cells are seen in the ischemic striatum
and cortex (c). On day 6, iron stain cells are in small clusters (f).

Fig. 5. The T2*W imaging (a, b, c) with USPIO enhancement and CD68 immunohistochemistry staining section (d) on day 3 poststroke. The USPIO-induced signal loss foci are within the distribution of compressed areas of CD68 immunopositive cells.

In the ischemic brain after 3 days with USPIO
administration, the average number of PB positive
cells was surprisingly low, with only a few single cells
seen in the ischemic striatum and cortex (Fig. 4c). After
6 days, iron-stained cells were observed in small clusters, although the maximal number of these cells never

exceeded 6–8 cells/hpf in any of the examined brain
sections. Generally, the iron particles were most localized in the CD68 immunopositive cell concentrated
areas; they were far less than the number of CD68 positive cells and that in the areas of USPIO-induced MR
signal change (Fig. 4c, f).

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

870

Acta Radiologica 55(7)

Fig. 6. The column diagrams of T1 relaxation time (a), T2 relaxation time (b), T2* relaxation time (c), and the number of CD68
immunopositive cell/hpf (d) on days 3 and 6 post-stroke. *P < 0.05, T1, T2, and T2 relaxation time in ischemic region vs. contralat (a, b,
c), positive cells numbers/hpf (d) in the cortex near the meninges, surrounding the corpus callosum and in the inner part of the
ipsilateral striatum vs. other ischemic region. #P < 0.05, region on day 6 vs. corresponding region on day 3.

The statistical analysis for the T1, T2, and T2* relaxation times, as well as the number of CD68 positive
cell/hpf, is illustrated in Fig. 6.

Discussion
This study investigated and compared the kinetics and
characterizations of Gd-DTPA and USPIO enhancement at the subacute phase following middle cerebral
artery occlusion. Gd-DTPA enhancement depicted
BBB breakdown, which covered the whole ischemic
lesion being consistent with IgG leakage, and which

was more obvious on day 3 than on day 6 poststroke. The USPIO-enhanced images demonstrated
both diﬀuse and focal patterns of signal alteration in
the ischemic lesion. The diﬀuse enhanced pattern had a
similar spatial and temporal proﬁle as with Gd-DTPA
enhancement. In addition, focal enhanced signal loss
was visible on T1W, T2W, and T2*W images, with a
peak tendency of MR signal loss, macrophage/microglia concentration and iron particle accumulation at a
later phase of the study.
As a conventional contrast agent, Gd-DTPA does
not cross an intact BBB and can thus be used to

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Yang et al.

871

detect BBB leakage. After focal cerebral ischemia, BBB
impairment is a long-term pathophysiological process
(18). During the subacute stage after stroke, the disturbance of BBB integrity was conﬁrmed by GdDTPA-enhanced T1W image and IgG staining in the
present work. In contrast, after USPIO administration,
a diﬀuse and slightly increased T1 signal intensity and a
decreased T2 signal intensity throughout the ischemic
striatum and cortex was demonstrated both qualitatively and quantitatively. This observed result is consistent with work by Farr et al. (11). The present diﬀuse
pattern of USPIO enhancement might be interpreted as
the free dispersed iron particles in the ischemic lesion.
First, free USPIO has been described in detail to have
higher T1 and T2 relaxivities compared to intracellular
USPIO compartmentalized in monocytes (19,20).
Second, there are distinct mismatches between the diffuse enhancement and the PB positive foci. A previous
study had suggested that PB staining might lack the
sensitivity to interstitial iron oxides particles (i.e. as
opposed to iron compartmentalized in vessels or in
cells) (21). As such, our results further show that iron
particles are not only in the cells, but also partly located
in the interstitial substance of an ischemic lesion.
Finally, the area of extended USPIO enhancement is
spatially related to the damaged region of the BBB.
These above mentioned factors suggest that the diﬀuse
enhanced pattern might be due to the extracellular
USPIO and that these iron particles may enter the
brain tissue passively by leakage over a damaged BBB.
In addition to the diﬀuse enhancement, USPIOinduced focal T1, T2, and T2* signal loss may have
been due to the intracellular compartmentalization of
the iron particles. There are three aspects of this ﬁnding
that need to be addressed. The ﬁrst is that the intracellular compartmentalization restricts water diﬀusion
and/or particle diﬀusion, thereby inducing the T1, T2,
and T2* signal loss of the USPIO in the cells (12,19,20).
The second explanation relates to the PB-positive cells
that exist in a cluster appearance, which corresponds to
the focal distribution of the MR signal loss. Because of
the magnetic susceptibility eﬀects, the internalization of
USPIO may have resulted in signiﬁcant ﬁeld distortions. The signal loss arising from such ﬁeld distortions
leads to negative contrast. Generally, the volume of the
MR signal change is a bit larger than the PB positive
area. The third aspect deals with the relationship
between the MR signal loss foci and the macrophage/
microglia response. Although the contribution of the
activated resident microglia versus that of inﬁltrating
macrophages to ischemic brain damage is diﬃcult to
deﬁne, because of similar immune-phenotypes and
other histological characteristics of these cells (22,23),
experiments with bone marrow chimeric mice have
indicated signiﬁcant diﬀerences in terms of the ratio

and contribution of the resident microglia versus
exogenous inﬁltrating macrophages subsequent to
ischemic inﬂammatory processes (24,25). Resident
brain microglia with a ramiﬁed morphology changes
to a reactive phagocytic phenotype within 3–4 days,
after which the major wave of macrophages inﬁltration
is delayed by 5–7 days. As such, the present USPIOinduced focal T1, T2, and T2* signal dynamic alteration is, to some degree, in accordance with the
temporal and spatial variations of the macrophages.
However, our results showed that the MR signal loss
foci and PB positive cells were far less than the CD68
immuno-positive area, in spite of being located in it,
especially in the compressed zones. A possible explanation is that USPIO enhancement may reﬂect a speciﬁc
iron-laden subpopulation of CD68 positive macrophages. In addition, as discussed above, because the
integrity of the BBB is compromised after stoke, it is
conceivable that MR signals were induced by the other
iron-laden cells that were already present in the CNS at
the time of USPIO administration, and that the uptake
of iron particles crossed the BBB passively.
In fact, our data have also showed that inﬂammatory responses to cerebral ischemia are often accompanied by enhanced BBB permeability, thereby resulting
in interstitial USPIO accumulation that is not necessarily directly related to the cellular inﬂammatory
response. Meanwhile, BBB breakdown and inﬂammatory cell inﬁltration are not necessarily linked with
respect to the temporal change tendency, which suggests that the cerebral build-up of iron particles could
not be solely attributed to extravasation over the
damaged BBB (1,3,6,15,16) but also to a neuroinﬂammatory phagocytosis process. Therefore, the MRI characteristics and pharmacokinetics of USPIO are far
more complex than those of the standard extracellular
contrast agents such as Gd-DTPA.
However, it should be noted that USPIO-enhanced
MRI is critically dependent on the contrast agent
applied, the magnetic ﬁeld, the timing of injection relative to stroke onset and the delay of the subsequent
MRI scans. Here, USPIO were injected on days 2 and
5 post-stroke. MRI was performed after a time lapse of
24 h to reduce the possibility that USPIO were trapped
in occluded vessels at the early stages (within hours) (7).
This was also done to eliminate the blood pool eﬀect of
USPIO, as the half-life of SH U 555 C blood in rats is
about 6 h (25–28). We employed a clinical whole-body 3
T MR scanner, which makes possible the interpretation
that USPIO-induced signal alteration can be easily
applied to other future experimental or clinical studies.
Indeed, we were unable to provide more direct evidence
to trace the iron particles after administration.
Nevertheless, we conducted multiple MR sequences to
evaluate the eﬀects of USPIO compartmentalization to

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

872

Acta Radiologica 55(7)

assess the relationship between neuroinﬂammation and
BBB impairment. The present results regarding the
characterizations of the signal alteration of intracellular
and extracellular USPIO in vivo, may be utilized to
assess cellular and molecular MRI in vitro that are
labeled with iron particles, to monitor in vivo neuroinﬂammation dynamics after focal cerebral ischemia, as
well as to evaluate the therapeutic strategy thereafter.
In conclusion, after focal cerebral ischemia, GdDTPA-enhanced MRI showed a higher sensitivity in
detecting BBB alterations than did USPIO enhancement. USPIO provided complementary information
regarding inﬂammatory cell activity in neuroinﬂammatory to cerebral ischemia that had not been visualized
using conventional Gd-DTPA. The assessment using
multiple MR parameters may identify intracellular
and extracellular USPIO in vivo.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the contribution and endeavor of
Tong Jin Sun.

Funding
The study was supported by Shanghai Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 09ZR1405100) and National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 81371521).

References
1. Denes A, Vidyasagar R, Feng J, et al. Proliferating resident microglia after focal cerebral ischaemia in mice. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2007;27:1941–1953.
2. Cho TH, Nighoghossian N, Wiart M, et al. USPIOEnhanced MRI of neuroinflammation at the sub-acute
stage of ischemic stroke: preliminary data. Cerebrovasc
Dis 2007;24:544–546.
3. Nighoghossian N, Wiart M, Cakmak S, et al.
Inflammatory response after ischemic stroke: a
USPIO-enhanced MRI study in patients. Stroke 2007;38:
303–307.
4. Rausch M, Sauter A, Frohlich J, et al. Dynamic patterns
of USPIO enhancement can be observed in macrophages
after ischemic brain damage. Magn Reson Med
2001;46:1018–1022.
5. Schroeter M, Saleh A, Wiedermann D, et al.
Histochemical detection of ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO) contrast medium uptake in
experimental brain ischemia. Magn Reson Med 2004;52:
403–406.
6. Kleinschnitz C, Bendszus M, Frank M, et al. In vivo monitoring of macrophage infiltration in experimental ischemic
brain lesions by magnetic resonance imaging. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2003;23:1356–1361.
7. Kleinschnitz C, Schutz A, Nolte I, et al. In vivo detection
of developing vessel occlusion in photothrombotic ischemic brain lesions in the rat by iron particle enhanced MRI.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2005;25:1548–1555.

8. Engberink RD, Blezer EL, Hoff EI, et al. MRI of monocyte infiltration in an animal model of neuroinflammation using SPIO-labeled monocytes or free USPIO.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2008;28:841–851.
9. Saleh A, Wiedermann D, Schroeter M, et al. Central nervous system inflammatory response after cerebral infarction as detected by magnetic resonance imaging. NMR
Biomed 2004;17:163–169.
10. Rausch M, Baumann D, Neubacher U, et al. In-vivo
visualization of phagocytotic cells in rat brains after transient
ischemia
by
USPIO.
NMR
Biomed
2002;15:278–283.
11. Farr TD, Seehafer JU, Nelles M, et al. Challenges
towards MR imaging of the peripheral inflammatory
response in the subacute and chronic stages of transient
focal ischemia. NMR Biomed 2011;24:35–45.
12. Kim J, Kim DI, Lee SK, et al. Imaging of the inflammatory response in reperfusion injury after transient cerebral
ischemia in rats: correlation of superparamagnetic iron
oxide-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging with histopathology. Acta Radiol 2008;49:580–588.
13. Desestret V, Brisset JC, Moucharrafie S, et al. Earlystage investigations of ultrasmall superparamagnetic
iron oxide-induced signal change after permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion in mice. Stroke 2009;
40:1834–1841.
14. Wiart M, Davoust N, Pialat JB, et al. MRI monitoring of
neuroinflammation in mouse focal ischemia. Stroke
2007;38:131–137.
15. Saleh A, Schroeter M, Jonkmanns C, et al. In vivo MRI
of brain inflammation in human ischaemic stroke. Brain
2004;127:1670–1677.
16. Saleh A, Schroeter M, Ringelstein A, et al. Iron oxide
particle-enhanced MRI suggests variability of brain
inflammation at early stages after ischemic stroke.
Stroke 2007;38:2733–2737.
17. Yang YM, Feng XY, Yao ZW, et al. Magnetic resonance
angiography of carotid and cerebral arterial occlusion in
rats using a clinical scanner. J Neurosci Meth
2008;167:176–183.
18. Sekeljic V, Bataveljic D, Stamenkovic S, et al. Cellular
markers of neuroinflammation and neurogenesis after
ischemic brain injury in the long-term survival rat
model. Brain Struct Funct 2012;217:411–420.
19. Simon GH, Bauer H, Saborovski O, et al. T1 and T2
relaxivity of intracellular and extracellular USPIO at
1.5T and 3T clinical MR scanning. Eur Radiol
2006;16:738–745.
20. Brisset JC, Desestret V, Marcellino S, et al. Quantitative
effects of cell internalization of two types of ultrasmall
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles at 4.7 T and
7 T. Eur Radiol 2010;20:275–285.
21. Stroh A, Zimmer C, Werner N, et al. Tracking of systematically administrated mononuclear cells in the ischemic
brain by high-field magnetic resonance imaging.
Neuroimage 2006;33:886–897.
22. Schroeter M, Jander S, Witte OW, et al. Local immune
responses in the rat cerebral cortex after middle cerebral
artery occlusion. J Neuroimmunol 1994;55:195–203.

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

Yang et al.

873

23. Stoll G, Jander S. The role of microglia and macrophages
in the pathophysiology of the CNS. Prog Neurobiol
1999;58:233–247.
24. Zhang Z, Dharmakumar R, Mascheri N, et al.
Comparison of superparamagnetic and ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide cell labelling for tracking green
fluorescent protein gene marker with negative and positive contrast magnetic resonance imaging. Mol Imaging
2009;8:148–155.
25. Schilling M, Besselmann M, Muller M, et al.
Predominant phagocytic activity of resident microglia
over hematogenous macrophages following transient
focal cerebral ischemia: an investigation using green
fluorescent protein transgenic bone marrow chimeric
mice. Exp Neurol 2005;196:290–297.

26. Reimer P, Bremer C, Allkemper T, et al. Myocardial perfusion and MR angiography of chest with SH U 555 C:
results of placebo-controlled clinical phase I study.
Radiology 2004;231:474–481.
27. Allkemper T, Bremer C, Matuszewski L, et al. Contrastenhanced blood-pool MR angiography with optimized
iron oxides: effect of size and dose on vascular contrast
enhancement in rabbits. Radiology 2002;223:432–438.
28. Tombach B, Reimer P, Bremer C, et al. First-pass and
equilibrium-MRA of the aortoiliac region with a superparamagnetic iron oxide blood pool MR contrast agent
(SH U 555 C): results of a human pilot study. NMR
Biomed 2004;3:500–506.

Downloaded from acr.sagepub.com at The University of Edinburgh on October 4, 2016

