[Link]
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1007/s00221-015-4390-x&domain=pdf
1 3
Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
DOI 10.1007/s00221-015-4390-x
RESEARCH ARTICLE
Evidence for a role of the reticulospinal system in recovery 
of skilled reaching after cortical stroke: initial results  
from a model of ischemic cortical injury
Wendy J. Herbert1,2,5 · Kimerly Powell3 · John A. Buford1,2,4
Received: 28 March 2015 / Accepted: 13 July 2015 / Published online: 1 August 2015 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015
shoulder/elbow representation in the lesioned M1 remained 
completely absent after recovery, and there was a little 
change in the contralesional M1. There was a definite difference
in motor output patterns for left versus right PMRF 
for this subject, with an increase in right arm responses 
from right PMRF and a paucity of left arm responses from 
left PMRF. The results are consistent with increased reliance
on PMRF motor outputs for recovery of voluntary 
upper limb motor control after significant cortical ischemic 
injury.
Keywords Upper extremity · Stroke · Hemiparesis
Introduction
Stroke is a leading cause of permanent, long-term disability 
(Go et al. 2014), and reduced arm function is particularly 
detrimental to quality of life (Nichols-Larsen et al. 2005). 
Enhanced understanding of mechanisms for recovery from 
stroke is required to develop more effective therapies. Current
studies focus primarily on the role of cortical plasticity
for improved hand function (Butefisch et al. 2005; Dancause
et al. 2005, 2006; Dancause and Nudo 2011; Frost 
et al. 2003; Liepert et al. 2000; Nudo and Milliken 1996; 
Tecchio et al. 2006). For many stroke survivors, reaching 
itself is severely impaired, constrained to gross, stereotyped
, whole-limb flexion or extension patterns known as 
synergies (Dewald et al. 1995; Ellis et al. 2007, 2005).
These synergies are consistent with the normal motor 
outputs of reticulospinal cells in the pontomedullary 
reticular formation (PMRF) of the macaque (Davidson 
and Buford 2004, 2006; Davidson et al. 2007). Evidence 
from cat and primate studies shows that even in the intact 
nervous system, reticulospinal neurons are involved in 
Abstract The purposes of this pilot study were to create 
a model of focal cortical ischemia in Macaca fascicularis
and to explore contributions of the reticulospinal system 
in recovery of reaching. Endothelin-1 was used to create 
a focal lesion in the shoulder/elbow representation of left 
primary motor cortex (M1) of two adult female macaques. 
Repetitive microstimulation was used to map upper limb 
motor outputs from right and left cortical motor areas and 
from the pontomedullary reticular formation (PMRF). In 
subject 1 with a small lesion and spontaneous recovery, 
reaching was mildly impaired. Changes were evident in 
the shoulder/elbow representations of both the lesioned 
and contralesional M1, and there appeared to be fewer 
than expected upper limb responses from the left (ipsilesional
) PMRF. In subject 2 with a substantial lesion, reaching
was severely impaired immediately after the lesion. 
After 12 weeks of intensive rehabilitative training, reach 
performance recovered to near-baseline levels, but movement
times remained about 50 % slower. Surprisingly, the 
* John A. Buford 
Buford.5@osu.edu
1 Division of Physical Therapy, School of Health 
and Rehabilitation Sciences,, The Ohio State University, 453 
W. 10th Ave., Rm. 516G, Columbus, OH 43210-1234, USA
2 Health and Rehabilitation Sciences PhD Program, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
3 Small Animal Imaging Core, Davis Heart and Lung Research 
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA
4 Center for Brain and Spinal Cord Repair, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
5 Present Address: Department of Physical Therapy Education, 
Elon University, Campus Box 2085, Elon, NC 27244, USA
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
3232 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
the control of skilled reaching (Buford 1996; Buford and 
Davidson 2004; Schepens and Drew 2003). If cooperation 
between reticulospinal and corticospinal systems is a normal
characteristic of motor control, it could certainly be a 
substrate for recovery (Fig. 1).
Stroke models in non-human primates for investigation
of motor recovery include ischemic cortical lesions 
induced by electrocoagulation of surface vessels (Nudo 
and Milliken 1996; Nudo et al. 1996), vascular occlusion 
methods (Carmichael 2005; Gerriets et al. 2003; Kozuimi 
et al. 1986) and permanent lesion methods by ablation 
of cortical tissue (McNeal et al. 2010) or ibotenic acid 
injections (Kaeser et al. 2010; Liu and Rouiller 1999). 
The electrocoagulation approach has not been used in 
the macaque because much of the primary motor cortex 
with monosynaptic projections to motoneurons, unique 
to higher primates (Courtine et al. 2007), lies deep in the 
central sulcus (Rathelot and Strick 2009) and is not accessible
to surface coagulation. Ablation and chemical lesion 
methods are effective in macaques (Kaeser et al. 2010; 
Liu and Rouiller 1999; McNeal et al. 2010), but may not 
be representative of ischemic stroke, the most common 
etiology in humans (Go et al. 2014). An alternative is the 
induction of cortical ischemia using endothelin-1 (ET-1), 
a potent, long-acting vasoconstrictive peptide (Robinson 
et al. 1990; Yanagisawa et al. 1988). It has been found 
in rat models that ET-1 reduces cerebral blood flow to 
ischemic levels whether applied to the cortical surface 
or injected directly into cortical tissue (Biernaskie et al. 
2001; Fuxe et al. 1992; Gilmour et al. 2004; Macrae 
et al. 1993a, b; Robinson et al. 1990). ET-1 methods produced
a pattern of ischemic damage similar to traditional 
MCA occlusion models (Sharkey et al. 1993). Of these 
approaches, intracortical ET-1 injections were considered 
most suitable for the present model because this offered 
the ability to specifically target arm-related areas of the 
primary motor cortex (Fuxe et al. 1992; Gilmour et al. 
2004; Windle et al. 2006).
Therefore, the purposes of this study were to pilot a 
new model of focal cortical ischemia in the macaque using 
ET-1 and to simultaneously explore the contributions of 
the reticulospinal and corticospinal systems in recovery of 
skilled reaching. We hypothesized that if the reticulospinal
system is involved in the recovery of voluntary control 
of arm movement after stroke, then changes in its motor 
output pattern should be evident. Preliminary results from 
these studies were reported in an abstract (Herbert et al. 
2010).
Materials and methods
Overview
Figure 2 provides an overview of the experimental design 
timeline. The experimental design was structured to capture 
reach performance, imaging and electrophysiological data 
at set time points before induction of the focal ischemic 
cortical injury and during recovery.
Right Cortex Left Cortex
Right
PMRF
Left
PMRF
Right Arm Left Arm
Reticulospinal Pathways Corticospinal Pathways
M1
SMA
PMd
Ipsi Contra
Corticoreticular Pathways
PMd SMA M1
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of available alternative pathways between 
the corticospinal and reticulospinal systems for upper limb motor 
control. This drawing illustrates how, after injury to a primary motor 
cortex on the left, corticoreticular projections to PMRF from other 
non-injured cortical motor areas (ipsilesional and contralesional PMd, 
SMA, M1) could be well positioned to provide alternative pathways 
for voluntary control of arm movement. In addition, transcallosal corticocortical
connections and ipsilateral corticospinal projections could 
also contribute to recovery. SMA supplementary motor area, M1 primary
motor cortex, PMd dorsal premotor area, PMRF pontomedullary
reticular formation The boxes labeled Right Arm and Left Arm
represent spinal circuits for motor control
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of 
experimental design timeline. 
This illustration provides an 
overview of behavioral and 
physiological measurements 
administered, as described 
in “Materials and methods” 
section. Items illustrated with 
a broken line were only for 
subject 2
Baseline
Subacute
Period
(2 Weeks)
Rehabilitation
(12 Weeks)
Terminal
Procedures
Weekly
Measurements
Reaching
Early
Reaching
Measurements
MRI MRI MRI
Motor Cortex Electrophysiological
Mapping,
then Lesion with ET-1
Motor Cortex Electro-
Physiological Mapping
Motor Cortex Electro-
Physiological Mapping,
then PMRF Mapping
Final
Reaching
Measurement
Baseline
Reaching
Measurements
( 8.0.0.2542.963987651 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
3233 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
Subjects and task
Subjects were two adult female monkeys (M. fascicularis). 
Subject care complied with the NIH Guide for the Care and 
Use of Laboratory Animals and the approved animal care 
protocol for our laboratory. The animal care facilities were 
accredited by AAALAC.
The subjects were free to move about the cage, with no 
restriction against using either arm for natural cage behaviors
such as feeding, grooming and mobility. Enrichment 
items provided in the cage were carefully selected to minimize
foraging and bilateral play activities that might mimic 
the rehabilitation activity. Observations of natural cage 
behaviors were made three times a day (WJH), typically at 
mealtimes.
Behavioral reaching task
As shown in Fig. 3, subjects sat in a primate chair with the 
non-reaching hand lightly restrained while performing a 
series of reach trials into four food wells positioned in front 
of the subject at eye and waist level. The apparatus was 
centered in front of the shoulder of the arm that was reaching.
In total, there were four trial types for each arm: high 
target lateral to the body, low target lateral to the body, high 
target medial across the body and low target medial across 
the body. The food wells were instrumented with photoelectric
sensors (IDEC Corporation) to detect opening/
closing of the door and entry/exit of the hand. The subject 
was prompted by a green (“ready”) indicator light that the 
apparatus was ready. A trial began when the subject placed 
the reaching hand on a start switch centered at waist level 
in front of the body. The start switch required less than 
25 g of force to actuate and was large enough that simply 
resting the weight of the hand on the switch was sufficient; 
no finger dexterity was required. While the start switch was 
depressed, a red (“go”) light was illuminated to prompt the 
subject that a food well door would open. After a variable 
waiting period (1–2 s) with the start switch depressed and 
subject attending to the task, the investigator (WJH) opened 
one of the food well doors. If the subject began reaching 
before the door opened, the trial was cancelled. Once the 
food well door was opened, the subject had 3 s to initiate
the reach. The subject was free to consume the food 
reward at a self-selected pace. If after 3 s, the subject had 
not begun to reach for the food well or the subject became 
distracted or gave up, the trial was cancelled. After the trial 
was completed or cancelled, the lights were turned off and 
the door to the food well was closed. Once 85 % success 
on the task could be performed with either arm, baseline 
performance was measured.
General surgical procedures and postoperative care
Surgeries were performed under veterinary supervision 
in aseptic conditions. Animals were pre-treated with antibiotics
(florfenicol) and were pre-anesthetized with ketamine
HCl (10 mg/kg IM). Atropine (0.03 mg/kg s.q.) was 
given preoperatively to decrease secretions and facilitate 
intubation. Animals were anesthetized with isoflurane™
gas (1–2 %) through endotracheal intubation and placed 
in a stereotaxic frame. During microstimulation, isoflurane 
was discontinued and replaced with intravenous anesthesia
, ketamine HCl at 14 mg/kg/h and dexmedetomidine, an 
alpha-2 adrenoceptor agonist, at 2.5 mcg/kg/h. The rates 
of ketamine and dexmedetomidine infusion were adjusted 
throughout microstimulation to maintain a stable anesthetic 
plane. A long-acting local anesthetic (bupivacaine) was also 
A B
Fig. 3 Schematic diagram of reaching task. Perspective outlines 
traced from a video record of subject 2 performing the task after rehabilitation
show a side view (a) and overhead (b) of the subject reaching
with the right (impaired) limb to retrieve food from the upper 
right box. This overhead drawing shows the extent of reach required 
to enter food wells to high and low targets lateral to and across the 
body with right hand. The start switch was centered in front of the 
body at waist level
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-357559860)
3234 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
injected into the tissue surrounding the craniotomy incision 
every 3–6 h. Mannitol (1 g/kg IV) was administered every 
8 h to reduce intracranial pressure and to prevent cerebral 
edema. Venous blood gases were drawn every 2–6 h. Fluid 
levels, glucose levels and electrolyte balance were closely 
monitored, and body temperature was maintained to within 
37–38 °C throughout the procedure. ECG, pulse oximetry
and capnography were used to monitor physiological 
status.
For microstimulation, a trephine was used to make craniotomies
(approximately 19 mm diameter each) over the 
left and right frontoparietal cortex at 12 mm lateral to the 
midline (approximately AP 12) to expose the center of the 
motor cortex hand/forelimb area. Rongeurs were then used 
to extend the craniotomies laterally to a few millimeters lateral
to the spur of the arcuate sulcus, rostrally to visualize 
the extent of the premotor cortex and to the anterior extent 
of the precentral dimple, and caudally to a few millimeters 
caudal to the central sulcus. The resulting craniotomy was 
ovoid, about 3.5 cm diameter in the mediolateral direction 
and about 2.5 cm in the anteroposterior direction. The dura 
mater was removed to expose the primary motor cortex and 
premotor cortex on each side, with a bridge of bone about 
4 mm wide left intact along the midline to protect the dorsal
sagittal sinus and maintain the structural integrity of the 
skull. Once the procedure was complete, the opening in the 
dura mater was covered with Gelfilm™ (Pharmacia, Kalamazoo
, MI). A removable prosthetic to cover the craniotomies
was fabricated with dental acrylic and secured to the 
skull with plastic screws, allowing MRI imaging as well as 
reaccess for subsequent surgeries. Antibiotics (florfenicol) 
and analgesics (meloxicam, buprenorphine) were administered
postoperatively.
Subjects received physical assistance with natural cage 
activities during the initial 24 h following surgery. During 
the 2-week spontaneous recovery period, subjects were 
monitored throughout the day and assistance with feeding 
and grooming was provided as needed. By the end of the 
2-week recovery period, both subjects were independent 
with gross cage mobility.
Electrophysiological mapping procedure
Cortical stimulation was delivered through glass-coated 
platinum–iridium electrodes (model UEJB4, Frederick 
Haer & Co., Inc., Bowdoinham, ME, tip exposure 20 µm, 
impedance ≅ 500 KΩ). At each site, a 36-pulse stimulus 
train (biphasic, 200 µs per phase, 333 Hz) was delivered by 
a digital stimulus controller (Master-8, AMPI, Israel) connected
to an analog stimulus isolator (Model 2200, AMSystems
, Carlsborg, WA, USA). The choice of a 36-pulse 
rather than a 12-pulse train for motor evoked potentials 
was based on maximizing stimulation effectiveness under 
anesthesia (Buford, unpublished results; Garzel et al. 2009; 
Kawaguchi et al. 1996). Based on surface landmarks in the 
cortex, a 1-mm-spaced stimulation grid was established 
to define the region of interest. The caudal boundary of 
the stimulating region was defined by the central sulcus; 
the rostral boundary was defined by the spur of the arcuate
sulcus. Stimulation began in an area expected to elicit 
arm responses. Proceeding from that site, penetrations 
were made at each grid coordinate until all arm-related 
sites were bordered by 2 mm with sites that were either 
non-responsive or not arm-related. Testing began with a 
current of 80 µA. If a response was not evoked at 80 µA, 
the site was designated as non-responsive. If stimulation 
produced an arm-related response, current was decreased 
in 10-µA increments until the movement disappeared and 
then gradually adjusted up and down in 5-µA steps to determine
the threshold. Threshold was defined as the lowest 
current (±5 µA) that produced a visible muscle twitch or 
slight movement observable to two investigators during 
three consecutive stimulus trains. The anesthetic plane was 
closely monitored and, when necessary, adjusted so that 
thresholds at previously responsive sites could be reproduced
to within ±5 µA.
The depth for each stimulation site was recorded relative
to the cortical surface. At each penetration site, the 
electrode was lowered 2.0 mm into the cortex, and then 
threshold testing began, advancing the depth in 0.5-mm 
increments to find the lowest threshold. Once threshold 
was determined, a customized computer program (Spike2 
software) was used to deliver five stimulus trains at a current
intensity equal to 1.5 times threshold in order to obtain 
consistent responses. Electromyographic (EMG) responses 
to stimulation were recorded with percutaneous implanted 
pairs of Teflon-coated stainless steel wires inserted into 
the following left and right arm muscles: upper trapezius 
(UTr), pectoralis major (PMj), middle deltoids (MDelt), 
latissimus dorsi (Lats), triceps brachii (Tri), biceps brachii 
(Bic), extensor carpi radialis (ECR) and flexor carpi ulnaris 
(FCU). EMG electrodes were implanted for each recording
session. For sites that were not arm-related, observed 
responses were noted but threshold was not determined.
For stimulation of the PMRF, techniques previously 
described by Davidson and Buford (Davidson and Buford 
2004, 2006) for use in chronic preparations were adapted 
for use in the anesthetized animal. To allow access to the 
PMRF, a small extension in the craniotomy exposing the 
cortex on each side was added caudally (leaving the dura 
mater intact) targeting the following stereotaxic coordinates
(electrode carrier angle 10° in coronal plane): AP +2, 
+1, 0, −1 and −2, and lateral 1.0 and 2.5, at a depth of 
−9, approximately level with the abducens nucleus at AP 0 
(based on Szabo and Cowan 1984 atlas). PMRF stimulation 
sites to target were selected based on analysis of random 
( 8.0.0.2542.776715897 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
3235 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
selection of sites in awake behaving animal dataset representative
of PMRF motor output (Davidson and Buford 
2006).
The PMRF electrode (model UEJB2 from Frederick
Haer and Co., Inc., Bowdoinham, ME) was advanced 
through a 23-gauge stainless steel guide cannula and lowered
into the brainstem with a manual hydraulic microdrive
attached to a stereotaxic carrier. The cannula length 
was set to reach just above the inferior part of the cerebellum
; slightly dorsal to the tentorium. The electrode length 
was set so that, before the microdrive was advanced, the 
electrode tip was in the cerebellum. The system was configured
to allow recording from the PMRF electrode with 
audio monitoring as it was advanced into the brainstem. 
Under ketamine/dexmedetomidine anesthesia, involuntary 
eye movements are evident. This made it possible to determine
an electrode location that was within the abducens 
nucleus based on the characteristic, position-related discharge
of these oculomotor neurons. Knowing the location 
of abducens provided a relative reference to locate reticulospinal
neurons based on our previous experience in awake 
behaving animals. For each penetration, recordings were 
performed as the electrode was advanced in order to provide
relative landmarks. Stimulation was applied at fixed 
depths as the electrode was withdrawn from the bottom 
of the track: 1.0-mm increments for subject one, 0.5-mm 
increments for subject two. As described above for cortex, 
threshold was determined at every PMRF site where armrelated
responses were noted, and EMG responses to stimulus
trains were recorded at 1.5 times threshold. In both 
subjects, all sites on the right were tested first, and then all 
sites on the left were tested. Stimulation sites outside the 
PMRF were removed from analysis after the anatomical 
reconstruction.
Detection of EMG responses to PMRF stimulation
Because upper limb responses to PMRF stimulation are 
often bilateral and involve muscles at multiple joints, 
a motor map based on visual observation of evoked 
responses, as is commonly done for the cerebral cortex, 
would be relatively ineffective. Therefore, in the current 
study, the PMRF upper extremity motor outputs were documented
based on the recorded EMG responses.
EMG responses to PMRF stimulation were rectified and 
averaged. In the averaged EMG response, an 89-ms period 
which ended 10 ms before stimulus onset was used to calculate
the EMG baseline mean and standard deviation (SD) 
level for all muscles. Facilitation responses could be satisfactorily
detected by applying a conventional 2 SD from 
the baseline mean criterion (Z score approach). Suppression
was more difficult to detect using the conventional 2 
SD approach. We suspected that under the anesthetic there 
was relatively little background EMG at the time of stimulation
to detect a decrease. In visually examining the EMG 
records, we found several cases where responses appeared 
to be suppression, but based on a conventional 2 SD criteria
were not detected. However, although the mean EMG 
level was minimally decreased, the variability of the EMG 
level was markedly reduced. To objectively measure this 
variability, the EMG data were processed to replot the data 
as the averaged SD of the EMG levels taken over a moving
5-ms window. This allowed us to measure variations in 
EMG level, which added an additional parameter for detection.
Thus, to detect suppression, the criteria were a combination
of three factors: (1) peak excursion of response from 
baseline mean, described as a Z score; (2) percent change 
of the mean response from baseline; and 3) percent change 
of the mean SD of the response from the mean SD of the 
baseline (i.e., decreased variability of the EMG level during
suppression). These criteria were also used to detect 
facilitation. A similar approach has been used in the awake 
behaving primate (Montgomery et al. 2013).
Sensitivity and specificity analyses for detection of 
responses by a variety of objective criteria were compared 
with responses identified by visual inspection for the suppression
responses. Sensitivity and specificity analyses 
were repeated for facilitation responses to compare the conventional
objective criteria with our visual inspection. To 
detect suppression, we found that a Z score of ≤−0.75, a 
percent change of the response mean of ≤−30 % and a percent
change of the SD of ≤−30 % were required (sensitivity = 65 %, specificity = 87 %). For facilitation, a Z score 
of ≥1.96, a percent change of the response mean from 
baseline mean of ≥30 % and a percent change of the SD 
level of ≥30 % were applied (sensitivity = 81 %, specificity = 94 %). After the three objective criteria were applied, 
subsequent visual inspection was used to omit spurious 
responses for which the measurements were contaminated 
by stimulus artifact. The sensitivity for suppression could 
have been improved by making our acceptance criteria 
more lenient. However, this would have lowered the specificity
for suppression, and this was deemed unacceptable.
Cortical injections of endothelin-1
Based on the initial cortical electrophysiological map, a 
focal ischemic lesion was created in the left primary motor 
cortex (M1) shoulder/elbow representation area. Microinjections
of endothelin-1 [(ET-1); (400 pmol/µl in sterile 
H
2
O); human endothelin-1, (American Peptide, USA)] 
were made at multiple selected arm-related sites in M1 
to induce the focal ischemic injury. A volume of 1.0 µl of 
endothelin-1 (ET-1) was injected at each site using a 10-µl 
Hamilton syringe. The dosage and number of ET-1 injections
were chosen based on previous rat studies showing 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.425344006)
3236 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
small quantities of localized ischemic lesions through all 
six cortical layers while sparing the underlying white matter
(Adkins et al. 2004; Fuxe et al. 1992; Gilmour et al. 
2004; Windle et al. 2006). For each injection, the needle 
was lowered to the target depth and left in position for 30 s 
before the ET-1 was injected. ET-1 was injected at each site 
in four boluses of 0.25 µl, allowing a 30-s pause between 
each bolus. At the end of ET-1 delivery at each site, the 
needle was left in place for 1 min to allow the ET-1 solution
to diffuse away from the needle tip before removal.
For subject 1, a total of ten ET-1 injection sites were 
staggered about 2 mm apart within the shoulder/elbow representation
, for a total volume infused of 10 µl. As noted in 
“Results” section, this produced a relatively mild deficit in 
reaching. Subject 2 received an ET-1 injection to every site 
that evoked a shoulder or elbow response to stimulation and 
then a complete second round of injections at these same 
sites, totaling thirty injections, for a total volume of ET-1 
infused of 30 µl. There was approximately 60 min between 
the first and second injections at each site. Based on the literature
, 60 min post-injection, the gradual reperfusion of 
cerebral blood flow may have improved to approximately 
50 % of baseline (Macrae et al. 1993a, b). Therefore, a second
round of injections was expected to increase the concentration
of ET-1 and the overall duration of ischemia. As 
noted in Results section, this approach resulted in relatively 
profound reaching deficits.
Magnetic resonance imaging acquisition
All magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the brain 
were acquired using the Biospec 94/30 (Bruker Biospin, 
Germany) with a horizontal 30-cm bore magnet operating
at 400 MHz (9.4 T). The subject was anesthetized with 
isoflurane gas (1.5–2 %), ECG and a plethysmograph were 
used to monitor physiological status, and axillary body temperature
was maintained to within 35–38 °C throughout the 
procedure. The subject was scanned in the supine position 
using a volume coil 1 H, rabbit body (154 mm inner diameter
). Scans were acquired before the first electrophysiological
mapping surgery (baseline), 9–10 days after the ET-1 
injections and after completion of rehabilitative training 
(subject two only), but before the final mapping procedures 
(see Fig. 2). Coronal, axial and sagittal T1-weighted FLASH 
(TR/TE = 500/5.0 ms, Flip Angle = 30°, NEX = 1) and 
T2-weighted RARE (TR/TE = 5000/14 ms, RareFactor = 8, NEX = 4) scans through the cortex and brainstem 
(FOV = 11 × 11 cm, matrix = 256 × 256, slice thickness = 1 mm) were acquired in contiguous slices spanning 
the brain. At the start of each MRI session, careful attention 
was made to align stereotaxic AP-zero by adjusting the scan 
rotation in 3 dimensions so that both auditory meati were 
included in a coronal plane image slice. In the sagittal plane, 
the line connecting the external occipital protuberance and 
the nasion was used as a reference to align the images in the 
axial plane. To align the horizontal plane, the image plane 
was set to place the inferior orbital rim 10 mm superior to 
the external auditory meatus, matching the alignment for 
Horsley Clark stereotaxic coordinates.
Magnetic resonance imagings were used for confirmation
of ET-1 injection site locations, lesion location and 
lesion volume calculations. Co-registration of MRI scans 
and neurophysiological maps was used for ET-1 injection
site reconstruction. Pre-injection T1-weighted MRIs 
acquired in the coronal plane were selected based on actual 
stereotactic coordinates of injection sites using the Szabo 
and Cowan atlas (Szabo and Cowan 1984) as a reference. 
The rostral edge of the precentral dimple was used as the 
relative reference point to co-register the MRIs with the 
stereotactic coordinates in the AP dimension. Then, each 
ET-1 injection site was marked on the MRI according to the 
stereotactic coordinate records (see Fig. 4a for example).
Lesion analysis
Anatomical assessments of lesion location and volume were 
made with T2-weighted (T2W) MRI scans. Lesion location 
was determined by visualization of anatomical structures 
in the T2W images and comparison with brain atlas (Szabo 
and Cowan 1984). ImageJ imaging analysis software (NIH 
v1.43) was used to evaluate each subject’s lesion volume. 
The abnormal bright area on the image, defined as signal
hyperintensity, comprised the region of interest (ROI). 
Comparison of gray-level values for the region of interest 
and stereotaxic equivalent region within the contralesional 
hemisphere was used to confirm the region included in 
manual tracings. Lesion volume was calculated after manually
outlining the ROI slice by slice in the coronal plane and 
multiplying by slice thickness (1 mm). The ROI was manually
traced on three separate occasions and the individual 
volume measurements were used to calculate a mean lesion 
volume (±standard deviation), allowing an indication of the 
consistency of the measurements.
Post-injection rehabilitative training procedure
After the 2-week spontaneous recovery period, subject 2 
received 60–90 min of daily intensive rehabilitative training 
of the right (impaired) upper limb, 3–4 days per week. The 
left arm was lightly restrained during training. During the first 
5 days, rehabilitative training consisted of reaching activities 
to retrieve food rewards offered by the hand of the investigator
at tabletop level within the immediate workspace of the 
impaired arm. As reaching recovered, the level of training 
difficulty was progressed to retrieving rewards lateral to the 
body, across midline and up toward targets at shoulder and 
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1966399862)
3237 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
chin heights. Once reaching ability had progressed to the 
point that success on the actual task seemed possible, the 
reach apparatus was reintroduced and used for the remainder
of rehabilitative training sessions. With the apparatus, the 
subject was soon able to perform over 300 reaching trials per 
training session. Each reach condition (i.e., across midline, 
far reaches) was practiced in blocks of 50 repetitions, alternating
between high and low targets for each condition.
Assessment of reach performance
Changes in reach performance were documented through 
daily observation of natural cage behaviors and performance
of the task during training, along with formal 
assessment on the reaching task at set time points (Fig. 2). 
The primary variable used to document performance was 
the movement time required to transport the hand from the 
start switch to the food well.
For each assessment, subjects performed two sets of 24 
reaching trials with each arm. In sessions where the overall 
reach attempt rate was low, a third set was offered in order 
to obtain more successful trials for analysis. The subject 
was required to reach to each of the four targets six times 
in a random order within each set of 24 reaches. The arm 
tested first each day was randomized, and then the subject 
alternated arms after each set of 24 reaches.
For subject 1 (spontaneous recovery only), reach performance
during natural recovery was tested immediately 
Fig. 4 a Baseline MRI and estimated endothelin-1 injection sites 
(indicated by white squares) in left motor cortex reconstructed on 
T1-weighted MRI scans (2-mm-thick contiguous coronal slices) for 
subject 1. Each scan represents 2 mm of the injection grid. Scans are 
oriented from rostral (left) to caudal (right) at estimated stereotactic 
coordinates of A16.4 to A12.1. M1 primary motor cortex, S1 primary 
sensory cortex, SMA supplementary motor area, LS lateral sulcus, STS
superior temporal sulcus, CGS cingulated sulcus, CS central sulcus. 
Dashed line represents arbitrary demarcation between M1 and S1. 
Scale bar 4 mm. b Reconstruction of ET-1-induced lesion (indicated 
by yellow arrows) in left motor cortex for subject 1 using T2-weighted 
MRI scans (1-mm-thick contiguous coronal slices) taken 9 days after 
the injections. R anatomical right of cortex, CS central sulcus. MRI 
scans through the lesion are oriented in rows from rostral (top left) to 
caudal (bottom right) at estimated stereotaxic coordinates of A19 (top 
left) to A12.1 (bottom right). The region of interest (ROI), defined as 
the area of abnormal signal intensity change (indicated by the yellow 
arrows), was manually traced on each individual section using ImageJ 
software. The estimated lesion volume was calculated by multiplying 
the total ROI area (mm2) by slice thickness
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
3238 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
post-injection (day 3) and then 7 and 13 days after the 
ET-1 injections. For subject 2 (rehabilitative training), performance
during natural recovery was tested at 4, 7, and 
12 days after the injections. As indicated in Fig. 2, after the 
2-week spontaneous recovery period, subject 2 received 
12 weeks of intensive rehabilitative training. Reach performance
was assessed immediately before initiation of rehabilitative
training and then weekly throughout training.
The states of the switches and doors from the apparatus
were recorded at 200 Hz using Spike2 software on a 
Power 1401 data acquisition system (CED, Cambridge, 
UK), along with a synchronized video record documenting 
reach performance at 30 Hz. Analysis of the video record in 
conjunction with data from the reach apparatus was used to 
define the following events: start of trial, contact with the 
start switch, opening of the food well door, hand leaving 
the start switch, hand first entering the well, hand leaving 
the well and food brought to mouth. Each trial was analyzed
frame by frame to assess times of task-related events 
and quality of reach performance such as number of entry 
attempts before success or failed entry attempts. Movement 
time, defined as time between hand leaving the start switch 
and first entry into the food well as indicated by the apparatus
, was used as the primary outcome measure.
Anatomical reconstruction
Two (subject 2) or three days (subject 1) after the final electrophysiological
mapping study, subjects were euthanized 
with sodium pentabarbitol i.v. and perfused transcardially 
with saline followed by paraformaldehyde. Coronal brain 
sections were cut at 50 µm on a freezing microtome, and 
every tenth section was mounted and stained with cresyl 
violet for reconstruction of the PMRF stimulation sites. The 
reconstruction of stimulation sites in the PMRF was completed
on standard brainstem sections (Szabo and Cowan 
1984). Due to the remodeling of cortical tissue associated 
with the craniotomy and lesion and the histological processing
, cortical sections could not be used for reconstruction
of the injection or stimulation sites. Rather, injection 
sites were reconstructed on the MRI images taken in vivo, 
as described above. Cortical stimulation sites were reconstructed
on a two-dimensional grid based on measurements 
of surface features (i.e., central sulcus, precentral dimple, 
arcuate sulcus) noted during stimulation and reproduced 
individually for each subject.
Data analysis
SPSS 17.0 and Microsoft Office Excel 2007 were used for 
all data analyses. Descriptive statistics and repeated measures
ANOVA were used to test for differences in movement 
time based on the arm used and target location. Chi-squared 
tests were used to investigate significant differences in 
proportions of cortical and PMRF arm movement representation
areas (ipsilesional vs. contralesional responses, 
shoulder/elbow vs. wrist/hand/forearm, etc.) and PMRF 
stimulation effectiveness comparisons for injured and 
healthy subjects. The Friedman test was used to investigate 
significant differences in threshold currents for movement 
representation areas within right and left motor cortex after 
the ET-1 injections. Odds ratio confidence interval calculations
were used to investigate PMRF response pattern comparisons
for injured and healthy subjects. Data from two 
healthy control subjects were used for odds ratio comparisons
of right and left PMRF arm response patterns. Data 
from a total of 47 electrode penetrations within PMRF for 
each control subject were compared with the data from the 
12 and 16 electrode penetrations from the injured subjects. 
A 2 × 2 frequency table was used to calculate the odds of 
arm response pattern differences occurring after recovery 
and that of healthy controls. A criterion level of P < 0.05 
was considered statistically significant. The Bonferroni 
familywise correction was used to adjust the P value for 
multiple comparisons. A criterion level of P < 0.05 was 
considered statistically significant.
Results
Anatomical results
The unilateral lesion of the motor cortex was produced by 
infusion of ET-1 at multiple sites in the shoulder/elbow 
representation of left M1 defined by intracortical microstimulation.
For subject one, as described in “Materials
and methods” section, ten injections were made in the 
arm-related area, approximately 45 % of the sites in which 
shoulder or elbow movement was represented. ET-1 injection
depths in this subject ranged from 2.5 to 4.0 mm, the 
superficial and deep layers of the motor cortex. The placement
and distribution of ET-1 injection sites in the left M1 
are shown in Fig. 4a.
Volumetric lesion analysis was performed on 
T2-weighted images taken 9 days post-injection. Eight 
MRI image slices contained areas of abnormal signal intensity
changes. The lesion volume indicated by the abnormal 
bright area in the MRI scans was 282 ± 6 mm3. Abnormal 
cortical tissue involved the precentral gyrus, extending 
throughout the gray matter, as well as superficial subcortical
white matter. No apparent abnormal signal intensity 
changes were noted in deep subcortical structures (see 
Fig. 4b).
For subject two, as described in METHODS, two ET-1 
injections were made at each site that evoked a shoulder 
or elbow response to stimulation. Injection depths ranged 
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
3239 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
from 3.0 to 5.5 mm, the superficial and deep layers of 
motor cortex, including sites deep in the bank of central 
sulcus (Fig. 5a).
Volumetric lesion analysis was performed on 
T2-weighted images taken at two time points, 10 days 
post-injection and again after completion of rehabilitative 
training (16 weeks post-injection). Ten days post-injection 
(Fig. 5b), with 29 MRI image slices affected, the lesion volume
indicated by the abnormal bright area in the MRI scans 
was quite extensive (4742 ± 180 mm3). Abnormal cortical 
tissue involved both gray and white matter of the left sensorimotor
cortex, extending into the superior parietal lobe, 
pre- and post-central gyrus and insula. No apparent signal 
intensity changes were measured in deep subcortical structures.
Sixteen weeks post-injection (Fig. 5c), with 13 MRI 
image slices affected, the volume of signal hyperintensity 
was about tenfold less, 481 ± 30 mm3, involving both gray 
and white matter of the sensorimotor cortex. The abnormal 
cortical tissue extended approximately 1–2 mm rostral to 
the most anterior ET-1 injection site into precentral gyrus 
and approximately 4 mm caudal to the most posterior injection
site into post-central gyrus.
Effects on reaching behavior
During surgical recovery following the ET-1 injections, 
both subjects presented with contralesional shoulder and 
elbow flexor posturing. During the first 24 h, subject 1 
could slowly climb the cage using both upper limbs, but 
had difficulty releasing the right hand’s grasp from the cage 
bars. The subject kept the right elbow close to the body 
when reaching in front of the body within arm’s length and 
would not reach away from the body in any direction for 
food. By day 2 post-injection, subject 1 had full use of the 
right hand, was able to reach away from the body with the 
right arm and was able to reach for food with either arm. 
However, if given the choice, the subject would retrieve 
food with the left arm.
Reach performance (movement times) on the reach 
task for subject 1 was similar for the right and left arms 
Fig. 5 a Baseline MRI and estimated endothelin-1 injection sites. 
Endothelin-1 injection sites (indicated by white squares) in left 
motor cortex reconstructed on T2-weighted MRI scans (1-mm-thick 
contiguous coronal slices) for subject 2. Scans are oriented in rows 
from rostral (top left) to caudal (bottom right) at estimated stereotactic
coordinates of A12.1 to A7.6. M1 primary motor cortex, S1
primary sensory cortex, SMA supplementary motor area, LS lateral 
sulcus, STS superior temporal sulcus, CS central sulcus. Dashed 
line represents estimated border between M1 and S1. Scale bar
4 mm. b Reconstruction of ET-1-induced lesion (indicated by yellow 
arrows) in left motor cortex for subject 2 using T2-weighted MRI 
scans (1-mm-thick contiguous coronal slices) taken 10 days after 
the injections. R anatomical right of cortex, CS central sulcus. MRI 
scans through the lesion are oriented in rows from rostral (top left) 
to caudal (bottom right) at estimated stereotaxic coordinates of A23 
(top left) to A −2.6 (bottom right). c Reconstruction of ET-1-induced 
lesion (indicated by yellow arrows) in left motor cortex for subject 
2 using T2-weighted MRI scans (1-mm-thick contiguous coronal 
slices) taken after the 12-week rehabilitative training period. R anatomical
right of cortex, CS central sulcus. MRI scans are oriented in 
rows from rostral (top left) to caudal (bottom right) at estimated stereotaxic
coordinates of A13.4 (top left) to A0.6 (bottom right)
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.2034184008)
3240 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
Fig. 5 continued
( 8.0.0.2542.657228289 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
3241 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
at baseline (Fig. 6). Immediately post-injection, movement 
times were prolonged bilaterally (F = 17.76, P < 0.001). 
The subject required physical assistance with pressing the 
start switch with the left arm before resuming full task 
performance independently and appeared to be distracted 
during right arm reach trials. On day 7, the subject was 
performing all components of the task independently with 
either arm, but movement times continued to be slowed for 
both arms.
Left arm movement times were slowest at 7 days postinjection
and returned to near-baseline performance levels 
by the end of the 2-week spontaneous recovery period. 
Immediately after injections, right arm movement times 
were almost double baseline times (Fig. 6). Right arm performance
gradually improved over the spontaneous recovery
period. However, movement times remained significantly
slower, never fully returning to baseline performance 
levels (F = 20.859, P < 0.001).
Subject 2 showed a much greater degree of impairment. 
This subject demonstrated marked functional deficits of the 
right upper and lower limbs. During the first 2 days, there 
was a very little voluntary use of the more affected upper 
limb for food manipulation, grooming or cage mobility. 
The subject held the right arm in a flexed posture at the 
side or in the lap and made no attempts to use the arm to 
grasp for food. When the subject stood on the cage perch 
to drink, holding the cage bars with the left hand, the right 
upper and lower limbs were drawn up into whole-limb synergistic
flexion patterns. By day 3 post-injection, voluntary 
use of the right arm was initiated for cage mobility, but the 
use of the limb was uncoordinated. By the start of rehabilitative
training (day 18 post-injection), the subject consistently
used the right arm for cage mobility, but continued 
to rely on the left arm for grooming and feeding. Right leg 
function was not formally assessed, but appeared grossly 
normal by the end of week 4 of rehabilitative training.
Reach performance (movement times) on the reach task 
was similar for the right and left arms at baseline (Fig. 7). 
At day 4 post-injection, left arm movement times were 
slow, but quickly recovered over the 2-week spontaneous
recovery period (F = 4.103, P = 0.027; Fig. 7). Right 
arm movement times, however, were markedly prolonged 
throughout recovery. Immediately post-injection (day 4), 
no reach attempts were made with the right arm. At day 
Movement Time (ms)
Spontaneous Recovery (Days)
3 7 13
0
200
400
600
800 Baseline Cortical Maps & Lesion Cortical & PMRF Maps
L A RM
RA RM
Baseline
Fig. 6 Movement times for subject 1. Data are the mean ± SEM 
movement times for each session, averaged across all successful trials
to all targets for each arm. One baseline session for this subject 
was measured after the task was learned. There was no rehabilitation. 
Reaching was assessed at three time points during spontaneous recovery
Movement Time (ms)
RA RM
L A RM
Rehabilitation
(Weeks)
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
4 7 12
PRE-REHAB 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
FINAL
T1 T2 T3
Baseline Cortical Maps & Lesion 2nd Cortical Maps Cortical & PMRF Maps
N = 6
Baseline Spontaneous
Recovery (Days)
Fig. 7 Movement times for subject 2. Data are the mean ± SEM 
movement times for each session, averaged across all successful trials
to all targets for each arm. Three baseline sessions for this subject 
were measured after the task was learned. Reaching was assessed at 
three time points during spontaneous recovery, but there were no successful
trials with the right arm to be measured. After the 2nd cortical
mapping procedure for this subject, another reaching assessment 
was performed, and then rehabilitation began. A final assessment was 
made a week after rehabilitation had concluded
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1846912254)
3242 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
7 post-injection, the subject was initiating right arm reach 
attempts. The subject made as many as 25 reach attempts 
per trial to enter each well, but was unsuccessful at all entry 
attempts. At day 12 post-injection, the subject made one 
successful food well entry over the course of 11 reach trials.
Reach performance errors during this session included 
large, gross circling motions in the vicinity of the well 
opening, especially when reaching toward low target lateral
to the body. When reaching toward high and low targets
across the body, the subject would overshoot the target 
by several inches to the left. Right arm reach performance 
remained unsuccessful until week 2 of rehabilitative training.
At this time, the subject successfully completed 6 of 
29 reach trials. A repeated measures ANOVA comparing 
right arm reach performance (movement times) at baseline
with reach performance across rehabilitative training 
(3, 6, 12 weeks) and after rehabilitative training showed 
reach performance was slowest early during training 
(week 3; F = 39.028, P < 0.001). Movement times gradually
improved in accuracy and speed throughout the first 
6 weeks of rehabilitative training. However, as illustrated in 
Fig. 7, after week 6 there was little change in overall movement
times, and performance levels did not return to baseline
by the end of the study. A trend was found for reaches 
to high target lateral to the body to be slowest, especially 
early during rehabilitative training (F = 2.407, P = 0.021).
Electrophysiological mapping of cortical motor outputs
To ensure that mapping procedures were comparable across 
time, the total number of sites studied in each session was 
compared. Overall, the total number of sites explored 
within each motor cortex was not significantly different for 
the pre- and post-injection mapping procedures in subject 
1. Likewise, for subject 2, cortical mapping procedures 
were balanced. The number of sites explored within each 
motor cortex was similar between sides and for all three 
time points (baseline, post-spontaneous recovery and after 
rehabilitative training).
On a surface map of left and right M1 (Fig. 8), each 
electrode penetration is represented by a color indicating
the body territory activated at threshold current. 
Arm-related sites were defined as shoulder, elbow, forearm
(supination, pronation), wrist or hand/fingers. Other 
regions were grossly defined as face (including jaw), trunk 
(including tail) or leg. A site was coded as a dual-response 
site if movement was evoked at two separate joints (i.e., 
shoulder and wrist, elbow and wrist). A site was coded as 
a complex site if movement was evoked at more than two 
joints, movement was evoked in the upper limb ipsilateral 
to stimulation or movement was evoked bilaterally. In both 
subjects at all time points, the gross somatotopic map in 
M1 was as expected: The arm-related sites were bounded 
medially by trunk- and leg-related sites, laterally by facerelated
sites and rostrally by non-responsive sites. Within 
the arm-related region, wrist- and hand-related sites were 
more lateral than shoulder- and elbow-related sites. Sites 
caudal to the central sulcus were not tested. For areas in the 
transitional zone between M1 and PMd, shoulder- and armrelated
sites were lateral to the precentral dimple.
Changes in arm movement representation 
after spontaneous recovery (subject 1)
For subject 1, the majority of sites (45/71 sites) explored in 
the ipsilesional (left) motor cortex before the ET-1 injection
evoked visible, contralateral arm-related movement 
responses to stimulation (Fig. 8a). This was a consequence 
of the study design, which was deliberately focused on 
mapping the arm representation of the motor cortex. Of the 
45 arm-related sites, 44 % (n = 20) evoked shoulder/elbow 
movements, 47 % (n = 21) evoked wrist/hand/forearm 
movements, and 9 % (n = 4) evoked complex movements 
of hip and shoulder or whole-arm movements. After the 
2-week spontaneous recovery period, there was a decrease 
in the number of effective stimulation sites in the affected 
cortex, with 60 rather than 71 sites responding. However, 
within the responsive sites, there was a relatively little 
change in the overall proportion of arm-related responses, 
with 52 % (n = 31) of the 60 sites explored evoking armrelated
responses to stimulation. Most sites that had been 
effective before the ET-1 injection remained microexcitable
after the injection; there was no zone of non-responsive
sites where ET-1 was injected. However, there was a 
reduction in the representation of the shoulder and elbow, 
only 27 % (n = 8) of the arm-related sites, with a relative 
increase to 74 % (n = 23) for the wrist/hand/forearm movement
representations (Fig. 8b).
In the contralesional cortex (right) for subject 1, the 
majority of sites explored (37/55 sites) before ET-1 injections
were arm-related, with 41 % (n = 15) evoking shoulder
/elbow movements, 54 % (n = 20) evoking wrist/hand/
forearm movements and 5 % (n = 2) evoking complex 
movements (Fig. 8a). After injection, there was a relatively 
little change in the number of sites explored that elicited 
arm-related movements (36/71 sites). However, the proportion
of sites eliciting simple shoulder/elbow movements 
(22 %, n = 8) or wrist/hand/forearm movements (25 %, 
n = 9) was reduced. Surprisingly, the novel change was the 
increase in the number of contralesional sites that evoked 
dual responses and complex, bilateral movements (50 %, 
n = 18); we also found one site that evoked an ipsilateral 
arm response 2 weeks after the injection (Fig. 8b).
In sum, there was a slight decrease in the overall number
of sites that evoked arm-related responses in the ipsilesional
cortex after recovery (χ2 = 4.65, P = 0.031). There 
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
3243 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
was an expansion of distal arm representation for the ipsilesional
cortex (χ2 = 12.76, P = 0.005) and a shift from simple
to complex responses in the contralesional cortex.
Changes in arm movement representation 
after rehabilitative training (subject 2)
In subject 2, slightly more than half (36/70 sites) of the 
responsive sites in the ipsilesional cortex (left) were armrelated
before the ET-1 injections (Fig. 8c). Of these 36 
arm-related sites, 36 % (n = 13) evoked visible shoulder 
and elbow movements, and 64 % (n = 23) evoked wrist/
hand/forearm movements. Two weeks after injections, the 
shoulder/elbow representation in the affected cortex was 
completely absent and remained absent even after rehabilitative
training and recovery of reaching. In fact, no armrelated
responses could be evoked after the injections in 
any part of the upper limb area, including the wrist/hand/
finger area. Interestingly, there was an expansion of the 
right leg movement representation area into areas that previously
evoked shoulder and elbow movements (Fig. 8d). 
As noted above, early in recovery, the subject’s ability to 
move the right leg was severely impaired, but this did eventually
recover.
In the contralesional cortex (right) for subject 2, the 
change observed after ET-1 injections was an increased 
representation of the wrist/hand/forearm of the left arm 
(Fig. 8d). There was no increase in representation of the 
right arm. Before the ET-1 injections, there were similar
proportions of visibly evoked shoulder and elbow 
responses (22/46 sites) and wrist/hand/forearm (24/46 
sites) responses from arm-related sites. After the 2-week 
spontaneous recovery period, 63 % of the arm-related 
sites (n = 34) evoked wrist/hand/forearm movements, 
and 37 % of arm-related sites (n = 20) evoked shoulder/
elbow or elbow/hand movements (χ2 = 35.33, P < 0.0001). 
Rostral Caudal
A  Baseline B  2 Weeks
Subject 1 S ubject 2
C  Baseline D  2 Weeks E  Post-Rehab
RIGHT
LEFT
cs
LEG
NO RESPONSE
FOREARM
WRIST TRUNK SHOULDER
COMPLEX +
DIGITS FACE ELBOW ENDOTHELIN-1 x
Fig. 8 Surface maps of microstimulation-evoked motor outputs 
from right and left motor cortex. For subject 1, the baseline map 
(a) was made immediately prior to the ET-1 injections and after 
2 weeks of spontaneous recovery (b). For subject 2, the baseline 
map (c) was made immediately prior to the ET-1 injections, a second
map was made after 2 weeks of spontaneous recovery (d), and 
the final map was made after 12 weeks of rehabilitation (e). During 
mapping, the shoulder/elbow representation was circumscribed by 
2 mm of other movements or non-responsive sites. The central sulcus
(CS) as defined by the superficial middle cerebral vein is shown 
by the red line. Sites within the grid that were not stimulated could 
not be accessed due to surface vessels. Each electrode penetration 
is represented at its corresponding position by a color indicating 
the body territory activated at threshold current (see color legend). 
Dual-response sites are represented by both body territory colors. 
ET-1 injection sites are indicated by the times symbol, and complex 
responses are indicated by a plus symbol. The scale is evident in that 
the dots on the grid are typically separated by 1 mm
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
3244 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
Following rehabilitative training, there was a little further 
change, with 67 % (n = 34) of arm-related sites evoking 
wrist/hand/forearm responses and 31 % (n = 16) evoking 
shoulder/elbow or elbow/wrist movements; one site found 
near the face/neck region in the final mapping study evoked 
bilateral shoulder elevation (Fig. 8e). In sum, the greatest 
changes for subject 2 were the complete absence of armevoked
responses to stimulation and the shift toward greater 
distal arm representation from contralesional cortex.
Cortical threshold current comparison
The threshold current levels for all shoulder/elbow and 
wrist/hand/forearm responses pre- and post-injection were 
also compared for the ipsilesional v. contralesional cortex 
using the non-parametric Friedman test. In subject 1, we 
found no significant changes in threshold for the pre- and 
post-injection mapping sessions or between sides (Table 1). 
In subject 2, there were no sites found related to arm movements
in the ipsilesional cortex after injections, so no comparison
could be made between sides. In the contralesional 
cortex, there was no significant difference in thresholds for 
shoulder/elbow responses pre- and post-injection, though 
the trend was toward lower thresholds post-injection. In 
subject 2, there was a significant decrease in the current 
required to elicit distal arm (wrist/hand/forearm) responses 
from the contralesional cortex after the 2-week spontaneous
recovery period compared with baseline (χ2 = 10.81, 
P = 0.004), but after rehabilitative training, these distal 
arm thresholds were no longer reduced.
As noted in Methods section, we also recorded EMG 
for all stimulation sites. In addition to observing movements
during cortical stimulation, we also inspected 
every EMG response to see whether changes in the EMG 
responses could be observed in subject 2 even though overt 
movements were not evident. No such evidence was found. 
In the right limb, in addition to no stimulation-evoked 
arm-related movements, there were no EMG responses 
evoked from left (lesioned) M1 arm-related stimulation 
sites, either. Likewise, we did not find EMG evidence of 
increased representation of left arm from right M1.
Outputs evoked by PMRF stimulation after cortical 
lesion
Because a structured organization like the homunculus in 
the cortex has not been demonstrated in the PMRF, the 
EMG responses detected to stimulation were the only reliable
way to accurately describe changes in motor output. 
The results from the PMRF post-recovery were evaluated 
against expectations from previous studies (Davidson and 
Buford 2006). From past experiments with awake behaving 
subjects, we have observed a relatively consistent pattern 
of motor outputs from the PMRF. Typically, most stimulation
sites (60–80 %) produce bilateral responses, with 
EMG responses detected in both the left and right arms in 
response to stimulation at a single PMRF site. In counting 
all responses evoked from a given side of the brainstem, 
the sites that produce unilateral responses are split roughly 
evenly between those producing ipsilateral (55 %) and contralateral
(45 %) effects (Davidson and Buford 2006). The 
left and right sides of the PMRF do not appear to be organized
differently, nor is stimulation more effective at evoking
responses for one side versus the other.
In the current experiment for subject 1, there were 12 
electrode penetrations (6 left and 6 right) made for mapping
at the end of the 2-week spontaneous recovery period 
(Fig. 9a). After anatomical reconstruction in this first subject
, we found that relatively few sites (n = 8) on the left 
side had been mapped compared to the right (n = 15). 
Only 3 of the 8 on the left (38 %) were effective in producing
EMG responses, compared to 13 of 15 on the right 
Table 1 Arm representation threshold current levels
Numbers represent mean threshold current levels in µA (±SE) 
required to elicit proximal (shoulder/elbow) and distal (wrist/hand/
forearm) responses for the left (lesioned) and right (non-lesioned) 
cortex. Pre-baseline map; Post and Post-1 = post-spontaneous recovery
map; Post-2 for subject 2 = final map after rehabilitative training. 
NR non-responsive
Proximal Distal
Left Cortex Right Cortex Left Cortex Right Cortex
SUBJECT 1
Pre 38.16 ± 16.6 37.0 ± 16.45 38.16 ± 16.6 37.0 ± 16.45
Post 32.5 ± 8.02 32.5 ± 8.02 28.25 ± 13.98 29.25 ± 12.9
SUBJECT 2
Pre 41.54 ± 4.51 31.2 ± 2.65 29.77 ± 3.38 26.00 ± 1.98
Post-1 NR 29.09 ± 2.32 NR 19.11 ± 1.59
Post-2 NR 38.95 ± 3.43 NR 28.52 ± 2.38
Fig. 9 Brainstem sites from which upper extremity muscle responses 
were evoked by stimulus trains for subjects 1 (a) and 2 (b). Symbols above and below horizontal dashed lines were considered non-
PMRF sites, as indicated by the paler colors, and were not tabulated 
in the results. Standard brainstem sections were adapted from Szabo 
and Cowan (1984), with nomenclature from Martin and Bowden 
(1996). The symbol colors and shapes are explained in the legend. 
n4 fourth cranial nerve; n5 fifth cranial nerve; 6 sixth cranial nerve 
nucleus; n7 seventh cranial nerve; 7 seventh cranial nerve nucleus; 
n8 eighth cranial nerve; 10 tenth cranial nerve nucleus; 12 12th cranial
nerve nucleus; icp inferior cerebellar peduncle, mcp middle 
cerebellar peduncle, scp superior cerebellar peduncle, Py pyramidal
tract, tz trapezoid body, IO inferior olivary nucleus, SO superior 
olivary nucleus, IVe inferior vestibular nucleus, SVe superior vestibular
nucleus, LVe lateral vestibular nucleus, MVe medial vestibular 
nucleus, PrP nucleus prepositus, ACU anterior cuneate nucleus; Sol
nucleus solitaries, Pr5 principal nucleus of fifth cranial nerve, Sp5
spinal nucleus of fifth cranial nerve; 4 V fourth ventricle
▸
( 8.0.0.2542.223890386 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
3245 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
(87 %). Overall, 67 EMG responses were found; 9 were 
from the left side, an average of 3 muscles per site, and 58 
were from the right, an average of 4.5 muscles per site. As 
previously reported in awake behaving animals, stimulation 
of the PMRF in the current study had a strong tendency 
to produce bilateral outputs. In 81 % of the sites found 
1 mm
A
A01183
AP-1
I Ve
M Ve
Sp5
IO
Py
scp
L V
e
Sol
4V
AP-3
AP2 AP0 AP1
AP-2
I Ve M Ve
4V
Sol
Sp5
IO
Py
PrP
scp
S Ve
LV e
LV e
M Ve
Sp5 n8
4V
IO
Py
I Ve
M 
V
e
4V
So
l
Sp5
ic
p
IO
Py
12 ACU
10
scp
7
LV e
mcp
Sp5
n8
4V
Py
ILC
scp
S 
V
e
LV e
Sp
5
n8
4V
7
6 n7
IO
Py
=  Eye, Face, Neck or Mouth
=  Shoulder/Arm
= T runk
=  NR
= Abducens
Response
= Bilateral
= Right
= Left
AP-2 AP-1
AP2
sc
p
mcp
n8
4V
Lve
LC
Sp5
IO
Py
7
AP1
sc
p
S
ve
Lve
4V
6
Sp
5
n8
7
IO
Py
B
AP0
lVe Mve
Sol
4V
PrP
IO
Py
Sp5
lVe
Mve
Sol
4V
PrP
IO
Py
Sp5
scp
Lve
Py
IO
scp
Sv
e
Lv
e Mve
4V
n8
Lve
Sp5
PrP
A03354
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1460085698)
3246 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
to produce effects, the response was bilateral, including 
at least one muscle in the left arm and at least one in the 
right; 19 % of the sites evoked only ipsilateral responses, 
and no sites evoked only contralateral responses. This was 
similar for the right and left sides. Given the relatively limited
number of effective sites producing responses, a Chisquared
test was used to further evaluate differences in 
effectiveness of PMRF stimulation in evoking left versus 
right muscle responses. In sum, for this subject, the right 
side of the PMRF appears to have been more responsive 
than the left, but the distribution of ipsilateral versus contralateral
responses was similar for both sides (X2 = 0.863, 
P = 0.35). Further motor output pattern comparisons 
showed, with a small lesion and spontaneous recovery, the 
balance of left versus right arm responses for both sides 
was similar to that expected for awake behaving animals 
(X2 = 4.19, P = 0.758). Given the relatively small number 
of sites in this subject, these findings should be interpreted 
with caution.
To determine the probability that a right–left imbalance 
would occur by chance due to PMRF sites targeted, right 
and left arm responses for the left and right PMRF for subject
1 were compared with awake behaving controls. For 
left PMRF, the odds (OR 0.294; 95 % CI 0.08, 1.07) of 
increased right arm responses after spontaneous recovery 
were not greater than expected. Similarly, for right PMRF, 
the odds (OR 1.85; 95 % CI 1.06, 3.24) of an imbalance 
of right–left arm responses after recovery were slightly 
higher for the injured animal, but did not reach statistical 
significance.
In subject 2, PMRF stimulation was performed at the 
end of rehabilitative training. Stimulation was applied at 
111 sites (58 left and 53 right) from 16 electrode penetrations
(8 left and 8 right), 85 of which were found to be 
within the PMRF based on the anatomical reconstruction 
(Fig. 9b). The number of left (42/85 sites) and right (43/85 
sites) PMRF sites explored was balanced. Of these 85 sites, 
58 (68 %) were effective for evoking at least one EMG 
response. In total, 152 significant EMG responses were 
evoked among the 16 muscles studied. There were more 
responses evoked from right (90/152 responses) than from 
left (62/152 responses) PMRF sites (X2 = 5.16, P = 0.023). 
For each effective stimulation site in right PMRF, the number
of muscles responding per site ranged from 1 to 8, with 
a median of 2 and a mean of 2.55 ± 1.57 (SD). A similar 
number of muscles responded per site for left PMRF, with 
a range of 1 to 7 muscles per site, a median of 2 and a mean 
of 2.69 ± 1.89 (SD). For this subject, bilateral responses 
were evoked from 52 % of all effective sites; 28 % of sites 
evoked only contralateral responses; 21 % of sites evoked 
only ipsilateral responses.
For subject 2, overall, there were about twice as many 
right arm EMG responses in response to PMRF stimulation 
(102 right, 50 left; X2 = 17.79, P < 0.0001). The left and 
right PMRF had different patterns of output. There was a 
relative paucity of left (ipsilateral) arm responses from the 
left (ipsilesional) PMRF, resulting in a relatively high proportion
of right arm responses (X2 = 14.52, P = 0.0001). 
Right arm responses were also more common from the 
right PMRF. Further motor output pattern comparisons 
with intact subjects showed that the balance of right versus 
left of arm responses from right PMRF was slightly higher 
than expected (X2 = 9.075, P = 0.028; Table 2). Again, 
given the small number of sites for this subject, these findings
should be interpreted with caution.
Right and left arm response patterns for the left and 
right PMRF for subject 2 were compared with data from 
awake behaving controls to establish the probability that 
this right–left imbalance occurred by chance. For left 
PMRF, there were nearly three times as many right arm 
responses after spontaneous recovery in the injured animal
(OR 2.709; 95 % CI 1.93, 3.81). For right PMRF, the 
odds of (OR 1.44; 95 % CI 1.11, 1.88) increased right arm 
responses were slightly higher for the injured animal but 
did not reach statistical significance.
Summary
In sum, intracortical ET-1 injections in the non-human primate
motor cortex produced localized impairments of reach 
performance and signal intensity changes on MRI consistent
with an ischemic cortical injury. Two weeks after a 
small focal lesion targeting a portion of the M1 arm representation
in subject 1, spontaneous recovery without motor 
skill training was associated with a reduction in the area of 
shoulder/elbow representation in the lesioned M1. For the 
contralesional M1, the overall area of arm representation 
was unchanged, but an increased representation of complex 
and bilateral arm movements was evident. There appeared 
to be decreased responsiveness in the left PMRF (ipsilesional
to ET-1 injection), but no change in the relative proportion
of right versus left arm responses from what was 
Table 2 Output effects evoked by electrical stimulation in the PMRF
Numbers are the total number of significant EMG output effects 
noted (facilitation and suppression are combined)
Percentages are the proportion for that side of the brainstem in that 
subject; the higher percentage is shown in bold
Stimulation site Subject 1 Subject 2
Ipsilateral Contralateral Ipsilateral Contralateral
Left PMRF Left Arm Right Arm Left Arm Right Arm
8 (89 %) 1(11 %) 16 (26 %) 46 (74 %)
Right PMRF Right Arm Left Arm Right Arm Left Arm
39 (67 %) 19 (33 %) 56 (62 %) 34 (38 %)
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.853657907)
3247 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
expected in healthy animals. For subject 2, after a sizeable 
cortical lesion, 12 weeks of intensive rehabilitative training 
produced substantial though incomplete recovery of reaching
performance. Despite this functional recovery, there 
was no return of the right arm representation in the lesioned 
M1, nor was there any new representation of the right arm 
found in the contralesional M1. The unique findings were 
the increased right arm responses found within the PMRF 
and decreased responsiveness of left PMRF.
Discussion
Advancing our understanding of the mechanisms involved 
in recovery of motor function after ischemic cortical 
lesions is essential for improving clinical interventions and 
rehabilitative strategies. The main findings of the present 
study were that intracortical endothelin-1 (ET-1) injections 
targeting the primary motor cortex (M1) arm representation 
area in the macaque were effective at producing impaired 
contralateral reaching. As anticipated from the rodent models
, the degree of reach performance deficits was influenced
by the extent of cortical tissue injured (Gartshore 
et al. 1996; Macrae et al. 1993a, b; Sharkey et al. 1993). 
Also, as in rodents (Fuxe et al. 1992; Gilmour et al. 2004; 
Windle et al. 2006), although lesion extent varied between 
the two subjects, this was consistent with the difference in 
dosing; the location of ET-1-induced cortical lesions in the 
macaque could be controlled. MRI reconstruction evidence 
indicated that the ET-1 injection sites comprised superficial 
and deep cortical layers (see Fig. 5a), and deep subcortical
structures were unimpaired for both subjects. Hence, 
these preliminary findings suggest the ET-1 model in the 
macaque to be a viable way to create ischemic cortical 
lesions with controlled locations. The simplest explanation
for reach performance differences between subjects is 
the extent of the lesion. In subject 1, with a subset of armrelated
sites injected and only one round of injections, the 
overall duration of ischemia was limited. Correspondingly, 
the lesion was small, and it seems likely that many corticospinal
cells projecting to the arm survived this procedure, 
such that within 2 weeks, there was substantial recovery. 
In subject 2, with more sites and an extended duration of 
ischemia created by two rounds of injections, the lesion to 
the arm-related region of the motor cortex was extensive 
and appears to have been functionally complete. Additionally
, the extensive signal intensity changes extending into 
somatosensory cortex evident at day 10 for subject 2 suggest
that sensory cortex deficits may have played a role 
in motor performance deficits. Early during rehabilitative 
training, the subject visually confirmed food by partially 
opening the hand. Thus, perhaps loss of corticocortical 
inputs from somatosensory cortex interfered with reach 
performance recovery (Coles and Glees 1954). Interestingly
, even with the apparent sensory cortex involvement, 
subject 2 regained the ability to orient hand to target and 
manipulate gross grasp for retrieval of food rewards.
Potential mechanisms for lesion evolution
Lesion volume derived from T2-weighted images for subject
2 was clearly larger at 10 days post-ET-1 injections 
than at final measurements. This evolution of the cortical 
lesion as assessed by MRI was comparable to other MRI 
scan findings, showing that over the 12-week course of 
rehabilitation, the signals in MRI returned in the direction 
of the pre-lesion appearance (Peuser et al. 2011). Because 
the histological processing used here was not designed to 
preserve the shape of the cortex and preserve the lesion 
during processing, we could not perform valid postmortem 
histological measurements in the present study. Although 
ET-1 infusion was aimed to the gray matter in M1, some 
spread to the white matter is likely, which may be detected 
on the day 10 post-MRI scans as signal hyperintensity 
extending into much of somatosensory cortex (Fig. 5b). 
Another plausible explanation for lesion volume differences
at the early and late time points for subject 2 may be 
enhanced inflammatory response and vasogenic edema in 
the peri-infarct region, which may have been particularly 
severe with the longer ischemic time period.
Potential mechanisms for recovery: adjacent cortical 
motor areas and contralesional cortex
Most current work on recovery from cortical motor area 
lesions in animal models focuses on reorganization of 
motor outputs from the penumbra and other spared ipsilesional
cortical motor structures (Aizawa et al. 1991; Dancause
and Nudo 2011; Frost et al. 2003; Glees and Cole 
1949; Liepert et al. 2000; Nudo 2007; Nudo and Milliken 1996; Nudo et al. 1996). These studies have shown 
that adjacent intact motor cortex areas can compensate for 
functions of the injured area. For example, there are robust 
corticospinal projections from the hand and arm representation
of the supplementary motor area (SMA) to the spinal
cord (Dum and Strick 1991; Galea and Darian-Smith 
1994; Maier et al. 2002). Neurophysiological evidence in 
non-human primates also supports a role for SMA in recovery
following isolated M1 injury (Aizawa et al. 1991; Eisner-Janowicz
et al. 2008). As discussed in “Results” section
, reanalysis of the functional topography of M1 after 
reach recovery for subject 2 (large lesion) failed to detect 
arm responses to stimulation in the peri-infarct area. The 
absence of a well-defined arm region in ipsilesional M1 for 
subject 2 suggests that functional compensation occurred in 
areas other than M1.
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1272813944)
3248 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
Others have suggested motor areas in the contralesional 
cortex may play a role in recovery (Butefisch et al. 2005; 
Nair et al. 2007; Netz et al. 1997; Pineiro et al. 2001; Turton
et al. 1996). Increased neural activity in homologous 
cortical motor regions ipsilateral to the paretic arm has been 
shown using electroencephalography (Serrien et al. 2004; 
Verleger et al. 2003), functional brain imaging (Chen et al. 
2003; Chollet et al. 1991; Cramer et al. 1997; Feydy et al. 
2002; Honda et al. 1997; Marshall et al. 2000; Netz et al. 
1997) and non-invasive brain stimulation (Alagona et al. 
2001; Harris-Love et al. 2011; Turton et al. 1996). Thus, 
our findings of contralesional cortical changes in the first 
subject were not unexpected. Given the lack of changes 
found in the contralesional cortex in subject 2 combined 
with the total lack of responsiveness from the ipsilesional 
cortex, increased reliance on motor control from ipsilateral 
and/or contralateral SMA along with increased reliance on 
corticoreticular pathways would seem to be likely explanations
for this subject’s recovery of reaching. Again, this 
remains as a future area of investigation.
Relatively few studies have considered the possible role 
of subcortical structures for recovery of motor control in 
monkeys, but when investigated, potential contributions 
of rubrospinal and reticulospinal systems have also been 
found (Belhaj-Saif and Cheney 2000; Riddle et al. 2009; 
Zaaimi et al. 2012). To our knowledge, the data presented 
here represent the first demonstration in a non-human primate
that alteration in the motor output of the PMRF may 
be associated with recovery of upper limb function after 
a relatively severe ischemic cortical injury as a model of 
stroke.
Potential mechanisms for recovery: PMRF 
contributions
Following damage to corticospinal projections, recovery of 
arm function could be mediated by strengthening of PMRF 
effectiveness via corticoreticular pathways from intact 
ipsilesional cortical motor areas (Jankowska et al. 2005; 
Jankowska and Edgley 2006; Rho et al. 1997). Recovery 
of arm function could also be mediated by increased effectiveness
of corticoreticular projections from contralesional 
homologous cortical motor regions. And finally, the relative
influence of reticulospinal projections in spinal segments
could be increased in conjunction with the relative 
loss of corticospinal influence after the lesion. Of course, 
these potential contributions of the reticulospinal system 
to recovery would be in addition to the potential for corticospinal
recovery, which has previously been considered 
(see Nudo 2007, for review).
The decreased responsiveness of the left PMRF to electrical
stimulation found in both subjects is consistent with the 
observation that the majority of corticoreticular projections 
are ipsilateral (Rho et al. 1997). Electrical stimulation in 
gray matter is thought to excite output neurons through 
two means. One is by stimulation of the output neurons 
themselves, and the other is by stimulation of local axonal 
braches that provide excitatory synaptic inputs to the output 
neurons. In the present example, with reticulospinal cells 
considered the output neurons from the PMRF, then the consequence
of a lesion to the ipsilateral motor cortex would 
be a loss of synaptic drive to reticulospinal neurons. In the 
short term, this could be expected to make it harder to elicit 
responses to electrical stimulation from the PMRF. In subject
2, after rehabilitative training, the left PMRF appeared 
to be more effective at evoking responses in the contralateral 
(right) limb than would be expected. While many plausible 
explanations for this finding are possible, the simplest explanation
would be that direct and indirect reticulospinal pathways
were strengthened from the left PMRF to motoneurons 
on the right side. We know there are reticulospinal neurons 
with direct contralateral projections to the spinal gray, and 
there are also strong ipsilateral reticulospinal projections to 
spinal interneurons that decussate, so these substrates exist 
(Edgley et al. 2004; Jankowska et al. 2005; Jankowska and 
Edgley 2006; Zaaimi et al. 2012). The current study was not 
designed to distinguish between the various possible explanations
, which remain as topics for further investigation.
Methodological considerations for future studies
In the present study, each animal was able to serve as its own 
control by comparing pre-lesion behavioral reach scores with 
post-lesion scores. Lesion size and survival time differences 
between the two animals added a variable of comparison 
when discussing PMRF output pattern changes. For subject 
2, since PMRF mapping was performed post-rehabilitation 
only, it is unclear to what extent survival time contributed 
to PMRF motor output changes. Based on these pilot data, 
future studies replicating lesion size and recovery timelines 
without intensive rehabilitative training are needed to assess 
the impact of training on reach recovery and whether degree 
of recovery and PMRF responsiveness are dependent on 
rehabilitative training, survival time or both.
Ideally, the PMRF upper extremity motor output patterns
would have been measured at baseline, after injection
and after recovery for each subject, as was done for the 
cortex. However, accessing the PMRF required deep brain 
electrode penetrations through the parietal cortex with relatively
large guide tubes. In the awake behaving subject, 
with tracks limited to a few per week, our laboratory successfully
runs several dozen tracks over the course of a few 
months per subject without obvious deficit. However, the 
need to run several deep tracks in one session was considered
too likely to result in PMRF changes brought on by 
the repeated penetrations that would confound the ability 
( 8.0.0.2542.1691969981 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
3249 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
to detect changes associated with recovery. This restricted 
the present study to a representative snapshot of the PMRF 
motor outputs at one time point. In light of the relatively 
consistent pattern of motor output from the PMRF that has 
been observed in previous works (Davidson and Buford 
2004, 2006; Gerriets et al. 2003), this was considered 
acceptable. Subsequent to this experiment, pilot studies 
to determine the impact of two sessions separated by several
weeks revealed relatively little evidence of histological
damage (Buford, unpublished results). Going forward, 
we would recommend at least two brainstem mapping 
sessions, baseline and terminal, for each subject. Whether 
more could be tolerated remains to be determined.
Conclusions
ET-1 allowed creation of controlled ischemic lesions in M1 
of the macaque, including lesions in the depth of the central 
sulcus. This provides a method for scientific investigation 
of defined cortical areas with an injury mechanism closely 
approximating ischemic stroke. In a subject with a relatively 
small lesion to M1 created by one round of ET-1 injections 
spaced at 2 mm, we found evidence of cortical plasticity ipsilateral
and contralateral to the lesion, which is reminiscent of 
what has been previously demonstrated. Interestingly, in the 
subject with a substantial lesion to M1 created by 2 rounds 
of ET-1 injections spaced at 1 mm, there was no evidence of 
ipsilesional recovery and no evidence of contralesional plasticity
, but reaching did recover substantially and there were 
changes evident in the motor output from the PMRF. These 
are the first findings demonstrating a role for the reticulospinal 
system in the recovery of skilled reaching after an ischemic 
cortical injury in the monkey. Further studies are needed investigating
the role of PMRF in reach recovery and the influence 
of rehabilitation compared with spontaneous recovery.
Acknowledgments The authors thank Stephanie Moran for excellent
technical support, Lynnette Montgomery for assistance with data 
collection, Lyn Jakeman for guidance with Dr. Herbert’s dissertation
project and the members of the ULAR staff who provided support
during these surgeries. Funding for this project was provided by 
a Research Investment Fund award from The Ohio State University 
College of Medicine and School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences
to JA Buford and in part by PODS I and PODS II awards to WJ 
Herbert from the Foundation for Physical Therapy, Inc. The authors 
would also like to acknowledge the Small Animal Imaging Core: 
Supported in part by Grant NINDS/P30 Core Grant (NS045758), 
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland.
References
Adkins DL, Voorhies AC, Jones TA (2004) Behavioral and neuroplastic
effects of focal endothelin-1 induced sensorimotor cortex 
lesions. Neuroscience 128:473–486
Aizawa H, Inase M, Mushiake H, Shima K, Tanji J (1991) Reorganization
of activity in the supplementary motor area associated 
with motor learning and functional recovery. Exp Brain Res 
84:668–671
Alagona G, Delvaux V, Gerard P, De Pasqua V, Pennisi G, Delwaide
PJ, Nicoletti F, de Maertens NA (2001) Ipsilateral motor 
responses to focal transcranial magnetic stimulation in healthy 
subjects and acute-stroke patients. Stroke 32:1304–1309
Belhaj-Saif A, Cheney PD (2000) Plasticity in the distribution of the 
red nucleus output to forearm muscles after unilateral lesions of 
the pyramidal tract. J Neurophysiol 83:3147–3153
Biernaskie J, Corbett D, Peeling J, Wells J, Lei H (2001) A serial MR 
study of cerebral blood flow changes and lesion development 
following endothelin-1-induced ischemia in rats. Magn Reson 
Med 46:827–830
Buford J (1996) A preliminary description of movement-related and 
preparatory activity in primate reticular formation (motor function
). J Jpn Phys Ther Assoc 23:11–30
Buford JA and Davidson AG (2004). Movement-related and preparatory
activity in the reticular formation during a bilateral reaching 
task. Accessed 11 Jan 2004
Butefisch CM, Kleiser R, Korber B (2005) Recruitment of contralesional
motor cortex in stroke patients with recovery of hand 
function. Neurology 64:1067–1069
Carmichael ST (2005) Rodent models of focal stroke: size, mechanism
, and purpose. NeuroRX 2:396–409
Chen R, Yung D, Li JY (2003) Organization of ipsilateral excitatory 
and inhibitory pathways in the human motor cortex. J Neurophysiol
89:1256–1264
Chollet F, DiPiero V, Wise RJ, Brooks DJ, Dolan RJ, Frackowiak RS 
(1991). The functional anatomy of motor recovery after stroke in 
humans: a study with positron emission tomography. Ann Neurol 
29:63–71
Coles J, Glees P (1954) Effects of small lesions in sensory cortex in 
trained monkeys. J Neurophysiol 17:1–13
Courtine G, Bunge MB, Fawcett JW, Grossman RG, Kaas JH, Lemon 
R, Maier I, Martin J, Nudo RJ, Ramon-Cueto A, Rouiller EM, 
Schnell L, Wannier T, Schwab ME, Edgerton VR (2007) Can 
experiments in nonhuman primates expedite the translation of 
treatments for spinal cord injury in humans? Nat Med 13:561–566
Cramer SC, Nelles G, Benson RR, Kaplan JD, Parker RA, Kwong 
KK, Kennedy DN, Finklestein SP, Rosen BR (1997) A functional
MRI study of subjects recovered from hemiparetic stroke. 
Stroke 28:2518–2527
Dancause N, Nudo RJ (2011) Shaping plasticity to enhance recovery 
after injury. Prog Brain Res 192:273–295
Dancause N, Barbay S, Frost SB, Plautz EJ, Chen D, Zoubina EV, 
Stowe AM, Nudo RJ (2005) Extensive cortical rewiring after 
brain injury. J Neurosci 25:10167–10179
Dancause N, Barbay S, Frost SB, Zoubina EV, Plautz EJ, Mahnken 
JD, Nudo RJ (2006) Effects of small ischemic lesions in the primary
motor cortex on neurophysiological organization in ventral 
premotor cortex. J Neurophysiol 96:3506–3511
Davidson AG, Buford JA (2004) Motor outputs from the primate 
reticular formation to shoulder muscles as revealed by stimulus 
triggered averaging. J Neurophysiol 92:83–95
Davidson AG, Buford JA (2006) Bilateral actions of the reticulospinal 
tract on arm and shoulder muscles in the monkey: stimulus triggered
averaging. Exp Brain Res 173:25–39
Davidson AG, Chan V, O’Dell R, Schieber MH (2007) Rapid changes 
in throughput from single motor cortex neurons to muscle activity.
Science 318:1934–1937
Dewald JPA, Pope PS, Given JD, Buchanan TS, Rymer WZ (1995) 
Abnormal muscle coactivation patterns during isometric torque 
generation at the elbow and shoulder in hemiparetic subjects. 
Brain 118:495–510
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
3250 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
Dum RP, Strick PL (1991) The origin of corticospinal projections
from the premotor areas in the frontal lobe. J Neurosci 
11:667–689
Edgley SA, Jankowska E, Hammar I (2004) Ipsilateral actions of 
feline corticospinal tract neurons on limb motoneurons. J Neurosci
24:7804–7813
Eisner-Janowicz I, Barbay S, Hoover E, Stowe AM, Frost SB, Plautz 
EJ, Nudo RJ (2008) Early and late changes in the distal forelimb
representation of the supplementary motor area after injury 
to frontal motor areas in the squirrel monkey. J Neurophysiol 
100:1498–1512
Ellis MD, Holubar BG, Acosta AM, Beer RF, Dewald JPA (2005) 
Modifiability of abnormal isometric elbow and shoulder joint 
torque coupling after stroke. Muscle Nerve 32:170–178
Ellis MD, Acosta AM, Yao J, Dewald JPA (2007) Position-dependent 
torque coupling and associated muscle activation in the hemiparetic
upper extremity. Exp Brain Res 176:594–602
Feydy A, Carlier R, Roby-Brami A, Bussel B, Cazalis F, Pierot L, 
Burnod Y, Maier MA (2002) Longitudinal study of motor recovery
after stroke: recruitment and focusing of brain activation. 
Stroke 33:1610–1617
Frost SB, Barbay S, Friel KM, Plautz EJ, Nudo RJ (2003) Reorganization
of remote cortical regions after ischemic brain 
injury: a potential substrate for stroke recovery. J Neurophysiol 
89:3205–3214
Fuxe K, Kurosawa N, Cintra A, Hallstrom A, Goiny M, Rosen L, 
Agnati LF, Ungerstedt U (1992) Involvement of local ischemia 
in endothelin-1 induced lesions of the neostriatum of the anaesthetized
rat. Exp Brain Res 88:131–139
Galea MP, Darian-Smith I (1994) Multiple corticospinal neuron populations
in the macaque monkey are specified by their unique cortical
origins, spinal terminations, and connections. Cereb Cortex 
4:166–194
Gartshore G, Dawson D, Patterson J, Macrae IM (1996) Topographic 
profile of reperfusion into MCA territory following endothelin-
1-induced transient focal cerebral ischaemia. Neurosci Lett 
202:209–213
Garzel L, Green J, Mattox L, Herbert W, Moran S, Buford J, Lewis S 
(2009) Anesthetic protocol for an extended duration electrophysiology
study in cynomolgus macaques. J Am Assoc Lab Anim 
Sci 48:570
Gerriets T, Li F, Silva M, Meng X, Brevard M, Sotak C, Fisher M 
(2003) The macrosphere model: evaluation of a new stroke 
model for permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. J 
Neurosci Methods 122:201–211
Gilmour G, Iversen SD, Neill MF, Bannerman DM (2004) The effects 
of intracortical endothelin-1 injections on skilled forelimb use: 
implications for modelling recovery of function after stroke. 
Behav Brain Res 150:171–183
Glees P, Cole J (1949) The reappearance of coordinated movements 
of the hand after lesions in the hand area of the motor cortex of 
the rhesus monkey. J Physiol 108:Proc-33
Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ, 
Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Franco S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, 
Hailpern SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, Kissela
BM, Kittner SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, 
Mackey RH, Magid DJ, Marcus GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, 
McGuire DK, Mohler ER III, Moy CS, Mussolino ME, Neumar 
RW, Nichol G, Pandey DK, Paynter NP, Reeves MJ, Sorlie PD, 
Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D, 
Turner MB (2014) Executive summary: heart disease and stroke 
statistics—2014 update: a report from the American Heart Association.
Circulation 129:399–410
Harris-Love ML, Morton SM, Perez MA, Cohen LG (2011) Mechanisms
of short-term training-induced reaching improvement in 
severely hemiparetic stroke patients: a TMS study. Neurorehabil 
Neural Repair 25:398–411
Herbert WJ, Montgomery LR, Buford JA (2010) Contributions of the 
corticospinal and reticulospinal systems in recovery of reaching 
following cortical ischemic brain injury in the non-human primate.
J Neurol Phys Ther 34:222
Honda M, Nagamine T, Fukuyama H, Yonekura Y, Kimura J, Shibasaki
H (1997) Movement-related cortical potentials and regional 
cerebral blood flow change in patients with stroke after motor 
recovery. J Neurol Sci 146:117–126
Jankowska E, Edgley SA (2006) How can corticospinal tract neurons 
contribute to ipsilateral movements? A question with implications
for recovery of motor functions. Neuroscientist 12:67–79
Jankowska E, Cabaj A, Pettersson LG (2005) How to enhance ipsilateral
actions of pyramidal tract neurons. J Neurosci 25:7401–7405
Kaeser M, Wyss AF, Bashir S, Hamadjida A, Liu Y, Bloch J, Brunet 
JF, Belhaj-Saif A, Rouiller EM (2010) Effects of unilateral motor 
cortex lesion on ipsilesional hand’s reach and grasp performance 
in monkeys: relationship with recovery in the contralesional 
hand. J Neurophysiol 103:1630–1645
Kawaguchi M, Shimizu K, Furuya H, Sakamoto T, Ohnishi H, Karasawa
J (1996) Effect of isoflurane on motor-evoked potentials 
induced by direct electrical stimulation of the exposed motor 
cortex with single, double, and triple stimuli in rats. Anesthesiology
85:1176–1183
Kozuimi J, Yoshida Y, Nakazawa T, Ooneda G (1986) Experimental 
studies of ischemic brain edema. 1. A new experimental model 
of cerebral embolism in rats in which recirculation can be introduced
in the ischemic area. Jpn J Stroke 8:1–8
Liepert J, Graef S, Uhde I, Leidner O, Weiller C (2000) Traininginduced
changes of motor cortex representations in stroke 
patients. Acta Neurol Scand 101:321–326
Liu Y, Rouiller EM (1999) Mechanisms of recovery of dexterity following
unilateral lesion of the sensorimotor cortex in adult monkeys.
Exp Brain Res 128:149–159
Macrae IM, Robinson MJ, Graham DI, Reid JL, McCulloch J (1993a) 
Endothelin-1-induced reductions in cerebral blood flow: dose 
dependency, time course, and neuropathological consequences. J 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 13:276–284
Macrae IM, Robinson MJ, Graham DI, Reid JL, McCulloch J (1993b) 
Endothelin-1-induced reductions in cerebral blood flow: dose 
dependency, time course, and neuropathological consequences. J 
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 13:276–284
Maier MA, Armand J, Kirkwood PA, Yand HW, Davis JN, Lemon RN 
(2002) Differences in the corticospinal projection from primary 
motor cortex and supplementary motor area to macaque upper 
limb motoneurons: an anatomical and electrophysiological study. 
Cereb Cortex 12:281–296
Marshall RS, Perera GM, Lazar RM, Krakauer JW, Constantine RC, 
DeLaPaz RL (2000) Evolution of cortical activation during 
recovery from corticospinal tract infarction. Stroke 31:656–661
McNeal DW, Darling WG, Ge J, Silwell-Morecraft K, Solon K, 
Hynes S, Pizzimenti M, Rotella D, Vanadurongvan T, Morecraft 
R (2010) Selective long-term reorganization of the corticospinal
projection from the supplementary motor cortex following
recovery from lateral motor cortex injury. J Comp Neurol 
518:586–621
Montgomery LR, Herbert WJ, Buford JA (2013) Recruitment of ipsilateral
and contralateral upper limb muscles following stimulation
of the cortical motor areas in the monkey. Exp Brain Res 
230:153–164
Nair DG, Hutchinson S, Fregni F, Alexander M, Pascual-Leone A, 
Schlaug G (2007) Imaging correlates of motor recovery from 
cerebral infarction and their physiological significance in wellrecovered
patients. NeuroImage 34:253–263
(8.0.0.2542.2111126018 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
3251 Exp Brain Res (2015) 233:3231–3251
1 3
Netz J, Lammers T, Homberg V (1997) Reorganization of motor 
output in the non-affected hemisphere after stroke. Brain 
120:1579–1586
Nichols-Larsen DS, Clark PC, Zeringue A, Greenspan A, Blanton S 
(2005) Factors influencing stroke survivors’ quality of life during 
subacute recovery. Stroke 36:1480–1484
Nudo RJ (2007) Postinfarct cortical plasticity and behavioral recovery.
Stroke 38:840–845
Nudo RJ, Milliken GW (1996) Reorganization of movement representations
in primary motor cortex following focal ischemic 
infarcts in adult squirrel monkeys. J Neurophysiol 75:2144–2149
Nudo RJ, Milliken GW, Jenkins WM, Merzenich MM (1996) Usedependent
alterations of movement representations in primary 
motor cortex of adult squirrel monkeys. J Neurosci 16:785–807
Peuser J, Belhaj-Saif A, Hamadjida A, Schmidlin E, Gindrat AD, 
Volker AC, Zakharov P, Hoogewoud HM, Rouiller EM, Scheffold
F (2011) Follow-up of cortical activity and structure after 
lesion with laser speckle imaging and magnetic resonance imaging
in nonhuman primates. J Biomed Opt 16:096011
Pineiro R, Pendlebury S, Johansen-Berg H, Matthews PM (2001) 
Functional MRI detects posterior shifts in primary sensorimotor 
cortex activation after stroke: evidence of local adaptive reorganization
? Stroke 32:1134–1139
Rathelot JA, Strick PL (2009) Subdivisions of primary motor cortex 
based on cortico-motoneuronal cells. PNAS 106:918–923
Rho MJ, Cabana T, Drew T (1997) Organization of the projections 
from the pericruciate cortex to the pontomedullary reticular formation
of the cat: a quantitative retrograde tracing study. J Comp 
Neurol 388:228–249
Riddle CN, Edgley SA, Baker SN (2009) Direct and indirect connections
with upper limb motoneurons from the primate reticulospinal
tract. J Neurosci 29:4993–4999
Robinson MJ, Macrae IM, Todd M, Reid JL, McCulloch J (1990) 
Reduction of local cerebral blood flow to pathological levels by 
endothelin-1 applied to the middle cerebral artery in the rat. Neurosci
Lett 118:269–272
Schepens B, Drew T (2003) Strategies for the integration of posture
and movement during reaching in the cat. J Neurophysiol 
90:3066–3086
Serrien DJ, Strens LH, Cassidy MJ, Thompson AJ, Brown P (2004) 
Functional significance of the ipsilateral hemisphere during movement
of the affected hand after stroke. Exp Neurol 190:425–432
Sharkey J, Ritchie IM, Kell PAT (1993) Perivascular microapplication 
of endothelin-1: a new model of focal cerebral ischaemia in the 
rat. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 13:865–871
Szabo J, Cowan WM (1984) A stereotaxic atlas of the brain of the 
cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicularis). J. Comp Neurol 
222:265–300
Tecchio F, Zappasodi F, Tombini M, Oliviero A, Pasqualetti P, Vernieri
F, Ercolani M, Pizzella V, Rossini PM (2006) Brain plasticity
in recovery from stroke: an MEG assessment. Neuroimage 
32:1326–1334
Turton A, Wroe S, Trepte N, Fraser C, Lemon RN (1996) Contralateral
and ipsilateral EMG responses to transcranial magnetic 
stimulation during recovery of arm and hand function after 
stroke. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 101:316–328
Verleger R, Adam S, Rose M, Vollmer C, Wauschkuhn B, Kompf D 
(2003) Control of hand movements after striatocapsular stroke: 
high-resolution temporal analysis of the function of ipsilateral 
activation. Clin Neurophysiol 114:1468–1476
Windle V, Szymanska A, Granter-Button S, White C, Buist R, Peeling 
J, Corbett D (2006) An analysis of four different methods of producing
focal cerebral ischemia with endothelin-1 in the rat. Exp 
Neurol 201:324–334
Yanagisawa M, Kurihara H, Kimura S, Tomobe Y, Kobayashi M, 
Mitsui Y, Yazaki Y, Goto K, Masaki T (1988) A novel potent 
vasoconstrictor peptide produced by vascular endothelial cells. 
Nature 332:411–415
Zaaimi B, Edgley SA, Soteropoulos DS, Baker SN (2012) Changes in 
descending motor pathway connectivity after corticospinal tract 
lesion in macaque monkey. Brain 135:2277–2289
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.734170299)
