R E S EA R C H A R T I C L E

Compromised Blood–Brain Barrier Competence in
Remote Brain Areas in Ischemic Stroke Rats
at the Chronic Stage
Svitlana Garbuzova-Davis,1,2,3,4* Edward Haller,5 Stephanie N. Williams,1 Eithan D. Haim,1
Naoki Tajiri,1 Diana G. Hernandez-Ontiveros,1 Aric Frisina-Deyo,1 Sean M. Boffeli,1
Paul R. Sanberg,1,2,4,6 and Cesario V. Borlongan1,2
1

Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612
Department of Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612
3
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida
33612
4
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612
5
Department of Integrative Biology, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620
6
Department of Psychiatry, University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, Florida 33612
2

ABSTRACT
Stroke is a life-threatening disease leading to long-term
disability in stroke survivors. Cerebral functional insufficiency in chronic stroke might be due to pathological
changes in brain areas remote from the initial ischemic
lesion, i.e., diaschisis. Previously, we showed that the
damaged blood–brain barrier (BBB) was involved in subacute diaschisis. The present study investigated BBB
competence in chronic diaschisis by using a transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) rat model.
Our results demonstrated significant BBB damage
mostly in the ipsilateral striatum and motor cortex in
rats at 30 days after tMCAO. The BBB alterations were
also determined in the contralateral hemisphere via
ultrastructural and immunohistochemical analyses.
Major BBB pathological changes in contralateral remote
striatum and motor cortex areas included 1) vacuolated

endothelial cells containing large autophagosomes, 2)
degenerated pericytes displaying mitochondria with
cristae disruption, 3) degenerated astrocytes and perivascular edema, 4) Evans blue extravasation, and 5)
appearance of parenchymal astrogliosis. Discrete analyses of striatal and motor cortex areas revealed significantly higher autophagosome accumulation in
capillaries of ventral striatum and astrogliosis in dorsal
striatum in both cerebral hemispheres. These widespread microvascular alterations in ipsilateral and contralateral brain hemispheres suggest persistent and/or
continued BBB damage in chronic ischemia. The pathological changes in remote brain areas likely indicate
chronic ischemic diaschisis, which should be considered in the development of treatment strategies for
stroke. J. Comp. Neurol. 522:3120–3137, 2014.
C 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
V

INDEXING TERMS: MCAO; rats; BBB; chronic diaschisis; autophagosomes; astrocytes

Stroke is a serious, life-threatening disease and the
fourth leading cause of death in the United States
(Anon, 2012). On average, every 40 seconds someone
has a stroke, and every 4 minutes someone dies of a
stroke (Anon, 2012; Go et al., 2013). Due to the interruption of blood flow to the brain, stroke is typed as
ischemic, intracerebral hemorrhagic, or subarachnoid
hemorrhagic. Approximately 87% of strokes are ischemic (Go et al., 2013). Stroke survivors may not fully
recover and risk long-term disability (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC], 2009). Among
ischemic stroke survivors at 65 years of age and older
C 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
V

3120

observed at 6 months after stroke, 50% had hemiparesis, 46% had cognitive deficits, and about 30% were

Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health; Grant number:
1RO1NS071956-01A1; Grant sponsor: James and Esther King Biomedical Research Program; Grant number: 1KG01-33966.
*CORRESPONDENCE TO: Svitlana Garbuzova-Davis, PhD, DSc, Center of
Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Department of Neurosurgery and
Brain Repair, University of South Florida, Morsani College of Medicine,
12901 Bruce B. Downs Blvd., Tampa, FL 33612. E-mail:
sgarbuzo@health.usf.edu
Received December 4, 2013; Revised January 28, 2014;
Accepted March 5, 2014.
DOI 10.1002/cne.23582
Published online March 8, 2014 in Wiley Online
(wileyonlinelibrary.com)

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience 522:3120–3137 (2014)

Library

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

dependent in daily living activities (Kelly-Hayes et al.,
2003).
The pathologic processes caused by stroke vascular
injury occur in a time-dependent manner and are separated into acute (minutes to hours), subacute (hours to
days), and chronic (days to months). The cascade of
cerebral pathological events arising shortly after initial
ischemic stroke insult (for review see Dirnagl et al.,
1999; Bramlett and Dietrich, 2004; VanGilder et al.,
2012) might contribute to prolonged and widespread
brain damage. Although the size of the primary stroke
lesion is important, the location of this lesion is also
essential for predicting patient outcome, especially at
the chronic stage. It has been shown that motor recovery and functional outcome in hemiplegic stroke
patients at 1 and 6 months after stroke correlate more
strongly with brain lesion size and primary location
rather than with only lesion size (Chen et al., 2000).
However, poststroke recovery might also depend on
functional changes in remote brain structures, i.e., diaschisis, which are distant from the initial (focal) ischemic lesion. Changes in blood flow and metabolism have
been determined in the hemisphere contralateral to unilateral cerebral ischemia, a condition known as transhemispheric diaschisis (Dobkin et al., 1989; Andrews,
1991). Stroke patients who recovered from severe
hemiparesis after about 6 months demonstrated overlap between the lesion-affected and recovery-related
networks in the contralesional thalamus and extrastriate
occipital cortex (Seitz et al., 1999). Also, it has been
shown that crossed cerebellar diaschisis is associated
with infarct hypoperfusion volume in both acute and
outcome stages in patients within 72 hours and 3
months of stroke onset, respectively, and that it
“persists despite neurological recovery” (Infeld et al.,
1995). In a rat middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
model of transient ischemia, transcortical diaschisis
was determined in the neocortex (Reinecke et al.,
1999; Neumann-Haefelin and Witte, 2000), suggesting
widespread degeneration of corticostriatal connections.
Another study on a focal cortical rat stroke model demonstrated ipsilateral diachisis in connected cortical
regions that were distant from initial damage (Carmichael et al., 2004).
Amid this complexity of postischemic pathological
changes, blood–brain barrier (BBB) competence might
be critical. Numerous comprehensive studies have identified BBB disruption after stroke (del Zoppo and Hallenbeck, 2000; Brown and Davis, 2002; del Zoppo and
Mabuchi, 2003; Persidsky et al., 2006; Sandoval and
Witt, 2008; Jin et al., 2010; Lakhan et al., 2013).
Increased BBB permeability has been shown both in
acute ischemic stroke patients (Dankbaar et al., 2011)

and in a rodent model of MCAO (Preston et al., 1993;
Yang and Betz, 1994; Belayev et al., 1996; Kahles
et al., 2007). Although biphasic (“open–close–open”)
BBB leakage separated by a refractory period in ischemic–reperfusion injury was noted between 3 and 24
hours post-MCAO (Kuroiwa et al., 1985; Preston et al.,
1993; Belayev et al., 1996; Rosenberg et al., 1998),
some studies showed BBB openings lasting for up to 4–
5 weeks (Strbian et al., 2008; Abo-Ramadan et al.,
2009) and possibly aggravating postischemic brain
injury.
However, despite intensive research into the implications of BBB openings in ischemic stroke, most of these
studies have focused on the acute poststroke stage
and the cerebral hemisphere of initial ischemic insult.
Recently, we demonstrated BBB alterations not only in
the ipsilateral hemisphere but also in contralateral brain
areas, 7 days after transient MCAO in rats, indicating
the existence of subacute ischemic diaschisis (Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013). Mainly, damaged endothelial
cells containing numerous autophagosomes, pericyte
degeneration, and perivascular edema in addition to
vascular leakage, widespread astrogliosis, activated
microglia, neuronal pyknosis, and decreased myelin
were determined in contralateral striatum and motor
and somatosensory cortices. Because our data revealed
that microvascular damage is associated with BBB
breakdown in brain areas remote from initial ischemic
lesion at the subacute ischemic stage, an important
next step was to investigate BBB competence and diaschisis in chronic ischemic stroke.
The aim of this study was to evaluate chronic diaschisis in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemia. A specific focus was analyzing BBB status in the contralateral
cerebral hemisphere, an area with remote brain structures not directly affected by ischemia.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Ethics statement
All procedures described were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at USF and
conducted in compliance with the Guide for the care
and use of laboratory animals.

Animals
All animals used in the study were obtained from The
Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). Thirty-two
Sprague Dawley adult male rats weighting 260.5 6
3.15 g were randomly assigned to one of two groups,
MCAO (n 5 15) or control (n 5 17). All rats were
housed in a temperature-controlled room (23 C) and

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3121

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

maintained on a 12:12-hour dark:light cycle (lights on
at 06:00 AM). Food and water were available ad libitum.

MCAO
Stroke surgery was performed via transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) using the intraluminal
filament technique previously described in detail (Borlongan et al., 2004a; Tajiri et al., 2012; GarbuzovaDavis et al., 2013) and based on our prior standardization of this stroke model (Matsukawa et al., 2009;
Yasuhara et al., 2009; Borlongan et al., 2010), showing
at least 80% reduction in regional cerebral blood flow in
stroke animals during the occlusion period as determined by laser Doppler (Perimed). Briefly, the tip of the
filament was customized using a dental cement (GC
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Body temperature was
maintained at 37 C 6 0.3 C during the surgical procedures. A midline skin incision was made in the neck,
with subsequent exploration of the right common
carotid artery (CCA), the external carotid artery, and
the internal carotid artery. A 4-0 monofilament nylon
suture (27.0–28.0 mm) was advanced from the CCA
bifurcation until it blocked the origin of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Animals were allowed to recover
from anesthesia during MCAO. At 60 minutes after
MCAO, animals were reanesthetized with 1–2% isoflurane in nitrous oxide/oxygen (69%/30%) using a face
mask and reperfused by withdrawal of the nylon thread.
A midline incision was made in the neck, and the right
CCA was isolated. The animals were then closed and
allowed to recover from anesthesia.

rat brains were rapidly removed from tMCAO rats (n 5
9) and controls (n 5 11) for EB extravasation assay as
described below. Remaining rats receiving an EB injection were perfused, and their brains were immediately
removed, fixed intact in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M
phosphate buffer for 24–48 hours, and then cryoprotected in 20% sucrose in 0.1 M phosphate buffer overnight. Coronal brain tissues were cut at 30 lm with a
cryostat, thaw-mounted onto slides, and stored at –
20 C for immunohistochemical analysis. Rats assayed
for electron microscopic analysis were randomly chosen
from each group (tMCAO n 5 3, control n 5 2). Rat
brains were immediately removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer for 16–24
hours at 4 C. On the next day, brains were cut into 1mm slices, mapped against a diagram of the whole
slice at Bregma level 0.20–0.48 mm accordingly to a
rat brain atlas (Paxinos and Watson, 1998), and the
motor cortex (M2/M1) and striatum (CPu) regions were
removed and coded from the slices of both brain hemispheres. Coordinates for ipsi-M1/M2 motor cortex area
were about 4 mm ventral and 1.5 mm lateral from the
striatum on the coronal section. Coordinates applied for
removal of striatum and motor cortex tissues from the
contralateral hemisphere were as previously described
(Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013). Tissues were then fixed
overnight in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate
buffer (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) at
4 C and stored for further electron microscopic
processing.

BBB permeability
Perfusion and tissue preparation
Thirty days after reperfusion, tMCAO rats and controls were killed under CO2 inhalation and perfused
transcardially with 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB; pH 7.2)
followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in phosphate
buffer solution under pressure-control fluid delivery at
85 mmHg. tMCAO rats (n 5 12) and controls (n 5 15)
were intravenously injected with 1 ml of 2% Evans blue
dye (EB; Aldrich Chemical, St. Louis, MO) in saline solution via the jugular vein 30 minutes prior to perfusion,
as previously described (Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013).
The surgical procedure was performed in tMCAO and
control rats using the same protocol, including exposure to anesthesia. Prior to perfusion, blood samples
(about 3 ml) were taken through cardiac puncture from
randomly selected tMCAO and control rats (n 5 5/
each group) and then collected into serum separation
tube (Corvac) for 10 minutes at room temperature (RT).
Sera were obtained after centrifugation at 1,200 rpm
for 15 minutes. Rats assayed for EB extravasation
received only phosphate buffer solution. After perfusion,

3122

EB dye, 961 Da, was used as a tracer for assessing
BBB disruption. The EB extravasation assay was performed as previously described (Borlongan et al.,
2004b; Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013). Briefly, after perfusion, rat brains were divided into right and left hemispheres. Brain tissues were weighed and placed in 50%
trichloroacetic acid solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).
After homogenization and centrifugation, the supernatant was diluted with ethanol (1:3) and loaded into a
96-well plate in triplicate. Sera were diluted with ethanol (1:10,000) and loaded separately into a 96-well
plate in triplicate also. The dye was measured with a
spectrofluorometer (Gemini EM Microplate Spectrofluorometer; Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) at excitation
of 620 nm and emission of 680 nm (Ay et al., 2008).
Calculations were based on external standards in the
same solvent. The tissue EB content was quantified
from a linear standard curve derived from known
amounts of the dye and was normalized to tissue
weight (micrograms per gram). For sera, EB concentration was quantified similarly and presented as

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

micrograms per milliliter. All measurements were performed by two experimenters blinded to the
experiment.

Electron microscopy
Because the cortex and striatum are the areas most
affected by MCAO (Nagasawa and Kogure, 1989; Popp
et al., 2009) and compromised BBB integrity was determined in remote contralateral brain areas in tMCAO
rats at subacute stage (Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013),
ultra structural analysis of microvessels was performed
in the motor cortex (M2/M1) and striatum (CPu) of
both brain hemispheres in rats 30 days after tMCAO by
using electron microscopy. Briefly, tissue samples were
postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide (Electron Microscopy
Sciences) in 0.1 M phosphate buffer for 1 hour at room
temperature and then dehydrated in a graded series of
acetone dilutions. Tissues were transferred to a 50:50
mix of acetone and LX112 epoxy resin embedding mix
(Ladd Research Industries, Burlington, VT) and infiltrated with this mixture for 1 hour. The tissues were
then transferred to a 100% LX112 embedding mix and
infiltrated with fresh changes of the embedding mixture.
The tissues were further infiltrated overnight in fresh
embedding medium at 4 C. On the following day, the
tissues were embedded in a fresh change of resin in
tissue capsules. The blocks were polymerized at 70 C
in an oven overnight. The blocks were trimmed and
then sectioned with a diamond knife on an LKB Huxley
ultramicrotome. Thick sections cut at 0.35 lm were
placed on glass slides and stained with 1% toluidine
blue. Thin sections were cut at 80–90 nm, placed on
copper grids, and stained with uranyl acetate and lead
citrate.

BBB integrity analysis
For analysis of BBB ultrastructure, microvessels in
the motor cortex and striatum of both ipsilateral and
contralateral brain hemispheres were examined by an
investigator blinded to the animal groups and photographed with an Olympus MegaView III digital camera
(ResAlta Research Technologies Corp., Golden, CO)
attached to a FEI Morgagni transmission electron microscope (FEI, Inc., Hillsboro, OR) at 60 kV. In addition to
the EB extravasation assay described above, vascular
EB leakage was analyzed in serial brain sections via
immunohistochemistry.

Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining for autophagosomes
was performed to detect autophagy response within
capillary endothelial cells. Serial brain tissue sections of
tMCAO and control rats were preincubated with 10%

normal donkey serum (NGS) and 0.3% Triton X-100 in
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 60 minutes at room
temperature. Sheep polyclonal anti-Beclin-1 antibody
(Beclin-1, 1:200; Thermo Scientific Pierce Antibodies,
Rockford, IL) was applied on the slides overnight at
4 C. On the next day, the slides were rinsed in
phosphate-buffered saline and incubated with secondary donkey anti-sheep antibody conjugated to fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; 1:500, Alexa Fluor 488;
Molecular Probes) for 2 hours. After rinsing, slides were
coverslipped with Vectashield containing DAPI (Vector,
Burlingame, CA) and examined with an Olympus BX60
epifluorescence microscope. Observation and quantification of Beclin-1 fluorescent intensity was performed
in five to eight capillaries per examined brain area and
structure in both hemispheres: striatum, medial (M), lateral (L), dorsal (D), and ventral (V) areas; motor cortex,
M2 and M1 areas. Microvascular EB leakage was also
analyzed in these images. Diameters of capillaries
(micrometers) were measured in NIH ImageJ (version
1.46) software. For consistent results, capillaries of
diameters from 20 to 25 lm were used for fluorescent
detection of Beclin-1 immunoexpression. Microvessels
below or above this range as well as longitudinal capillaries were excluded.
In a separate set of brain sections, immunohistochemical staining of astrocytes was performed as
described by Garbuzova-Davis et al. (2013). Briefly,
brain tissues were preincubated in blocking solution as
described above and then incubated overnight with rabbit polyclonal antiglial fibrillary acid protein primary antibody (GFAP; 1:500; Dako, Carpinteria, CA) at 4 C. On
the next day, secondary goat anti-rabbit antibody conjugated to FITC (1:500; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) was
applied for 2 hours. After washing, slides were coverslipped with Vectashield containing DAPI (Vector) and
examined with an Olympus BX60 epifluorescence microscope. Fluorescent images were taken from two or three
sections per animal, sections separated by approximately 90 lm, and analyzed in the same discrete areas
of the striatum and motor cortex described above.
Immunohistochemical images of all assessments performed were taken at approximately the same Bregma
level analyzed by electron microscopy by an investigator blinded to the experiments, and animal codes were
removed prior to analysis. To avoid bias in the analysis
of fluorescence images, specific brain areas were identified in a section using a 103/0.30 numerical aperture
(NA) lens and then areas of interest were photographed
with a 203/0.50 NA lens, photographing the slide in a
random raster pattern. All image analyses for Beclin-1
and GFAP were performed by measuring intensity of fluorescent expression (%/lm2) in NIH ImageJ (version

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3123

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

TABLE 1.
Primary Antibodies Used
Antigen

Immunogen

Manufacturer

Catalog/lot No./species

Dilution used

Beclin-1

Synthetic peptide from
human coiled-coil myosinlike BCL2-interacting
protein
Polyclonal rabbit antiglial
fibrillary acidic protein;
GFAP isolated from cow
spinal cord

Thermo Scientific Pierce
Antibodies (Rockford, IL)

OSA00006W/0D1691051/
sheep polyclonal

1:200

Dako (Glostrup, Denmark)

Z0334/00073720/rabbit
polyclonal

1:500

GFAP

1.46) software. For Beclin-1 immunoexpression, fluorescent intensity was measured relative to capillary area.
For GFAP immunoexpression, fluorescent intensity was
measured in the entire image. Thresholds for detection
of Beclin-1 and GFAP fluorescein expressions were
adjusted for each image to eliminate background noise.

Primary antibody characterization
The primary antibodies, their sources, and the dilutions used for immunohistochemistry in this study are
listed in Table 1. Immunohistochemical staining for autophagosomes within capillary endothelial cells was performed using a polyclonal sheep anti-Beclin-1 antibody
(1:200; catalog No. OSA00006W; Thermo Scientific
Pierce Antibodies, Rockford, IL). The antigen is a synthetic peptide from amino acid region 400–450 of
human Beclin-1, which was conjugated to a blue carrier
protein. This region is homologous in rat and mouse and
corresponds to a portion of BCL2-interacting protein.
This antibody identifies a Beclin-1 protein with Western
blotting at approximately 50–55 kDa (manufacturer’s
technical information; antibody registry No. AB_962043).
Immunohistochemical staining of astrocytes was performed with a rabbit polyclonal anti-GFAP primary antibody (1:500; catalog No. Z0334; Dako, Glostrup,
Denmark). This polyclonal antibody was prepared against
GFAP from bovine spinal cord. GFAP shows 90–95%
homology between species, and, as demonstrated by
immunocytochemistry, the antibody cross-reacts with
GFAP in cat, dog, mouse, rat, and sheep (manufacturer’s
technical information; antibody registry No. AB_10013382;
Fuentes-Santamaria et al., 2013).

Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean 6 SEM. One-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s/Dunn’s multiple-comparisons
test (Statview, Cary, NC) was used. Analyses were considered significant at: EB extravasation, P < 0.0167; EB
serum concentration, P < 0.005; Beclin-1 or GFAP
immunoexpression in striatum, P < 0.0004; Beclin-1 or
GFAP immunoexpression in motor cortex, P < 0.0018.

3124

RESULTS
Ultrastructure of the cerebral
microvasculature in a chronic ischemic rat
model of tMCAO
BBB ultrastructure was analyzed in brains of rats killed
at 30 days after tMCAO by electron microscopy. Structural integrity of microvessels in the striatum and motor
cortex of the brain was studied on hemispheres ipsilateral and contralateral to tMCAO damage.

Striatum
The striatum in both hemispheres of control rats was
characterized by the normal appearance of capillaries
surrounded by astrocyte cell processes and myelinated
axons (Fig. 1A,B). Capillaries consisted of a single layer
of endothelial cells (ECs) surrounded by a basement
membrane (BM) layer, sometimes enclosed by additional pericyte cytoplasm. Neurons demonstrated normal morphology with central nuclei (Fig. 1C). Organelles
in all cells were well preserved, and mitochondria
showed a normal pattern of cristae.
In the hemisphere ipsilateral to tMCAO, ultrastructural abnormalities were observed in capillary endothelia in the striatum (Fig. 1D,E). Nearly all ECs showed
cytoplasmic formation of autophagosomes, with some
autophagosomes extending from lumen to basal lamina
in attenuated portions of the cells (Fig. 1D). In several
capillaries, large autophagosomes had almost ruptured
the lumen of the EC membrane. Numerous large
vacuoles were seen in EC cytoplasm, and perinuclear
membrane separation was occasionally observed in EC
(Fig. 1E). Pericytes appeared swollen or completely
degenerated (Fig. 1D,E). Mitochondria in the cytoplasm
of most ECs and pericytes showed disrupted cristae.
Near the capillaries were large spaces created by
degenerating astrocyte cell processes and protein-filled
areas formerly occupied by astrocytes (Fig. 1D). Also,
the capillary shown in Figure 1D demonstrated an
edematous astrocyte with lipofuscin inclusions. In
another striatum capillary (Fig. 1E), two large vacuoles

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

Figure 1. Electron microscopic examination of microvasculature in the rat striatum 30 days after tMCAO. A–C: Control. Representative areas
of control rat striatum were characterized by the normal ultrastructural appearance of capillaries, motor neurons (N), neuropil, and myelinated axons (A). A single layer of endothelial cells (ECs) was surrounded by a single layer of basement membrane (BM) and enclosed by additional pericyte (P) cytoplasm, forming an intact BBB. Astrocyte (Ast) processes surrounding capillaries showed a normal morphology. D–F:
tMCAO 30 days ipsilateral hemisphere. D: In the hemisphere ipsilateral to tMCAO insult, ultrastructural abnormalities were observed in striatum capillary endothelia. ECs showed formation of autophagosomes (Aph) in their cytoplasm, with some autophagosomes extending from
lumen to basal lamina in attenuated portions of the cells. Pericytes appeared swollen or completely degenerated. In close proximity to the
capillary was a large protein-filled area created by degenerating astrocyte cell processes. Edematous astrocyte with lipofuscin inclusions was
noted. E: Numerous large vacuoles were seen in EC cytoplasm (arrowheads) and perinuclear membrane separation was occasionally
observed in EC. Pericyte was also swollen and contained enlarged mitochondria with disruption of cristae. Two large vacuoles (V) occupy the
cytoplasm of the astrocyte. Collagen (Coll) formation surrounding capillaries was detected. Myelin sheets in many axons were separated and
disrupted (black A). Two degenerated axons (white A) showed evidence of disrupted axoplasmic transport. F: In ipsilateral striatum areas,
edematous space between astrocyte, oligodendrocyte (Oligo), and neuron was noted (asterisks). Neuron also demonstrated swollen and
edematous cytoplasm. G–I: tMCAO 30 days contralateral hemisphere. G: In contralateral striatum, capillaries contained vacuolated EC with
large autophagosomes. A degenerated pericyte occupied by mitochondria (m) with loss of cristae was also apparent. Surrounding the capillary were degenerated astrocytes (asterisks) showing severe edema and free-floating, enlarged mitochondria. H: A capillary with vacuolization
in EC cytoplasm in addition to the perinuclear membrane separation (arrowheads) proceeded to almost rupture the cell membrane. Adjacent
to the capillary is an edematous perivascular space (asterisks) containing enlarged mitochondria. Profile of dilated endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) was observed in neuronal cytoplasm near the capillary. I: Another neuron with dilated nucleus appeared in contralateral striatum.
Entirely degenerated astrocyte containing vacuoles and lipofuscin inclusions (Lf) was observed in close proximity to a damaged neuron. En,
endothelial cell; P, pericyte; BM, basement membrane; Ast, astrocyte; E, erythrocyte; Tj, tight junction; m, mitochondrion; A (black), axon; A
(white), disrupted axoplasmic transport; V, vacuole; N, neuron; Nu, nucleus; Aph, autophagosome; ER, swollen endoplasmic reticulum; Lf, lipofuscin inclusion; Coll, collagen; Oligo, oligodendrocyte. Arrowheads in E and H indicate separation of luminal EC membrane; arrowheads in I
indicate dilated nucleus in neuron. Asterisks in D–H indicate extracellular edema. Scale bars 5 2 lm in A–E,F–I; 500 nm in G.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3125

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

occupied the astrocyte cytoplasm. Figure 1E also shows
collagen formation surrounding the capillary, likely
resulting from replacement of degenerated pericyte
processes. Myelin sheets in many axons were separated and disrupted (Fig. 1E, black A). Some demyelinated or completely degenerated axons showed
evidence of disrupted axoplasmic transport (Fig. 1E,
white A). In neuropil of striatum ipsilateral to tMCAO,
edematous space between astrocyte, oligodendrocyte,
and neuron was noticed (Fig. 1F). Neurons also demonstrated swollen and edematous cytoplasm. Also,
uncommon locations of microglia, surrounding or adjacent to capillaries, were detected (data not shown).
In the striatum contralateral to tMCAO insult, considerable vascular damage was observed. Although some
capillaries demonstrated normal morphology, numerous
capillaries had vacuolated ECs containing large autophagosomes (Fig. 1G). Vacuolization in EC cytoplasm in
addition to the perinuclear membrane separation proceeded to almost rupture the EC membrane as shown
in one capillary (Fig. 1H). Swollen or degenerated pericytes contained mitochondria with loss of cristae (Fig.
1G). Surrounding the capillaries were degenerated
astrocytes showing severe edema and free-floating,
enlarged mitochondria with obvious disruption of the
cristae (Fig. 1G,H). Neurons near capillaries displayed
swollen (Fig. 1H) or completely degenerated (Fig. 1I)
endoplasmic reticulum. In Figure 1I, dilated nucleus
appears in a degenerated neuron, possibly indicating an
apoptotic process. Additionally, an entirely degenerated
astrocyte containing vacuoles and lipofuscin inclusions
is indicated adjacent to this damaged neuron (Fig. 1I).

Motor cortex
As in the striatum, motor cortex capillaries in control
rats showed normal ultrastructure consisting of microvessels with a single endothelium layer surrounded by
BM and pericyte cytoplasm (Fig. 2A,B). Astrocyte cell
processes were adjacent to the outer capillary surface.
Myelinated axons were evident, and mitochondria
showed a normal pattern. Neurons, oligodendrocytes,
and astrocytes in close proximity to capillaries demonstrated normal morphology (Fig. 2C).
Thirty days poststroke, in the hemisphere ipsilateral
to insult, capillary ultrastructure in motor cortex displayed varied abnormalities (Fig. 2D,E). Edematous ECs
with swollen mitochondria were adjacent to healthy ECs
in the lumen (Fig. 2D). In numerous motor cortex microvessels, astrocyte cell processes demonstrated dilated
endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 2D) or complete degeneration, as shown by edematous space in their cytoplasm
(Fig. 2E). Pericytes also showed a similar profile of
dilated endoplasmic reticulum and cytoplasmic lipid

3126

drops (Fig. 2E). Axonal myelin degeneration and
perivascular edema were noted (Fig. 2E,F). Additionally,
a neuron with a swollen nucleus near a capillary and an
autophagosome were observed in EC cytoplasm
(Fig. 2F).
In the hemisphere contralateral to tMCAO, capillaries
in the motor cortex also showed endothelial and pericytic cell damage (Fig. 2G,H). Swollen ECs and autophagosomes in EC cytoplasm were noted in numerous
capillaries. Figure 2G shows complete pericyte degeneration with lipofuscin inclusions. In another capillary (Fig.
2H), a swollen pericyte contained enlarged mitochondria with disruption of the cristae. As in the ipsilateral
hemisphere, large areas of extracellular edema were
observed surrounding the capillary or glial cells (Fig.
2G–I). The endothelium thickness was reduced in the
area of perivascular edema (Fig. 2H,I). In some motor
cortex contralateral areas, edematous spaces were
apparent in neurons near their nuclei or in their cytoplasm (Fig. 2I). Interestingly, microglial cells were
detected adjacent to capillaries, likely phagocytosing
degenerated neural tissue (Fig. 2H).
Thus, BBB alterations were clearly detected by electron microscopy in the striatum and motor cortex of
both ipsilateral and contralateral cerebral hemispheres
in rats 30 days after tMCAO. Capillary ultrastructural
abnormalities were demonstrated in brain regions
remote from the site of primary ischemic injury in
chronic phase.

Microvascular permeability
Capillary BBB permeability was examined via quantitative analysis of EB extravasation into the brain parenchyma in tMCAO rats and controls. Tissue
measurements showed significantly higher EB levels in
ipsilateral (1.45 6 0.05 lg/g, P < 0.0001) and contralateral (1.11 6 0.04 lg/g, P < 0.0001) hemispheres
vs. controls (0.68 6 0.06 lg/g; Fig. 3A). A significantly
(P 5 0.0047) elevated EB level was determined in the
ipsilateral hemisphere compared with the contralateral.
These results correlated with our EM findings showing
ultrastructural abnormalities in capillary endothelia in
striatum and motor cortex microvessels in both ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres possibly leading to
capillary leakage.
Quantification of EB concentrations in sera from
tMCAO and control rats was performed as a control for
cerebral EB extravasation. Expected results showed no
significant difference (P 5 0.8127) in EB concentrations
in sera from control (1.39 6 0.06 lg/ml) vs. tMCAO
(1.42 6 0.14 lg/ml) rats (Fig. 3B), confirming the
same dye content in stroke and control animals after
intravenous injection.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

Figure 2. Electron microscopic examination of microvasculature in the rat motor cortex 30 days after tMCAO. A–C: Control. A,B: Similarly
to striatum, capillaries in control motor cortex showed normal ultrastructure consisting of microvessels with a single endothelium layer
(En), surrounded by BM and partially bounded by pericyte (P) cytoplasm. Astrocyte (Ast) cell processes were adjacent to the outer capillary surface. Myelinated axons (A) were present, and mitochondria showed a normal pattern. C: In control motor cortex areas, neurons
(N), oligodendrocytes (Oligo), and astrocytes proximal to capillary demonstrated normal morphology. D–F: tMCAO 30 days ipsilateral hemisphere. D: In the hemisphere ipsilateral to tMCAO damage, edematous ECs with swollen mitochondria were adjacent to healthy ECs in the
lumen. Astrocyte cell processes surrounding capillary demonstrated dilated endoplasmic reticulum (ER). E: Completely degenerated astrocyte with edematous cytoplasm adjacent to capillary. Surrounding the capillary were cell processes of a degenerated pericyte with dilated
endoplasmic reticulum and lipid drops (L). E,F: There was evidence of extracellular edema and myelin degeneration. F: Capillary EC displayed autophagosome (Aph) formation. Neuron appeared with swollen nucleus near the capillary. G–I: tMCAO 30 days contralateral hemisphere. G: In motor cortex of the hemisphere contralateral to tMCAO insult, a capillary was observed with swollen endothelium and
complete pericyte degeneration with lipofuscin inclusions. H: In another capillary, a swollen pericyte contained enlarged mitochondria (m)
with disruption of the cristae in addition to EC containing an autophagosome. Large areas of extracellular edema were observed surrounding the capillary (asterisks). The thickness of endothelium was reduced in the area of perivascular edema. Microglia were detected adjacent to capillary and degenerated myelin. I: Edematous spaces (asterisks) were revealed in neurons near the nucleus or in their cytoplasm
proximal to extracellular edema surrounding the capillary. En, endothelial cell, P, pericyte; BM, basement membrane; Ast, astrocyte; E,
erythrocyte; m, mitochondrion; A, axon; V, vacuole; N, neuron; Nu, nucleus; Aph, autophagosome; ER, swollen endoplasmic reticulum; L,
lipid drop; Lf, lipofuscin inclusion; Oligo, oligodendrocyte; D, dendrite. Right arrowhead in D indicates edematous EC with swollen mitochondria. Asterisks in E–I indicate extracellular edema. Scale bars 5 500 nm in A,H; 2 lm in B–G,I.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3127

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

Figure 3. Quantitative analysis of EB extravasation into the rat
brain parenchyma and dye concentration in sera 30 days after
tMCAO. A: Quantitative measurement of cerebral tissue EB content showed significantly (P < 0.0001) higher extravasated EB
levels in ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres vs. control. A
significantly (P 5 0.0047) elevated EB level was determined in
the ipsilateral hemisphere compared with the contralateral. B:
There was no significant difference in EB concentration in sera
from tMCAO rats vs. controls.

the contralateral striatum, a significant (P < 0.0001)
increase of Beclin-1 fluorescence expression was determined in area V (Figs. 4I, 5B), although elevations of
protein expression were seen in M, L, and D areas vs.
controls. Significantly (P < 0.0001) higher Beclin-1
immunoexpression was noted in V striatum (Fig. 4H)
compared with area M in ipsilateral hemisphere and M
(P < 0.0001) and D (P 5 0.0002) areas of contralateral
striatum (Fig. 5B). In the motor cortex, a significant
increase of Beclin-1 immunoexpression in capillary
endothelium was determined in M2 (P 5 0.0005) and
M1 (P < 0.0001) areas in ipsilateral hemisphere (Figs.
4O,P, 5C). Overexpression of Beclin-1 in contralateral
motor cortex was noted in M2 area (Fig. 4Q). Notably,
more extensive Beclin-1 upregulation was shown in ipsilateral M1 capillary ECs (P 5 0.0012; Figs. 4P, 5C)
than in M2 or contralateral M1 (P < 0.0001) or M2 (P
5 0.0004) areas. Additionally, immunofluorescence
revealed expansion of Beclin-1 in numerous capillaries
of analyzed brain structures in both hemispheres (Fig.
4F,H,J,L). Together, our data demonstrated upregulation
of Beclin-1 immunoexpression in capillary endothelium
in ipsilateral and contralateral striatum and motor cortex microvessels, likely leading to the endothelium damage and vascular leakage determined by quantitative
analysis of EB extravasation. Capillary permeability
examined via immunofluorescence expression showed
no EB leakage on the abluminal capillary side in the
brains of control rats (Fig. 4A–D). At 30 days after
tMCAO, EB extravasation was identified at some distance from microvessels in the ipsilateral hemisphere,
mostly, in L, D, and V areas of the striatum (Fig. 4F–H)
and motor cortex (M1; Fig. 4P). Extensive EB leakage
was also seen in the same areas of cerebral structures
in the hemisphere contralateral to initial insult (Fig. 4I–
L,Q,R).

Astrocyte reactivity
Autophagosomes in cerebral ECs
In view of the fact that our electron microscopic
analyses demonstrated ECs containing autophagosomes
in numerous striatum and motor cortex capillaries of
both ipsi- and contralateral hemispheres 30 days after
tMCAO, immunohistochemical analysis of Beclin-1
expression was performed in capillaries from both hemispheres in the striatum (medial [M] lateral [L], dorsal
[D], and ventral [V] areas) and motor cortex (M2 and
M1 areas). Analyzed capillary diameters in all striatum
areas were 23.03 6 0.61 lm and in M2/M1 motor
cortex 22.51 6 0.52 lm. Results showed significant
(P < 0.0001) upregulation of Beclin-1 immunoexpression in ipsilateral L, D, and V striatum areas of poststroke rats compared with controls (Figs. 4F–H, 5B). In

3128

Immunohistochemical analysis of astrocytes by GFAP
immunoexpression was performed in the same areas of
the striatum and motor cortex in both hemispheres as
described for Beclin-1 analysis. In the ipsilateral hemisphere of tMCAO rats, significantly (P < 0.0001) elevated GFAP fluorescent expression was determined in
all analyzed areas of the striatum (M, L, D, and V) compared with control animals (Figs. 6E–H, 7B). A significant increase of GFAP immunoreactivity in the
contralateral striatum of poststroke rats vs. controls
was demonstrated only in area D (P 5 0.0002; Figs.
6K, 7B). Higher levels of GFAP fluorescence expression
were demonstrated in M and D areas of the striatum
poststroke in the ipsilateral hemisphere compared with
any analyzed striatal contralateral areas (P < 0.0001;

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

Figure 4. Immunohistochemical analysis of Beclin-1 immunoexpression in capillary endothelium in the rat brain 30 days after tMCAO. A–
D: Control striatum ipsi-/contralateral hemisphere. Immunofluorescent staining for Beclin-1 (green, arrowheads) showed typical expression
in capillary endothelium of medial (A), lateral (B), dorsal (C), and ventral (D) striatum of control rats. E–H: tMCAO 30 days, striatum ipsilateral hemisphere. In the ipsilateral hemisphere, extensive Beclin-1 immunoexpression, indicating autophagosome accumulation within endothelium in numerous striatum capillaries in all analyzed areas, was observed. I–L: tMCAO 30 days, striatum contralateral hemisphere. In
the contralateral striatum, higher Beclin-1 expression was determined in lateral (J) and ventral (L) areas compared with medial (I) or dorsal
(K). In both ipsilateral (E–H) and contralateral (I–L) striatal capillaries, EB leakage (red, asterisks) was seen. M–R: Motor cortex. In motor
cortex, increased Beclin-1 immunoexpression in capillary endothelium was determined in M2 (O) and M1 (P) areas in the ipsilateral hemisphere vs. control (M,N). Q: Elevated Beclin-1 immunopositivity was noted in M2 contralateral motor cortex. R: Beclin-1 immunoexpression
in M1 contralateral motor cortex was slightly elevated compared with M1 control (N). EB leakage (red, asterisks) was higher in M1 ipsilateral motor cortex area (P). M: Notably, EB dye in ipsilateral or contralateral hemispheres of controls was observed within the capillary
lumen (number sign). Striatum: medial (A,E,I), lateral (B,F,J), dorsal (C,G,K), and ventral (D,H,L) areas. Motor cortex: control ipsi-/contralateral hemisphere (M: M2 area, N: M1 area), tMCAO 30 days ipsilateral hemisphere (O: M2 area, P: M1 area), and tMCAO 30 days contralateral hemisphere (Q: M2 area, R: M1 area). Scale bars 5 25 lm.

Fig. 7B). There were no statistical differences between
tMCAO and control rats in GFAP immunoexpression
within M2 and M1 motor cortex in ipsilateral or contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 7C), although increased GFAP
immunoreactivity was shown in ipsilateral M2 area of
tMCAO rats (Fig. 6O) vs. controls. Also, ipsilateral M2

motor cortex significantly (P 5 0.0009) differed from
M2 contralateral area in poststroke animals. Additionally, GFAP-positive cells were distinguished surrounding
capillaries in the striatum of control brains with detection of EB fluorescence as small red dots attached to
the capillary lumen (Fig. 6A–D). In the brains of rats 30

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3129

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

days post-tMCAO, most evidenced astrogliosis in ipsilateral striatum accompanied by microvascular leakage
(Fig. 6F,G). Similar capillary leakage was seen in contralateral striatum areas (Fig. 6J–L). Interestingly, EB extravasation in the striatum and motor cortex of both
hemispheres was predominantly in capillaries with dissociation of astrocyte end-feet from lumen (Fig. 6F–H,J–
L,O–R).

DISCUSSION

Figure 5. Quantitative analysis of Beclin-1 immunoexpression in
capillary endothelium in the rat brain 30 days after tMCAO. A:
Schematic representation of analyzed areas in the striatum and
motor cortex in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres. B:
Significant (P < 0.0001) upregulation of Beclin-1 immunoexpression was detected in ipsilateral lateral (L), dorsal (D), and ventral
(V) striatum areas of poststroke rats compared with controls. In
contralateral striatum, a significant (P < 0.0001) increase of
Beclin-1 fluorescent expression was determined in area V, although
elevation of protein expression was demonstrated in medial (M), L,
and D areas vs. controls. C: In motor cortex, a significant increase
of Beclin-1 immunoexpression in capillary endothelium was determined in M2 (P 5 0.0005) and M1 (P < 0.0001) areas in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Overexpression of Beclin-1 in contralateral
motor cortex was noted in M2 area. More extensive Beclin-1
upregulation was seen in capillary ECs of ipsilateral M1 (P 5
0.0012) than in M2 and in comparison with contralateral M2 (P 5
0.0004) and M1 (P < 0.0001) motor cortex areas.

3130

Based on our previous results (Garbuzova-Davis
et al., 2013) demonstrating that the damaged BBB
plays an important role in subacute diaschisis in the
tMCAO ischemic stroke rat model, the present investigation focused on BBB competence in chronic ischemic
diaschisis. Although our results showed that most BBB
damage (endothelial and pericyte cells impairment,
edematous or degenerated perivascular astrocytes, significant EB parenchymal extravasation, endothelial autophagosome accumulation, and increased parenchymal
astrocyte reactivity) was detected in the ipsilateral
striatum and motor cortex of rats at 30 days after
tMCAO, BBB alterations were also identified in the
same brain structures of the contralateral hemisphere.
Major BBB pathological changes in contralateral remote
striatum and motor cortex areas included 1) vacuolated
endothelial cells containing large autophagosomes, 2)
degenerated pericytes displaying mitochondria with cristae disruption, 3) degenerated astrocytes and perivascular edema, 4) EB extravasation, and 5) appearance of
parenchymal astrogliosis. These pathological alterations
were observed not only in the brain regions of primary
ischemic injury but also in contralateral cerebral remote
areas, suggesting persistent BBB damage in chronic
ischemia.
Extensive vascular damage such as BBB impairment
in ipsilateral and contralateral cerebral brain structures
determined at the ultrastructural level represents a
main pathologic feature of chronic tMCAO. Microvascular abnormalities characterized by capillary endothelial
and pericyte cell deterioration in addition to perivascular astrocyte degeneration and edema formation in the
hemispheres ipsi- and contralateral to MCAO insult
strongly evidence compromised BBB integrity in the
chronic poststroke condition. Although major ultrastructural BBB damage was observed in the striatum and
motor cortex capillaries of the ipsilateral hemisphere,
significant but less severe BBB abnormalities were
determined in the same brain structures in the hemisphere contralateral to tMCAO at 30 days. This vascular damage in remote brain areas opposite the
initial stroke insult might indicate ongoing

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

Figure 6. Immunohistochemical analysis of GFAP immunoexpression in the rat brain 30 days after tMCAO. A–D: Control striatum ipsi-/
contralateral hemisphere. Normal appearance of parenchymal GFAP positive cells with well-defined astrocytes surrounding capillaries
(green, arrowheads) was seen in all examined striatal areas of ipsilateral or contralateral hemisphere in control rats. EB dye was visible as
small red dots (number signs) attached to the capillary lumen. E–H: tMCAO 30 days, striatum ipsilateral hemisphere. In the ipsilateral
hemisphere of tMCAO rats, increased GFAP immunoreactivity, indicating astrogliosis, was determined in all analyzed striatal areas. I–L:
tMCAO 30 days, striatum contralateral hemisphere. Similar, but less intensive, GFAP immunoreactivity was observed in contralateral striatum. EB capillary leakage was detected mostly in lateral and dorsal areas of ipsilateral (F,G, red, asterisks) and contralateral (J,K, red,
asterisks) striatum. M–R: Motor cortex. In motor cortex, GFAP immunoexpression in M2 and M1 areas in ipsilateral (O,P) and contralateral
(Q,R) hemispheres of tMCAO rats did not differ from that of controls (M,N). Importantly, dissociation of astrocytes from capillary
lumen was observed in the striatum (F–H,J–L) and motor cortex (O–R) of both hemispheres in tMCAO rats. Striatum: medial (A,E,I), lateral
(B,F,J), dorsal (C,G,K), and ventral (D,H,L) areas. Motor cortex: control ipsi-/contralateral hemisphere (M: M2 area, N: M1 area), tMCAO
30 days ipsilateral hemisphere (O: M2 area, P: M1 area) and tMCAO 30 days contralateral hemisphere (Q: M2 area, R: M1 area). Scale
bars 5 50 lm.

pathological vascular changes in association with
chronic diaschisis.
The pervasive BBB abnormalities, evidenced by electron microscopic imaging in both ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres at 30 days post-tMCAO, led to
vascular leakage as confirmed by quantitative analysis

of EB extravasation into the brain parenchyma. The
extravasated EB level in the ipsilateral and contralateral
hemispheres was significantly higher, twofold and 1.5fold, respectively, compared with nonischemic controls.
Notably, EB extravasation in the contralateral hemisphere was significantly less than in ipsilateral. In

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3131

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

comparison with our previous study (Garbuzova-Davis
et al., 2013) showing significant EB level in both hemisphere parenchymas in subacute (7 days) tMCAO, half
the EB extravasation was noted in chronic (30 days)
ischemic tMCAO. Although the reduction in vascular
leakage was substantial from subacute to chronic poststroke stage, significant capillary leakage at 30 days
after tMCAO supports previous studies demonstrating

BBB leakage for up to 5 weeks (Strbian et al., 2008;
Abo-Ramadan et al., 2009). This capillary leakage in the
contralateral hemisphere might indicate pervasive BBB
damage at the chronic poststroke stage, leading to the
perivascular edema demonstrated by our electron
microscopic analyses. In both ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres, the EB extravasation possibly occurs
transcellularly or paracellularly from impaired EC at the
structural level as demonstrated in our study, or the
extravasation might be aided by decreased tight junction integrity under hypoxic condition as shown in vitro
(Mark and Davis, 2002; Koto et al., 2007) and ex vivo
(Kago et al., 2006). Also, the elevated EB level in brain
parenchyma might result from neovascular permeability.
Angiogenesis has been shown to begin shortly after
ischemic insult both in rodent models of MCAO and in
stroke patients (Marti et al., 2000; Hai et al., 2003;
Krupinski et al., 1994), and vessel proliferation continues for up to 3 weeks following experimental cerebral
ischemia (Hayashi et al., 2003). Despite the importance
of vascular remodeling in neurological poststroke recovery (Zhang and Chopp, 2009), new cerebral vessels are
leaky for several weeks until forming a fully functional
BBB (Risau, 1994). Thus, vascular leakage detected by
EB extravasation in cerebral hemisphere of initial
tMCAO insult and contralateral hemisphere likely is due
to compromised endothelial cell integrity and/or neovascular permeability and might contribute to neuronal
damage by allowing neurotoxins and other harmful
blood-borne substances into the CNS. tMCAO rats demonstrated significant motor and neurological dysfunction
at 1 month after stroke with substantial neuronal cell
losses in the ipsilateral striatum persisting for up to 8
weeks compared with the contralateral hemisphere
striatum (Borlongan et al., 1995; Yasuhara et al., 2009).
Other reports showed significant correlations between
lesion size and histopathological neuronal changes in
tMCAO rats for up to 21–60 days poststroke (Peeling
Figure 7. Quantitative analysis of GFAP immunoexpression in the
rat brain 30 days after tMCAO. A: Schematic representation of
analyzed areas in the striatum and motor cortex in the ipsilateral
and contralateral hemispheres. B: In ipsilateral striatum of tMCAO
rats, significantly (P < 0.0001) elevated GFAP immunoexpression
was determined in all analyzed areas (M, L, D, and V) vs. controls. The only significant (P 5 0.0002) increase of GFAP immunoreactivity was determined in area D of contralateral striatum.
C: There were no significant differences between tMCAO and control rats in GFAP immunoexpression in M2 and M1 motor cortices
in ipsilateral or contralateral hemispheres, although elevation of
GFAP immunoexpression was determined in ipsilateral M2 area of
tMCAO rats. Also, ipsilateral M2 area of motor cortex was significantly (P 5 0.0009) higher than in the contralateral side in
tMCAO rats.

3132

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

et al., 2001; Sicard et al., 2006). Moreover, a significant decrease of the apical dendritic spine density of
the layer V pyramidal neurons in the peri-infarct cortex
was determined in the aged mice at 5 months after
focal cerebral cortical ischemia (Cui et al., 2013).
Although these studies demonstrated neuronal pathological changes predominantly in the brain areas of primary ischemic insult, our ultrastructural analysis
revealed numerous neurons with swollen endoplasmic
reticulum or edematous cytoplasm and demyelinated
axons in the striatum and motor cortex of both ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres at chronic postischemia. Future evaluations focusing on neuronal
characteristics in brain areas remote from initial ischemic injury after more prolonged chronic ischemia are
needed.
As in our previous study (Garbuzova-Davis et al.,
2013) showing excessive autophagosome accumulation
within capillary endothelium in ipsilateral and contralateral striatum and motor cortex areas in subacute posttMCAO, the present study also demonstrated a significant increase of autophagosomes in ECs through upregulation of Belcin-1 expression at the chronic stage in
tMCAO rats. Because autophagy plays an important
role in cell survival by degradation of cytosolic components through the autophagosomal–lysosomal pathway
(Uchiyama et al., 2008), excessive autophagic processes might induce cellular death (Reggiori and Klionsky, 2002). Increased autophagosomes within neurons
in the penumbra were demonstrated at 6 hours postischemia in tMCAO (Rami et al., 2008), inducing further
neuronal damage after ischemic insult (Sadoshima,
2008; Balduini et al., 2009). Our capillary analyses in
specific discrete areas of the striatum and motor cortex
in both ipsi- and contralateral hemispheres revealed significant overexpression of Beclin-1 in ECs. Interestingly,
immunofluorescent Beclin-1 expression was significantly
higher in capillary ECs of the ventral striatum in both
ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres. Because the
ventral striatum is adjacent to the interstitial nucleus of
the posterior limb of the anterior commissure (IPAC),
an area vital for various afferent brain connections
(Alheid et al., 1999; Shammah-Lagnado et al., 1999;
G€artner et al., 2002), it is possible that affected capillaries in this area of both ipsilateral and contralateral
hemispheres might negatively influence the amygdala–
striatal afferent connections. Although the amygdala–
striatal transition area has typical striatal connections
via cortico- and thalamostriate pathways and is directly
or indirectly involved in projections to the substantia
nigra (Shammah-Lagnado et al., 1999, 2001; Otake and
Nakamura, 2003), the investigation of BBB integrity in
these connected remote brain areas from initial ische-

mic insult might be essential for a better understanding
of poststroke diaschisis. Another of our findings was
significant Beclin-1 overexpression in EC capillaries predominantly of ipsilateral M2 and M1 motor cortex
areas, with higher expression in M1. Although expression of Beclin-1 in contralateral capillary endothelium of
the motor cortex did not significantly differ from controls, elevated marker expression was noted. These
capillary endothelium alterations resulting from autophagosome accumulation, potentially leading to vascular leakage in motor cortex areas, might induce and/or
promote neuronal injury in chronic postischemia. Studies have shown extensive neuronal postischemic damage in the cerebral cortex, thalamus, brainstem, and
spinal cord accompanied by degeneration of corticofugal axonal fibers extending transcallosally into the contralateral hemisphere and caudally along descending
tracts, indicating remote changes (Iizuka et al., 1989,
1990; Wu and Ling, 1998; Dihne et al., 2002; Ferrer
and Planas, 2003; Wang et al., 2012). Moreover, predicting functional potential and recovery in chronic
stroke patients depends on corticospinal tract disruption (Stinear et al., 2007; Jayaram et al., 2012). Thus,
these results demonstrating upregulation of Beclin-1
expression correlate with our EM observation showing
that EC capillaries contained large autophagosomes
attenuating portions of the endothelia or even almost
rupturing the lumen of EC membrane in analyzed brain
structures in both hemispheres at 30 days after
tMCAO. The extensive autophagosome accumulations
within ECs likely led to the BBB dysfunction and vascular leakage determined by quantitative analysis of EB
extravasation. The accumulation of autophagosomes in
EC likely indicates that these cells have undergone
postischemic stress, are severely damaged, and are
attempting self-repair. However, many EC are unable to
repair themselves through autophagocytosis, and they
finally die and slough off the capillaries, contributing to
the capillary leakage shown in our study. The initial
stroke might have switched the EC to an anaerobic
metabolism, and they might not have successfully
switched back to an aerobic metabolism in the chronic
poststroke condition (Wojtkowiak et al., 2012). Possibly
the observed EC leakage is due to disruption of normal
transport mechanisms and cellular metabolism.
Finally, astrocyte reactivity analyzed in the same specific brain areas in both ipsilateral and contralateral
hemispheres used for detection of capillary Beclin-1
expression showed significant increases of GFAP immunoreactivity in all striatal areas of the ipsilateral hemisphere. In the contralateral striatum, significantly
elevated GFAP expression was determined only in the
dorsal area, although enhanced astrocyte reactivity was

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3133

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

noted in remaining regions of the striatum. As yet it is
unclear why bilateral astrocytic overexpression is
restricted to the dorsal striatum. Possibly, astrogliosis
in this striatal area reflects spatial differences in astrocyte reactivity resulting from the striatum’s anatomical
location proximate to the corpus callosum. A recent
report (Wang et al., 2012) demonstrated degeneration
of transcallosal fibers in stroke patients in the subacute
or chronic stage by using functional MRI. However, this
possibility requires further investigation at different
poststroke stages in an animal model. There were no
significant differences in GFAP immunoreactivity in M2
and M1 motor cortices between tMCAO and controls in
either ipsilateral or contralateral hemispheres. GFAP
expression in M2 of ipsilateral hemisphere, however,
was significantly higher than in M2 on the contralateral
side. These results indicate reactive astrogliosis in the
ipsilateral striatum in addition to some astrogliosis in
remote striatal areas and likely point to chronic postischemic inflammation. Inflammation plays a major role
in the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke (del Zoppo and
Hallenbeck, 2000; Huang et al., 2006), so activated
astrocytes (and microglia) might be important contributors to neuroinflammation by secretion of various exacerbating factors such as proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines. Although microglial cell response was not
directly analyzed in the present study, our ultrastructural examination demonstrated uncommon locations of
microglia, surrounding or adjacent to capillaries, in both
ipsilateral and contralateral striatum and motor cortices. This observation might indicate migration of microglia to the capillary wall, where their activation could
induce vascular endothelial inflammation. In an interesting study (Butler et al., 2002), positively double-labeled
astrocytes (GFAP) with Fluoro-Jade in the striatum at 21
days after 1 hour of MCAO in rats demonstrated astrocyte degeneration. Also, the authors described
restricted bilateral astrocytic activation in the hippocampus, without contralateral effects in the cortex or
striatum, beginning at 1 day and lasting to at least 21
days post-MCAO. Although these results did not show
astrocyte degeneration in the contralateral striatum or
cortex after ischemic injury, our electron microscopic
evaluation provides strong evidence of edematous or
entirely degenerated astrocytes adjacent not only to
capillaries but also to neurons in the striatum and
motor cortex of both ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres at 30 days tMCAO. Moreover, dissociation of
astrocyte end-feet from capillary lumen was demonstrated via immunohistochemistry in the brain structures of both hemispheres analyzed. The ultrastructural
alterations have been noted in the microvascular BM
and BM–astrocyte contacts, leading to cerebral edema

3134

formation in rats with permanent MCAO (Kwon et al.,
2009). These alterations progressed in a timedependent manner during the acute phase of focal
ischemia: astrocyte swelling and focal detachment from
BM (4 hours), marked astrocyte swelling and decreased
contact with BM (8 hours), damaged BM and markedly
decreased BM–astrocyte contact (12 hours), BM degradation and ruptured astrocytes (16 hours), excessive
water accumulation around microvessels (20 hours),
and astrocyte end-feet losing visibility and BM becoming faint (48 hours). Because astrocytes regulate cerebral fluid balance mainly via ion and water channels,
the astrocyte impairment discussed above, occurring
shortly after the ischemic insult, is aggravated at subacute (Garbuzova-Davis et al., 2013) and chronic ischemic stages as demonstrated in the present study by
significant perivascular edema formation. A comprehensive review (Abbott et al., 2006) emphasized that
proper interaction between capillary endothelium and
astrocytes within the neurovascular unit is essential for
normal BBB maintenance and that “investigation of the
mechanisms involved in endothelial–astrocytic interaction could help in the design of therapies targeted at
specific features necessary for BBB function.” One
approach for astrocyte-directed stroke therapy has
been discussed (for review see Gleichman and Carmichael, 2013).
In summary, the compromised BBB integrity detected
in chronic postischemic rats in cerebral hemisphere
capillaries both ipsilateral and contralateral to initial
stroke insult might indicate chronic diaschisis. This
widespread microvascular damage resulting from EC
impairment demonstrated by excessive autophagosome
accumulation and perivascular astrocyte degeneration
could aggravate neuronal deterioration in chronic ischemia. Chronic diaschisis should be considered in the
development of treatment strategies for stroke, with a
primary focus on restoration of endothelial and/or
astrocytic integrity toward BBB repair, which might be
beneficial for many chronic stroke patients. One potential therapeutic approach for BBB repair in stroke is cell
therapy for replacement of damaged ECs by endothelial
progenitors. A combination of cellular BBB therapy and
inhibition of environmental inflammatory effectors might
be a more beneficial treatment strategy for stroke.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

ROLE OF AUTHORS
All authors had full access to all the data in the
study and take responsibility for the integrity of the

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

data and the accuracy of the data analysis. Study concept and design: SG-D, PRS, CVB. Electron microscopy:
EH. Acquisition of data: NT, DGH-O, AF-D, SNW, EDH.
Analysis and interpretation of data: SG-D, EH, SNW,
EDH, SMB. Drafting of the manuscript: SGD. Critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content: EH, PRS, CVB. Statistical analysis: CVB. Surgery: CVB. Technical support: EH. Study supervision:
SG-D, CVB.

LITERATURE CITED
Abbott NJ, R€onnb€ack L, Hansson E. 2006. Astrocyte–endothelial interactions at the blood–brain barrier. Nat Rev Neurosci 7:41–53.
Abo-Ramadan U, Durukan A, Pitkonen M, Marinkovic I,
Tatlisumak E, Pedrono E, Soinne L, Strbian D, Tatlisumak
T. 2009. Post-ischemic leakiness of the blood–brain barrier: a quantitative and systematic assessment by Patlak
plots. Exp Neurol 219:328–333.
Alheid GF, Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Beltramino CA. 1999. The
interstitial nucleus of the posterior limb of the anterior
commissure: a novel layer of the central division of
extended amygdala. Ann N Y Acad Sci 877:645–654.
Andrews RJ. 1991. Transhemispheric diaschisis. A review and
comment. Stroke J Cereb Circ 22:943–949.
Anon. 2012.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,National Center for Health Statistics. Compressed Mortality
File 1999–2009. CDC WONDER Online Database, compiled for Compressed Mortality File 1999–2009 Series 20,
No. 20, 2012. Underlying cause-of-death 1999–2009.
Available from: http://wonder.cdc.gov/mortSQl.html
Ay I, Francis JW, Brown RH Jr. 2008. VEGF increases blood–
brain barrier permeability to Evans blue dye and tetanus
toxin fragment C but not adeno-associated virus in ALS
mice. Brain Res 1234:198–205.
Balduini W, Carloni S, Buonocore G. 2009. Autophagy in
hypoxia–ischemia induced brain injury: evidence and
speculations. Autophagy 5:221–223.
Belayev L, Busto R, Zhao W, Ginsberg MD. 1996. Quantitative
evaluation of blood–brain barrier permeability following
middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Brain Res 739:
88–96.
Borlongan CV, Cahill DW, Sanberg PR. 1995. Locomotor and
passive avoidance deficits following occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. Physiol Behav 58:909–917.
Borlongan CV, Hadman M, Sanberg CD, Sanberg PR. 2004a.
Central nervous system entry of peripherally injected
umbilical cord blood cells is not required for neuroprotection in stroke. Stroke J Cereb Circ 35:2385–2389.
Borlongan CV, Lind JG, Dillon-Carter O, Yu G, Hadman M,
Cheng C, Carroll J, Hess DC. 2004b. Bone marrow grafts
restore cerebral blood flow and blood brain barrier in
stroke rats. Brain Res 1010:108–116.
Borlongan CV, Kaneko Y, Maki M, Yu S-J, Ali M, Allickson JG,
Sanberg CD, Kuzmin-Nichols N, Sanberg PR. 2010. Menstrual blood cells display stem cell-like phenotypic
markers and exert neuroprotection following transplantation in experimental stroke. Stem Cells Dev 19:439–452.
Bramlett HM, Dietrich WD. 2004. Pathophysiology of cerebral
ischemia and brain trauma: similarities and differences. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab 24:133–150.
Brown RC, Davis TP. 2002. Calcium modulation of adherens
and tight junction function: a potential mechanism for
blood–brain barrier disruption after stroke. Stroke J
Cereb Circ 33:1706–1711.

Butler TL, Kassed CA, Sanberg PR, Willing AE, Pennypacker
KR. 2002. Neurodegeneration in the rat hippocampus
and striatum after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Brain
Res 929:252–260.
Carmichael ST, Tatsukawa K, Katsman D, Tsuyuguchi N,
Kornblum HI. 2004. Evolution of diaschisis in a focal
stroke model. Stroke J Cereb Circ 35:758–763.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2009.
Prevalence and most common causes of disability among
adults—United States, 2005. MMWR 58:421–426.
Chen CL, Tang FT, Chen HC, Chung CY, Wong MK. 2000.
Brain lesion size and location: effects on motor recovery
and functional outcome in stroke patients. Arch Phys
Med Rehabil 81:447–452.
Cui L, Murikinati SR, Wang D, Zhang X, Duan W-M, Zhao L-R.
2013. Reestablishing neuronal networks in the aged
brain by stem cell factor and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor in a mouse model of chronic stroke. PloS
One 8:e64684.
Dankbaar JW, Hom J, Schneider T, Cheng S-C, Bredno J, Lau
BC, van der Schaaf IC, Wintermark M. 2011. Dynamic
perfusion-CT assessment of early changes in blood brain
barrier permeability of acute ischaemic stroke patients. J
Neuroradiol 38:161–166.
Del Zoppo GJ, Hallenbeck JM. 2000. Advances in the vascular
pathophysiology of ischemic stroke. Thromb Res 98:73–
81.
Del Zoppo GJ, Mabuchi T. 2003. Cerebral microvessel
responses to focal ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
23:879–894.
Dihne M, Grommes C, Lutzenburg M, Witte OW, Block F.
2002. Different mechanisms of secondary neuronal damage in thalamic nuclei after focal cerebral ischemia in
rats. Stroke J Cereb Circ 33:3006–3011.
Dirnagl U, Iadecola C, Moskowitz MA. 1999. Pathobiology of
ischaemic stroke: an integrated view. Trends Neurosci
22:391–397.
Dobkin JA, Levine RL, Lagreze HL, Dulli DA, Nickles RJ, Rowe
BR. 1989. Evidence for transhemispheric diaschisis in
unilateral stroke. Arch Neurol 46:1333–1336.
Ferrer I, Planas AM. 2003. Signaling of cell death and cell survival following focal cerebral ischemia: life and death
struggle in the penumbra. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 62:
329–339.
Fuentes-Santamarıa V, Alvarado JC, Gabaldon-Ull MC, Manuel
Juiz J. 2013. Upregulation of insulin-like growth factor
and interleukin 1b occurs in neurons but not in glial cells
in the cochlear nucleus following cochlear ablation. J
Comp Neurol 521:3478–3499.
Garbuzova-Davis S, Rodrigues MCO, Hernandez-Ontiveros DG,
Tajiri N, Frisina-Deyo A, Boffeli SM, Abraham JV, Pabon
M, Wagner A, Ishikawa H, Shinozuka K, Haller E,
Sanberg PR, Kaneko Y, Borlongan CV. 2013. Blood–brain
barrier alterations provide evidence of subacute diaschisis in an ischemic stroke rat model. PloS One 8:e63553.
G€artner U, H€artig W, Riedel A, Brauer K, Arendt T. 2002.
Immunocytochemical evidence for the striatal nature of
the rat lateral part of interstitial nucleus of the posterior
limb of the anterior commissure (IPAC). J Chem Neuroanat 24:117–125.
Gleichman AJ, Carmichael ST. 2013. Astrocytic therapies for
neuronal repair in stroke. Neurosci Lett [Internet]. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.
055
(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0304394013009592).
Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD,
Borden WB, Bravata DM, Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Franco
S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern SM, Heit JA, Howard

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3135

S. Garbuzova-Davis et al.

VJ, Huffman MD, Kissela BM, Kittner SJ, Lackland DT,
Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Magid D, Marcus GM, Marelli
A, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER, Moy CS,
Mussolino ME, Nichol G, Paynter NP, Schreiner PJ, Sorlie
PD, Stein J, Turan TN, Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D,
Turner MB, American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. 2013. Heart
disease and stroke statistics—2013 update: a report
from the American Heart Association. Circulation 127:
e6–e245.
Hai J, Li ST, Lin Q, Pan QG, Gao F, King MX. 2003. Vascular
endothelial growth factor expression and angiogenesis
induced by chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in rat brain.
Neurosurgery 53:963–972.
Hayashi T, Noshita N, Sugawara T, Chan PH. 2003. Temporal
profile of angiogenesis and expression of related genes
in the brain after ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
23:166–180.
Huang J, Upadhyay UM, Tamargo RJ. 2006. Inflammation in stroke
and focal cerebral ischemia. Surg Neurol 66:232–245.
Iizuka H, Sakatani K, Young W. 1989. Corticofugal axonal
degeneration in rats after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke J Cereb Circ 20:1396–1402.
Iizuka H, Sakatani K, Young W. 1990. Neural damage in the
rat thalamus after cortical infarcts. Stroke J Cereb Circ
21:790–794.
Infeld B, Davis SM, Lichtenstein M, Mitchell PJ, Hopper JL.
1995. Crossed cerebellar diaschisis and brain recovery
after stroke. Stroke J Cereb Circ 26:90–95.
Jayaram G, Stagg CJ, Esser P, Kischka U, Stinear J, JohansenBerg H. 2012. Relationships between functional and
structural corticospinal tract integrity and walking post
stroke. Clin Neurophysiol 123:2422–2428.
Jin R, Yang G, Li G. 2010. Molecular insights and therapeutic targets for blood–brain barrier disruption in ischemic stroke:
critical role of matrix metalloproteinases and tissue-type
plasminogen activator. Neurobiol Dis 38:376–385.
Kago T, Takagi N, Date I, Takenaga Y, Takagi K, Takeo S.
2006. Cerebral ischemia enhances tyrosine phosphorylation of occludin in brain capillaries. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 302:324–329.
Kahles T, Luedike P, Endres M, Galla H-J, Steinmetz H, Busse
R, Neumann-Haefelin T, Brandes RP. 2007. NADPH oxidase plays a central role in blood–brain barrier damage in
experimental stroke. Stroke J Cereb Circ 38:3000–3006.
Kelly-Hayes M, Beiser A, Kase CS, Scaramucci A, D’Agostino
RB, Wolf PA. 2003. The influence of gender and age on
disability following ischemic stroke: the Framingham
study. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 12:119–126.
Koto T, Takubo K, Ishida S, Shinoda H, Inoue M, Tsubota K,
Okada Y, Ikeda E. 2007. Hypoxia disrupts the barrier
function of neural blood vessels through changes in the
expression of claudin-5 in endothelial cells. Am J Pathol
170:1389–1397.
Krupinski J, Kaluza J, Kumar P, Kumar S, Wang JM. 1994. Role
of angiogenesis in patients with cerebral ischemic
stroke. Stroke 25:1794–1798.
Kuroiwa T, Ting P, Martinez H, Klatzo I. 1985. The biphasic
opening of the blood–brain barrier to proteins following
temporary middle cerebral artery occlusion. Acta Neuropathol 68:122–129.
Kwon I, Kim EH, del Zoppo GJ, Heo JH. 2009. Ultrastructural
and temporal changes of the microvascular basement
membrane and astrocyte interface following focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Res 87:668–676.
Lakhan SE, Kirchgessner A, Tepper D, Leonard A. 2013.
Matrix metalloproteinases and blood–brain barrier disruption in acute ischemic stroke. Front Neurol 4:32.

3136

Mark KS, Davis TP. 2002. Cerebral microvascular changes in
permeability and tight junctions induced by hypoxia–
reoxygenation. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 282:
H1485–H1494.
Marti HJ, Bernaudin M, Bellail A, Schoch H, Euler M, Petit E,
Risau W. 2000. Hypoxia-induced vascular endothelial
growth factor expression precedes neovascularization
after cerebral ischemia. Am J Pathol 156:965–976.
Matsukawa N, Yasuhara T, Hara K, Xu L, Maki M, Yu G,
Kaneko Y, Ojika K, Hess DC, Borlongan CV. 2009. Therapeutic targets and limits of minocycline neuroprotection
in experimental ischemic stroke. BMC Neurosci 10:126.
Nagasawa H, Kogure K. 1989. Correlation between cerebral
blood flow and histologic changes in a new rat model of
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke J Cereb Circ 20:
1037–1043.
Neumann-Haefelin T, Witte OW. 2000. Periinfarct and remote
excitability changes after transient middle cerebral artery
occlusion. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 20:45–52.
Otake K, Nakamura Y. 2003. Forebrain neurons with collateral
projections to both the interstitial nucleus of the posterior limb of the anterior commissure and the nucleus of
the solitary tract in the rat. Neuroscience 119:623–628.
Paxinos G, Watson C. 1998. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates (deluxe edition), 4th ed. San Diego: Academic
Press.
Peeling J, Corbett D, Del Bigio MR, Hudzik TJ, Campbell TM,
Palmer GC. 2001. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion:
correlations between histopathology, T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, and behavioral indices. J Stroke
Cerebrovasc Dis 10:166–177.
Persidsky Y, Ramirez SH, Haorah J, Kanmogne GD. 2006.
Blood–brain barrier: structural components and function
under physiologic and pathologic conditions. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol 1:223–236.
Popp A, Jaenisch N, Witte OW, Frahm C. 2009. Identification
of ischemic regions in a rat model of stroke. PloS One 4:
e4764.
Preston E, Sutherland G, Finsten A. 1993. Three openings of
the blood–brain barrier produced by forebrain ischemia
in the rat. Neurosci Lett 149:75–78.
Rami A, Langhagen A, Steiger S. 2008. Focal cerebral ischemia induces upregulation of Beclin 1 and autophagy-like
cell death. Neurobiol Dis 29:132–141.
Reggiori F, Klionsky DJ. 2002. Autophagy in the eukaryotic
cell. Eukaryot Cell 1:11–21.
Reinecke S, Lutzenburg M, Hagemann G, Bruehl C, NeumannHaefelin T, Witte OW. 1999. Electrophysiological transcortical diaschisis after middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) in rats. Neurosci Lett 261:85–88.
Risau W. 1994. Molecular biology of blood–brain barrier ontogenesis and function. Acta Neurochir Suppl 60:109–112.
Rosenberg GA, Estrada EY, Dencoff JE. 1998. Matrix metalloproteinases and TIMPs are associated with blood–brain
barrier opening after reperfusion in rat brain. Stroke J
Cereb Circ 29:2189–2195.
Sadoshima J. 2008. The role of autophagy during ischemia/
reperfusion. Autophagy 4:402–403.
Sandoval KE, Witt KA. 2008. Blood–brain barrier tight junction permeability and ischemic stroke. Neurobiol Dis 32:200–219.
Seitz RJ, Azari NP, Knorr U, Binkofski F, Herzog H, Freund HJ.
1999. The role of diaschisis in stroke recovery. Stroke J
Cereb Circ 30:1844–1850.
Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Alheid GF, Heimer L. 1999. Afferent
connections of the interstitial nucleus of the posterior
limb of the anterior commissure and adjacent amygdalostriatal transition area in the rat. Neuroscience 94:
1097–1123.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

Compromised BBB competence in remote brain areas in ischemic stroke

Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Alheid GF, Heimer L. 2001. Striatal
and central extended amygdala parts of the interstitial
nucleus of the posterior limb of the anterior commissure:
evidence from tract-tracing techniques in the rat. J Comp
Neurol 439:104–126.
Sicard KM, Henninger N, Fisher M, Duong TQ, Ferris CF.
2006. Long-term changes of functional MRI-based brain
function, behavioral status, and histopathology after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke J Cereb Circ
37:2593–2600.
Stinear CM, Barber PA, Smale PR, Coxon JP, Fleming MK,
Byblow WD. 2007. Functional potential in chronic stroke
patients depends on corticospinal tract integrity. Brain J
Neurol 130:170–180.
Strbian D, Durukan A, Pitkonen M, Marinkovic I, Tatlisumak E,
Pedrono E, Abo-Ramadan U, Tatlisumak T. 2008. The
blood–brain barrier is continuously open for several
weeks following transient focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience 153:175–181.
Tajiri N, Acosta S, Glover LE, Bickford PC, Jacotte Simancas
A, Yasuhara T, Date I, Solomita MA, Antonucci I, Stuppia
L, Kaneko Y, Borlongan CV. 2012. Intravenous grafts of
amniotic fluid-derived stem cells induce endogenous cell
proliferation and attenuate behavioral deficits in ischemic
stroke rats. PloS One 7:e43779.
Uchiyama Y, Shibata M, Koike M, Yoshimura K, Sasaki M.
2008. Autophagy—physiology and pathophysiology. Histochem Cell Biol 129:407–420.

VanGilder RL, Huber JD, Rosen CL, Barr TL. 2012. The transcriptome of cerebral ischemia. Brain Res Bull 88:313–
319.
Wang LE, Tittgemeyer M, Imperati D, Diekhoff S, Ameli M,
Fink GR, Grefkes C. 2012. Degeneration of corpus callosum and recovery of motor function after stroke: a
multimodal magnetic resonance imaging study. Hum
Brain Mapp 33:2941–2956.
Wojtkowiak JW, Rothberg JM, Kumar V, Schramm KJ, Haller E,
Proemsey JB, Lloyd MC, Sloane BF, Gillies RJ. 2012.
Chronic autophagy is a cellular adaptation to tumor acidic
pH microenvironments. Cancer Res 72:3938–3947.
Wu YP, Ling EA. 1998. Transsynaptic changes of neurons and associated microglial reaction in the spinal cord of rats following
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Neurosci Lett 256:41–44.
Yang GY, Betz AL. 1994. Reperfusion-induced injury to the
blood–brain barrier after middle cerebral artery occlusion
in rats. Stroke J Cereb Circ 25:1658–1664; discussion
1664–1665.
Yasuhara T, Matsukawa N, Hara K, Maki M, Ali MM, Yu SJ,
Bae E, Yu G, Xu L, McGrogan M, Bankiewicz K, Case C,
Borlongan CV. 2009. Notch-induced rat and human bone
marrow stromal cell grafts reduce ischemic cell loss and
ameliorate behavioral deficits in chronic stroke animals.
Stem Cells Dev 18:1501–1514.
Zhang ZG, Chopp M. 2009. Neurorestorative therapies for
stroke: underlying mechanisms and translation to the
clinic. Lancet Neurol 8:491–500.

The Journal of Comparative Neurology | Research in Systems Neuroscience

3137

