Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Peptides
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/peptides

Pathophysiological roles of adrenomedullin-RAMP2 system in acute
and chronic cerebral ischemia
Kyoko Igarashi a , Takayuki Sakurai a , Akiko Kamiyoshi a , Yuka Ichikawa-Shindo a ,
Hisaka Kawate a , Akihiro Yamauchi a , Yuichi Toriyama a , Megumu Tanaka a , Tian Liu a ,
Xian Xian a , Akira Imai a , Liuyu Zhai a , Shinji Owa a , Teruhide Koyama a , Ryuichi Uetake a ,
Masafumi Ihara b , Takayuki Shindo a,∗
a
b

Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan
Department of Regenerative Medicine, Research Institute of Biomedical Research and Innovation, Kobe, Japan

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 26 June 2014
Received in revised form 25 August 2014
Accepted 25 August 2014
Available online 22 September 2014
Keywords:
Adrenomedullin
Receptor activity-modifying protein
Cerebral ischemia
Blood vessel

a b s t r a c t
The accessory protein RAMP2 is a component of the CLR/RAMP2 dimeric adrenomedullin (AM) receptor
and is the primary determinant of the vascular functionality of AM. RAMP2 is highly expressed in the
brain; however, its function there remains unclear. We therefore used heterozygous RAMP2 knockout
(RAMP2+/−) mice, in which RAMP2 expression was reduced by half, to examine the actions of the endogenous AM-RAMP2 system in cerebral ischemia. To induce acute or chronic ischemia, mice were subjected
to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) or bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS), respectively. In RAMP2+/− mice subjected to MCAO, recovery of cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) was slower than in
WT mice. AM gene expression was upregulated after infarction in both genotypes, but the increase was
greater in RAMP2+/− mice. Pathological analysis revealed severe nerve cell death and demyelination,
and a higher level of oxidative stress in RAMP2+/− mice. In RAMP2+/− mice subjected to BCAS, recovery of cerebral perfusion was slower and less complete than in WT mice. In an 8-arm radial maze test,
RAMP2+/− mice required more time to solve the maze and showed poorer reference memory. They also
showed greater reductions in nerve cells and less compensatory capillary growth than WT mice. These
results indicate the AM-RAMP2 system works to protect nerve cells from both acute and chronic cerebral
ischemia by maintaining CBF, suppressing oxidative stress, and in the case of chronic ischemia, enhancing
capillary growth.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Although the mortality rates for cerebrovascular diseases have
declined in recent years, thanks to advances in treatment, they
continue to be important life-threatening ailments. Furthermore,
the prevention and management of the aftereffects and disability caused by cerebrovascular diseases are urgent social problems,

Abbreviations: AM, adrenomedullin; RAMP, receptor activity-modifying protein; CLR, calcitonin-receptor-like receptor; CNS, central nervous system; WT,
wild-type; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; BCAS, bilateral carotid artery
stenosis; CBF, cerebral blood ﬂow; 8-OHdG, 8-hydroxy-2 -deoxyguanosine; GFAP,
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein.
∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine, Asahi 3-1-1, Matsumoto, Nagano 390-8621,
Japan. Tel.: +81 263 37 2578; fax: +81 263 37 3437.
E-mail address: tshindo@shinshu-u.ac.jp (T. Shindo).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.peptides.2014.08.013
0196-9781/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

especially in aging societies. Cerebrovascular diseases include cerebral infarction, cerebral hemorrhage, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
subdural hematoma, and moyamoya disease, among others, with
cerebral infarction affecting the largest number of patients. In cerebral infarction, a thrombus is formed in a brain blood vessel and
the neurons supplied by that vessel undergo ischemic damage,
leading to motility and sensory dysfunction. In addition, cerebral
infarctions can also be the cause of vascular dementia resulting
from chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Next to Alzheimer’s disease,
vascular dementia is the second most common form of dementia; however, no effective treatments for vascular dementia have
yet been established. It appears that improving the prognosis of
patients with cerebrovascular disease will require new approaches
to treatment, perhaps focusing on vascular homeostasis.
Adrenomedullin (AM) was originally identiﬁed as a vasodilatory peptide from human pheochromocytoma [11]. It is now known
that AM is expressed and secreted by various organs and exhibits a

22

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

Table 1
Primers and probes used for quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
AM Forward
AM Reverse
AM Probe
CLR Forward
CLR Reverse
CLR Probe
RAMP2 Forward
RAMP2 Reverse
RAMP2 Probe
RAMP3 Forward
RAMP3 Reverse
RAMP3 Probe
IL-6 Forward
IL-6 Reverse
IL-1␤ Forward
IL-1␤ Reverse
TNF-␣ Forward
TNF-␣ Reverse

CTACCGCCAGAGCATGAACC
GAAATGTGCAGGTCCCGAA
CCCGCAGCAATGGATGCCG
AGGCGTTTACCTGCACACACT
CAGGAAGCAGAGGAAACCCC
ATCGTGGTGGCTGTGTTTGCGGAG
GCAGCCCACCTTCTCTGATC
AACGGGATGAGGCAGATGG
CCCAGAGGATGTGCTCCTGGCCAT
TGCAACGAGACAGGGATGC
GCATCATGTCAGCGAAGGC
AGAGGCTGCCTCGCTGTGGGAA
CCCAATTTCCAATGCTCTCC
TGAATTGGATGGTCTTGGTCC
CTACAGGCTCCGAGATGAACAAC
TCCATTGAGGTGGAGAGCTTTC
ACGGCATGGATCTCAAAGAC
AGATAGCAAATCGGCTGACG

wide array of bioactivities. For example, AM suppresses antioxidative stress [30,31], inﬂammation [8] and apoptosis [23,37], whereas
it stimulates the proliferation, migration and differentiation of
various cell types [9,10,17]. It is also involved in the regulation
of hormone secretion [24,25] and exerts organ-protective effects
[21,22], as well as its vasodilatory effect. We previously reported
that homozygous AM knockout (AM−/−) mice die in utero due to
defective vascular development, which highlights the angiogenic
function of AM [32].
AM is also distributed in the central nervous system (CNS);
cerebrovascular cells, neurons and glial cells all secrete AM. Furthermore, intracerebroventricular administration of AM leads to
reductions in drinking, salt intake and eating behavior [18,26,34].
Recently, Maki et al. reported that tissue injury after chronic cerebral ischemia was reduced and cognitive function was improved
in AM-overexpressing mice as a result of enhanced neovascularization [13,14]. Although these results sparked much interest in

the potential clinical application of AM for the treatment of cerebrovascular diseases, the very short half-life of AM in blood limits
its applicability for chronic diseases, which require long-term therapy. We have therefore been concentrating on the AM receptor
system as an alternative therapeutic target. The AM receptor is a
heterodimer composed of calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CLR; a
seven-transmembrane G-protein coupled receptor) and an accessory protein called receptor activity-modifying protein (RAMP).
Three RAMP isoforms have been identiﬁed (RAMP1, 2, 3). We previously showed that homozygous RAMP2 knockout (RAMP2−/−)
mice die in utero due to the same defective vascular development
seen in AM−/− mice, and demonstrated that RAMP2 is the key
determinant of the vascular functionality of AM [5].
In the present study, we investigated the pathophysiological signiﬁcance of RAMP2 in cerebral ischemia. To do so, we
generated acute and chronic cerebral ischemia models using heterozygous RAMP2 knockout (RAMP2+/−) and wild-type (WT) mice,
and evaluated the efﬁcacy of RAMP2 as a therapeutic target in cerebrovascular disease.
Material and methods
Experimental animals
RAMP2+/− mice were generated by our group [5]. Because
RAMP2−/− mice die in utero, we used male RAMP2+/− and their
WT littermates (10 to 12-week-old male mice for MCAO and
9-week-old male mice for BCAS) in this study. All animal handling procedures were performed in accordance with a protocol
approved by the Ethics Committee of Shinshu University.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
MCAO, an operative procedure to cause acute cerebral ischemia,
was performed in WT and RAMP2+/− mice as described by Shah

Fig. 1. Evaluation of blood ﬂow recovery after MCAO. (A) Representative laser Doppler images of cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) in wild-type (WT) and RAMP2+/− mice 24 h after
MCAO. R and C = rostral and caudal side, respectively. (B) Temporal proﬁle of CBF after MCAO in WT and RAMP2+/− mice. CBF in each hemisphere prior to the operation was
assigned a value of 100%. Values are expressed as the mean ± SEM. n = 11 in each. CBF recovery tended to be delayed in RAMP2+/− mice on both the infarcted and contralateral
sides.

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

23

Fig. 2. Histological changes after MCAO. H&E staining of the cerebral cortex, callous corpus and corpus striatum boundary region in WT and RAMP2+/− mice 24 h after MCAO.
Scale bar = 100 ␮m. On the whole, staining was fainter in RAMP2+/− than WT mice.

Fig. 3. Evaluation of neuronal cell degeneration and oxidative stress after MCAO. (A–C) Kluver-Barrera staining in coronal plane sections of whole brain (A), cerebral cortex
(B), and corpus striatum boundary region (C) after MCAO. Scale bar = 100 ␮m. Numbers of cresyl violet-stained neurons at cerebral cortex (B) and luxol fast blue-stained
myelin at corpus striatum boundary region (B) were decreased in RAMP2+/− mice. (D) Immunostaining of 8-OHdG, a marker of oxidative DNA damage (shown in green
ﬂuorescent). Scale bar = 100 ␮m. (E) TUNEL in sections of cerebral cortex. Cells were counter-stained with methyl green. Scale bar = 50 ␮m. (F) Bar graph comparing numbers
of TUNEL-positive cells per microscopic ﬁeld (magniﬁcation: 200×) between WT and RAMP2+/− mice. Bars are mean ± SEM. n = 6 in each mouse. p < 0.01. The incidence of
TUNEL positivity was signiﬁcantly higher in RAMP2+/− than WT mice.

24

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

Fig. 4. Evaluation of gene expression after MCAO. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of the cerebral expression of the indicated genes in WT or RAMP2+/− mice after MCAO
or sham operation. Data from the non-infarcted cerebral hemisphere of sham-operated WT mice were assigned a value of 1. L and R = left and right hemisphere, respectively.
Bars are mean ± SEM. n = 4 in each.

et al. [28]. Brieﬂy, 1.5-cm of 6-0 nylon surgical suture was coated
with silicone to make an embolic ﬁlament. Mice were anesthetized with isoﬂurane, and the right common carotid artery was
exposed. Blood ﬂow in the external carotid artery was permanently intercepted using an electric knife. The common carotid
artery was clipped, intercepting the blood ﬂow, and the embolic
ﬁlament was inserted from the external carotid artery into the
middle cerebral artery. The ﬁlament was then removed after
2 h.
Cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) was measured using an OMEGAZONE
OZ-1 laser Doppler blood ﬂow imaging system (Omegawave Inc.,

Japan). After 24 h, the brains were removed for pathology and gene
expression analysis.
Bilateral common carotid artery stenosis (BCAS) and behavioral
analysis
BCAS is an operative procedure to cause chronic cerebral
ischemia by attaching an external microcoil (internal diameter:
0.18 mm) to the bilateral common carotid arteries. We performed
BCAS in WT and RAMP2+/− mice as described previously [13,29].
Brieﬂy, mice were anesthetized with isoﬂurane, and the common

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

25

Fig. 5. Evaluation of blood ﬂow recovery during BCAS. (A) Protocol for the evaluation of chronic cerebral ischemia. (B) Representative laser Doppler images of CBF in WT and
RAMP2+/− brains before (upper panels) and immediately after (lower panels) induction of BCAS. R and C = rostral and caudal side, respectively. (C) Temporal proﬁle of CBF
after BCAS in WT and RAMP2+/−. CBF in each hemisphere prior to the operation was assigned a value of 100%. Values are expressed as mean ± SEM. **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05. n = 5
in each. Both mice showed acute reductions of CBF immediately after the operation, which then gradually recovered. By the end of the study (day 28), CBF reached about
80% of the pre-operative level. RAMP2+/− mice showed a greater reduction of CBF at an early stage after the operation (2–24 h).

carotid artery was exposed. Two 4-0 silk sutures were then placed
loosely around distal and proximal parts of the artery and, using the
sutures, the artery was lifted, enabling the microcoil to be attached
below the carotid bifurcation. Sham animals were subjected to the
same surgery, but the microcoil was not attached. CBF was measured using a laser Doppler blood ﬂow imaging system prior to the
operation; immediately after the operation; 2, 6, and 12 h after the
operation; and 1, 3, 7, 14, 21 and 28 days after the operation.
Beginning 28 days after attaching the microcoil, we evaluated
the behavior of each mouse using an 8-arm radial maze (SMART
v3.0.00, Panlab, Spain). For the task, the mice were pretrained
to ﬁnd food pellets within the maze. In the behavioral trials, we
counted the numbers of correct choices (visits to an arm with a food
pellet) during the initial 4 choices in the maze. We also recorded
reference memory errors (counts of visits to arms without a food
pellet) and the average time required to take all the food pellets.
After the behavioral trials, the brains were removed for pathology
and gene expression analysis.
Histology
Tissues were ﬁxed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde, embedded in parafﬁn, and cut into 7-␮m-thick sections for histological
examination. The specimens were then deparafﬁnized for hematoxylin/eosin (H&E) staining, cresyl violet staining, Kluver-Barrera
staining, and TUNEL. Immunostaining was performed using antibodies against glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP; astrocyte
marker, Invitrogen), 8-hydroxy-2 -deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG; DNA
oxidation breakdown marker, Japan Institute for the Control of
Aging), and anti-CD31 (capillary marker, BD Biosciences).

out using an Applied Biosystems 7300 real-time PCR System with
SYBR green (Toyobo, Japan) or Realtime PCR Master Mix (Toyobo) and TaqMan probes (MBL). The primers and probes used are
listed in Table 1. Values were normalized to mouse GAPDH (PreDeveloped TaqMan assay reagents, Applied Biosystems).
Statistical analysis
Values are expressed as the mean ± SEM. Student’s t-test was
used to determine the signiﬁcance of differences between two
means. Values of p < 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant.
Results
Blood ﬂow recovery after MCAO was delayed in RAMP2+/− mice
We used an MCAO model to evaluate the effect of acute cerebral infarction in WT and RAMP2+/− mice. When we compared
cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) 24 h after MCAO, the blood ﬂow recovery tended to be lower in RAMP2+/− mice (Fig. 1A). Immediately
after the operation, both the infarcted and contralateral sides of
the brain showed transiently diminished blood ﬂow. In WT mice,
blood ﬂow then rapidly recovered on the contralateral side. In contrast, in RAMP2+/− mice, blood ﬂow recovery on the contralateral
side appeared to be greatly affected by the poor recovery on the
infarcted side (Fig. 1B) – i.e., blood ﬂow to both the infarcted side
and contralateral side remained diminished 24 h after the MCAO
operation.
Greater neural cell damage and oxidative stress in RAMP2+/−
mice after MCAO operation

RNA extraction and quantitative real-time RT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from tissues using TRI Reagent (Molecular Research Center, Inc.), after which the RNA was treated with
DNA-free (Ambion) to remove contaminating DNA and reverse
transcribed using a High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit
(Applied Biosystems). Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was carried

Histological analysis 24 h after MCAO revealed reductions in cell
density, cellular vacuolation and nuclear alterations in the cerebral cortex, callous corpus and corpus striatum boundary region
in both RAMP+/− and WT mice, but the damage was more severe
in RAMP2+/− mice (Fig. 2). In Kluver-Barrera staining of the brain
sections (Fig. 3A–C), the number of cresyl violet-stained neurons

26

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

Fig. 6. Behavioral analysis after BCAS. (A–C) Eight-arm radial maze tests were performed after 28 days of BCAS. Behavior trials were performed on the indicated days after
measuring CBF on day 28. (A) Comparison of correct answer counts during the initial 4 choices. (B) Comparison of reference memory error; counts of visits to an arm without
a food pellet. The errors were counted for 5 min or until all the pellets were eaten. (C) Comparison of the average time required to take all of the food pellets during the 2
weeks of the behavior trials. Bars are mean ± SEM. WT: n = 13; RAMP2+/−: n = 11 in A and B. WT: n = 9, RAMP+/−: n = 7 in C. The test was performed 2 times a day and the
mean value was used for the statistical analysis. *p < 0.05. (D–F) Results of 8-arm radial maze tests during pre-training period; correct answer (D), reference memory error
(E), and required time (F). Bars are mean ± SEM. WT: n = 42, RAMP2+/−: n = 32.

at the cerebral cortex (Fig. 3B) and luxol fast blue-stained myelin
at the corpus striatum boundary region (Fig. 3C) were decreased
in RAMP2+/− mice. Oxidative stress was assessed on the infarcted
side by immunostaining for 8-OHdG, levels of which are indicative
of the degree of oxidative DNA damage. We found that 8-OHdG
levels were higher in RAMP2+/− than WT brains (Fig. 3D). Furthermore, TUNEL analysis of the infarcted area showed a signiﬁcantly
higher incidence of apoptosis in RAMP2+/− brains than in WT
brains (Fig. 3E and F), indicating greater irreversible brain damage.
Taken together, these ﬁndings indicate RAMP2+/− mice are more
vulnerable to acute brain ischemia than WT mice.
Altered gene expression in RAMP2+/− mice following MCAO
We next evaluated the gene expression in the infarcted and
contralateral cerebral hemispheres after MCAO or sham operation
(Fig. 4). In RAMP2+/− mice, RAMP2 gene expression was reduced
to about half of that seen in WT mice. On the other hand, CLR and
another RAMP isoform, RAMP3, were unchanged. AM expression
was increased on the infarcted side in both genotypes, but the

elevation was pronounced in RAMP2+/− mice, which suggests a
compensatory response to the reduction of AM-RAMP2 signaling
in RAMP2+/− mice.
Although the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant, the
gene expression level of IL-1␤ was slightly higher in RAMP2+/−
following MCAO. Thus, RAMP2+/− mice showed more severe brain
damage with greater inﬂammation after acute ischemia than WT
mice.
Blood ﬂow recovery after BCAS was delayed in RAMP2+/− mice
Fig. 5A shows the protocol used for the evaluation of chronic
cerebral ischemia using a BCAS model. Nine-week-old WT and
RAMP2+/− mice underwent pre-training in an 8-arm radial maze
for 8 days. The BCAS operation was then performed and blood ﬂow
recovery was followed for 28 days. At 14 weeks, behavior was analyzed using the 8-arm radial maze and at 16 weeks the brains were
removed for further analysis. Immediately after the BCAS operation,
CBF was depressed in both WT and RAMP2+/− mice (Fig. 5B and
C). During the period spanning 2 h to 12 h after the operation, the

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

27

Fig. 7. Histological changes after 42 days of BCAS. (A and B) H&E (A) and cresyl violet (B) staining of sections of cerebral cortex collected from WT and RAMP2+/− mice after 42
days of BCAS. Scale bar in (A) and (B) = 50 ␮m and 100 ␮m, respectively. (C–E) Immunostaining of GFAP-positive astrocytes (C); 8OH-dG, a marker of oxidative DNA damage
(D), and CD31-positive capillaries (E). Sections of cerebral cortex (C and E) or cerebral cortex, callous corpus, and corpus striatum boundary region (D) are shown. Green
ﬂuorescent in C, brown stain in D, and red stain in E represent positive immunoreactivity. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI and hematoxylin in (C) and (E), respectively.
Scale bar = 50 ␮m. RAMP2+/− brains showed glial cell activation, higher levels of oxidative stress, and retarded capillary formation.

CBF returned to the basal level; however, it then gradually declined
until the end of the observation period (day 28). The time-course of
the changes in CBF was similar between WT and RAMP2+/− mice,
but the ﬂow at an early stage after the BCAS operation (2–24 h) was
signiﬁcantly lower in RAMP2+/− mice (Fig. 5C).
Behavior analysis reveals more severe cognitive disorder in
RAMP2+/− mice
After monitoring CBF for 28 days, we performed a behavioral
analysis using an 8-arm radial maze. The visits to the arm with
a food pellet were considered correct, and the number of visits
out of the ﬁrst four choices were counted. Thus the maximum
score was 4 (Fig. 6A). At a relatively earlier stage in the behavioral
analysis (day 3), the counts of correct answers were signiﬁcantly

lower in RAMP2+/− mice than in WT mice. Correspondingly, the
counts of visits to an arm without a food pellet (reference memory
errors) were signiﬁcantly higher in RAMP2+/− mice on days 3 and 7,
indicating more severe disturbance of reference memory (Fig. 6B).
In addition, the average time required to obtain the food pellets
was signiﬁcantly longer for RAMP2+/− mice (Fig. 6C). Such differences were not detected during the pre-training period (Fig. 6D–F),
suggesting lower RAMP2 levels exacerbate the cognitive disorder
related to chronic cerebral ischemia.
Greater neuronal cell loss, glial cell activation, oxidative stress,
and retarded capillary formation in RAMP2+/−
Pathological analysis performed after 42 days of BCAS revealed
that RAMP2+/− brains showed greater neural cell loss from the

28

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

Fig. 8. Histological changes early after BCAS operation. (A and B) H&E staining in sections of cerebral cortex collected from WT and RAMP2+/− mice 1 day (A) or 5 days (B)
after the BCAS operation. Scale bar = 50 ␮m. On day 1, RAMP2+/− brains showed poorer staining than WT. On day 5, vacuolar degeneration of neuronal cells (arrows in B)
was detected, and was pronounced in RAMP2+/− brains.

cerebral cortex than WT mice (Fig. 7A and B). Likewise, neural cell loss in the callous corpus and corpus striatum boundary
region was also greater in RAMP2+/− mice than in WT mice
(data not shown). On the other hand, GFAP-positive astrocytes in
the cerebral cortex were increased in RAMP2+/− mice (Fig. 7C),
indicating glial cell activation. Oxidative stress, indicated by oxidative DNA damage (8-OHdG levels; Fig. 7D) was higher in the
cerebral cortex, callous corpus, and corpus striatum boundary
region in RAMP2+/−. On the other hand, CD31-positive capillary formation was retarded in the cerebral cortex of RAMP2+/−
(Fig. 7E).
Histological changes detected early after BCAS in RAMP2+/− mice
Because there was a large transient fall in CBF early after the
BCAS operation, even though the cerebral vessels were not completely blocked, we speculated that histological changes might have
occurred earlier than day 42. Consistent with that idea, even on day
1 after the BCAS operation, cell densities were lower in RAMP2+/−
than WT brains (Fig. 8A). Moreover, on day 5 after the operation,
cellular vacuolization was greater in RAMP2+/− than WT brains
(Fig. 8B).
Altered gene expression in RAMP2+/− mice subjected to BCAS
In RAMP2+/− mice, the gene expression of the inﬂammatory cytokines was slightly higher than WT early after BCAS.
This suggests that, as with MCAO, inﬂammatory responses
occurred early after induction of BCAS and were more severe in
RAMP2+/− (Fig. 9).

Discussion
Signiﬁcant advances have been made in our understanding
of the cellular and molecular events underlying ischemic cell
death after cerebral infarction, including loss of metabolic stores,
excessive intracellular calcium accumulation, oxidative stress, and
potentiation of the inﬂammatory response [40]. We anticipate
that knowledge of the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms will enable development of novel therapeutic approaches
to the treatment of cerebral ischemic disease. Within this context, endogenous vasoactive molecules, which work to maintain
vascular and organ homeostasis, appear to be attractive therapeutic targets. One of these vasoactive molecules is AM, which,
in addition to inducing vasodilation, exerts antiapoptotic, antiinﬂammatory, antioxidative stress, and organ-protective effects.
Indeed, the potential for AM use in the treatment of cerebrovascular diseases has attracted much attention. For instance, using a
transient focal ischemia model, Miyamoto et al. found that infarct
volumes and neurological deﬁcits were greater in AM+/− mice than
in WT mice [16]. They also reported that reduced cAMP-protein
kinase A signaling in AM+/− mice leads to increases in oxidative
stress, which likely worsens the ischemic brain damage. In addition, Fernandez et al. reported that CNS-speciﬁc AM−/− mice were
less resistant to hypobaric hypoxia than WT mice, suggesting AM
exerts a neuroprotective effect in the CNS [4]. Conversely, using
mice overexpressing circulating AM, Maki et al. showed that elevation of AM levels after cerebral infarction accelerated capillary
formation, hastened blood ﬂow recovery, and prevented memory
deﬁcits [14].
These earlier observations provide compelling evidence that
AM works to prevent cerebral injuries, but they provide no

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

29

Fig. 9. Evaluation of gene expression after BCAS. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of expression of the indicated genes in whole brains from WT and RAMP2+/− mice after
BCAS or sham operation. Data from the sham-operated WT mice on each day were assigned a value of 1. Bars are mean ± SEM. n = 2–4 in each.

30

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31

information about which of the two dimeric receptors of AM,
CLR/RAMP2 and/or CLR/RAMP3, mediate those beneﬁcial effects.
However, we previously reported that AM−/− and RAMP2−/− mice
die in utero due the same defect in vascular development [5]. In contrast, RAMP1−/− and RAMP3−/− mice are born normally [1,35].
Moreover, aged RAMP2+/− mice spontaneously develop severe
organ ﬁbrosis with accelerated vascular senescence [12]. We therefore postulated that RAMP2 is the key determinant of the vascular
functionality of AM. In the present study, we showed that AM acting via CLR/RAMP2 works to prevent brain injury in both acute and
chronic cerebral ischemia.
Adrenomedullin was originally isolated as a potent vasodilator,
and we reported that AM plays a key role in the physiological regulation of vascular tone [19,20]. AM expression was upregulated
by hypoxia in an acute cerebral infarction model [27], while intravenous infusion of AM increased CBF and prevented ischemic brain
injury [3]. Thus, AM is thought to be upregulated in response to
cerebral ischemia as a compensatory response to restore CBF. In
the present study, we found that AM gene expression was elevated on the infarcted side after MCAO in both WT and RAMP2+/−
mice, but the response was more pronounced in RAMP2+/− mice.
This suggests there was positive feedback to offset the reduction of
RAMP2, and thus AM-CLR/RAMP2 signaling, and that RAMP2 plays
a central role with AM after cerebral infarction. In addition, CBF was
also depressed on the contralateral side after cerebral infarction in
RAMP2+/− mice. This likely reﬂects the fact that, even without vascular occlusion, anesthesia and operative procedures often affect
CBF, and again RAMP2+/− mice were more sensitive to these procedures. Taken together, these results indicate that the endogenous
AM-RAMP2 system plays a protective role to maintain CBF after
acute cerebral infarction.
Inﬂammatory cytokines are important factors contributing to
ischemic brain injury [2]. AM has been shown to suppress inﬂammation [8]. In the present study, we found that the gene expression
of inﬂammatory cytokines was slightly higher in RAMP2+/− mice
after MCAO and early after BCAS. Inﬂammation has been implicated
as a secondary mechanism underlying ischemia-induced neuronal
injury, extending the area of brain infarcts [38,39]. Consistent with
those reports, we observed that activation of astrocytes in the
BCAS model was enhanced in RAMP2+/− mice, likely exacerbating
inﬂammation and neural cell injury [33,36]. With loss of RAMP2,
therefore, not only do the diminished vascular effects contribute to
the severity of brain damage, but so does the enhanced inﬂammatory response.
Inﬂammation and oxidative stress are closely related in cerebrovascular disease, acting together to exacerbate its pathology
[15]. Shimosawa et al. ﬁrst reported the antioxidative function
of AM through the suppression of NADPH oxidase [30,31]. We
reported that aged RAMP2+/− mice showed severe organ ﬁbrosis
with marked oxidative stress and accelerated vascular senescence.
Conversely, endothelial cells stably overexpressing RAMP2 were
protected from cellular senescence induced by oxidative stress [12].
In the present study, we found that the level of oxidative stress
marker was higher in RAMP2+/− mice than in WT mice, suggesting
the antioxidative effects of the endogenous AM-RAMP2 system are
also protective against ischemic brain damage. Collectively then,
our ﬁndings indicate that the AM-RAMP2 system protects against
brain injury by restoring CBF and suppressing both inﬂammation
and oxidative stress.
There are currently no effective treatments for vascular dementia, which is an aftereffect of cerebral infarction – i.e., there are as yet
no treatments that can restore cerebral perfusion or the functionality of cerebral vessels. Consequently, enhancement of angiogenesis
could be the most promising approach to treating vascular dementia. In BCAS-induced chronic cerebral ischemia, we found that
RAMP2+/− mice showed reduced capillary development. We also

found that reducing RAMP2 worsened the cognitive disorder associated with chronic cerebral ischemia. Maki et al. reported that
AM promotes angiogenesis and prevents cognitive decline after
chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in mice [13]. We also reported that
AM+/− mice showed reduced blood ﬂow and capillary formation
in tumor transplantation and hind-limb ischemia models [6]. AM
possesses novel angiogenic properties mediated by its ability to
enhance VEGF expression [7]. However, during the chronic phase
after BCAS, we detected no change in VEGF expression (data not
shown). We believe that the angiogenic potency of AM does not
solely reﬂect its regulation of angiogenic factors; we reported that
RAMP2−/− mice also showed disruption of cellular adhesion, tight
junctions, and the actin cytoskeleton of vascular endothelial cells
[5,12].
AM has been attracting much attention for its potential clinical
application. On the other hand, the clinical applicability of AM, like
that of other endogenous bioactive peptides, has limitations; AM
has a very short half-life in the blood, which makes it impractical for
use in the treatment of chronic diseases, such as vascular dementia.
In the present study, we showed that through maintenance of CBF
and suppression of inﬂammation and oxidative stress, endogenous
RAMP2, a component of the dimeric AM receptor (CLR/RAMP2),
works to prevent tissue damage after cerebral ischemia, thereby
contributing to the maintenance of cognitive function. We therefore suggest that the CLR/RAMP2 complex or RAMP2 itself could
be a useful therapeutic target for the prevention or treatment of
cerebrovascular diseases, including both cerebral infarction and
vascular dementia. It is noteworthy that RAMP2 is the critical determinant of the protective effects of AM in cerebral ischemia. In that
context, our ﬁndings provide a clear rationale for the development
of drugs that modulate RAMP2 and thus the vascular functionality
of AM.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the Funding Program for Next
Generation World-Leading Researchers (NEXT Program) grant
No. (LS053) from the Cabinet Ofﬁce, Government of (26293183,
26293085, 25460330, 26460337, 26670153) Cardiovascular Diseases from the National Cardiovascular Center, and research grants
from the Novartis Foundation for Gerontological Research, the
Ichiro Kanehara Foundation, the Cosmetology Research Foundation, the SENSHIN Medical Research Foundation, the Nagao
Memorial Fund, the Kanzawa Medical Research Foundation, the
Ono Medical Research Foundation, the Nakatomi Foundation, the
Japan Heart Foundation & Astellas/Pﬁzer Grant for Research on
Atherosclerosis Update, the Research Foundation for Opto-Science
and Technology, Takeda Science Foundation, and the Japan Vascular
Disease Research Foundation.
References
[1] Dackor R, Fritz-Six K, Smithies O, Caron K. Receptor activity-modifying proteins
2 and 3 have distinct physiological functions from embryogenesis to old age. J
Biol Chem 2007;282:18094–9.
[2] del Zoppo G, Ginis I, Hallenbeck JM, Iadecola C, Wang X, Feuerstein GZ. Inﬂammation and stroke: putative role for cytokines, adhesion molecules and iNOS
in brain response to ischemia. Brain Pathol 2000;10:95–112.
[3] Dogan A, Suzuki Y, Koketsu N, Osuka K, Saito K, Takayasu M, et al. Intravenous
infusion of adrenomedullin and increase in regional cerebral blood ﬂow and
prevention of ischemic brain injury after middle cerebral artery occlusion in
rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1997;17:19–25.
[4] Fernandez AP, Serrano J, Tessarollo L, Cuttitta F, Martinez A. Lack of
adrenomedullin in the mouse brain results in behavioral changes, anxiety, and lower survival under stress conditions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2008;105:12581–6.
[5] Ichikawa-Shindo Y, Sakurai T, Kamiyoshi A, Kawate H, Iinuma N, Yoshizawa
T, et al. The GPCR modulator protein RAMP2 is essential for angiogenesis and
vascular integrity. J Clin Invest 2008;118:29–39.

K. Igarashi et al. / Peptides 62 (2014) 21–31
[6] Iimuro S, Shindo T, Moriyama N, Amaki T, Niu P, Takeda N, et al. Angiogenic effects of adrenomedullin in ischemia and tumor growth. Circ Res
2004;95:415–23.
[7] Iinuma N, Sakurai T, Kamiyoshi A, Ichikawa-Shindo Y, Arai T, Yoshizawa T, et al.
Adrenomedullin in sinusoidal endothelial cells play protective roles against
cold injury of liver. Peptides 2010;31:865–71.
[8] Isumi Y, Kubo A, Katafuchi T, Kangawa K, Minamino N. Adrenomedullin suppresses interleukin-1beta-induced tumor necrosis factor-alpha production in
Swiss 3T3 cells. FEBS Lett 1999;463:110–4.
[9] Iwasaki H, Eguchi S, Shichiri M, Marumo F, Hirata Y. Adrenomedullin as a
novel growth-promoting factor for cultured vascular smooth muscle cells:
role of tyrosine kinase-mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase activation.
Endocrinology 1998;139:3432–41.
[10] Kano H, Kohno M, Yasunari K, Yokokawa K, Horio T, Ikeda M, et al.
Adrenomedullin as a novel antiproliferative factor of vascular smooth muscle
cells. J Hypertens 1996;14:209–13.
[11] Kitamura K, Kangawa K, Kawamoto M, Ichiki Y, Nakamura S, Matsuo
H, et al. Adrenomedullin: a novel hypotensive peptide isolated from
human pheochromocytoma. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1993;192:553–
60.
[12] Koyama T, Ochoa-Callejero L, Sakurai T, Kamiyoshi A, Ichikawa-Shindo Y,
Iinuma N, et al. Vascular endothelial adrenomedullin-RAMP2 system is essential for vascular integrity and organ homeostasis. Circulation 2013;127:
842–53.
[13] Maki T, Ihara M, Fujita Y, Nambu T, Harada H, Ito H, et al. Angiogenic roles of
adrenomedullin through vascular endothelial growth factor induction. Neuroreport 2011;22:442–7.
[14] Maki T, Ihara M, Fujita Y, Nambu T, Miyashita K, Yamada M, et al. Angiogenic and
vasoprotective effects of adrenomedullin on prevention of cognitive decline
after chronic cerebral hypoperfusion in mice. Stroke 2011;42:1122–8.
[15] Miller AA, Budzyn K, Sobey CG. Vascular dysfunction in cerebrovascular disease: mechanisms and therapeutic intervention. Clin Sci (Lond)
2010;119:1–17.
[16] Miyamoto N, Tanaka R, Shimosawa T, Yatomi Y, Fujita T, Hattori N, et al. Protein kinase A-dependent suppression of reactive oxygen species in transient
focal ischemia in adrenomedullin-deﬁcient mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2009;29:1769–79.
[17] Miyashita K, Itoh H, Sawada N, Fukunaga Y, Sone M, Yamahara K, et al.
Adrenomedullin promotes proliferation and migration of cultured endothelial
cells. Hypertens Res 2003;26(Suppl.):S93–8.
[18] Murphy TC, Samson WK. The novel vasoactive hormone, adrenomedullin,
inhibits water drinking in the rat. Endocrinology 1995;136:2459–63.
[19] Nishimatsu H, Hirata Y, Shindo T, Kurihara H, Kakoki M, Nagata D, et al. Role
of endogenous adrenomedullin in the regulation of vascular tone and ischemic
renal injury: studies on transgenic/knockout mice of adrenomedullin gene. Circ
Res 2002;90:657–63.
[20] Nishimatsu H, Hirata Y, Shindo T, Kurihara H, Suzuki E, Sata M, et al. Endothelial
responses of the aorta from adrenomedullin transgenic mice and knockout
mice. Hypertens Res 2003;26(Suppl.):S79–84.
[21] Niu P, Shindo T, Iwata H, Ebihara A, Suematsu Y, Zhang Y, et al. Accelerated cardiac hypertrophy and renal damage induced by angiotensin II in
adrenomedullin knockout mice. Hypertens Res 2003;26:731–6.

31

[22] Niu P, Shindo T, Iwata H, Iimuro S, Takeda N, Zhang Y, et al. Protective effects of
endogenous adrenomedullin on cardiac hypertrophy, ﬁbrosis, and renal damage. Circulation 2004;109:1789–94.
[23] Okumura H, Nagaya N, Kangawa K. Adrenomedullin infusion during
ischemia/reperfusion attenuates left ventricular remodeling and myocardial
ﬁbrosis in rats. Hypertens Res 2003;26(Suppl.):S99–104.
[24] Petrie MC, Hillier C, Morton JJ, McMurray JJ. Adrenomedullin selectively
inhibits angiotensin II-induced aldosterone secretion in humans. J Hypertens
2000;18:61–4.
[25] Samson WK, Murphy T, Schell DA. A novel vasoactive peptide,
adrenomedullin, inhibits pituitary adrenocorticotropin release. Endocrinology
1995;136:2349–52.
[26] Samson WK, Murphy TC. Adrenomedullin inhibits salt appetite. Endocrinology
1997;138:613–6.
[27] Serrano J, Alonso D, Encinas JM, Lopez JC, Fernandez AP, Castro-Blanco S, et al.
Adrenomedullin expression is up-regulated by ischemia-reperfusion in the
cerebral cortex of the adult rat. Neuroscience 2002;109:717–31.
[28] Shah ZA, Namiranian K, Klaus J, Kibler K, Dore S. Use of an optimized transient
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery protocol for the mouse stroke model. J
Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2006;15:133–8.
[29] Shibata M, Ohtani R, Ihara M, Tomimoto H. White matter lesions and glial
activation in a novel mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Stroke
2004;35:2598–603.
[30] Shimosawa T, Ogihara T, Matsui H, Asano T, Ando K, Fujita T. Deﬁciency
of adrenomedullin induces insulin resistance by increasing oxidative stress.
Hypertension 2003;41:1080–5.
[31] Shimosawa T, Shibagaki Y, Ishibashi K, Kitamura K, Kangawa K, Kato S, et al.
Adrenomedullin, an endogenous peptide, counteracts cardiovascular damage.
Circulation 2002;105:106–11.
[32] Shindo T, Kurihara Y, Nishimatsu H, Moriyama N, Kakoki M, Wang Y,
et al. Vascular abnormalities and elevated blood pressure in mice lacking
adrenomedullin gene. Circulation 2001;104:1964–71.
[33] Stoll G, Jander S, Schroeter M. Inﬂammation and glial responses in ischemic
brain lesions. Prog Neurobiol 1998;56:149–71.
[34] Taylor GM, Meeran K, O‘Shea D, Smith DM, Ghatei MA, Bloom SR.
Adrenomedullin inhibits feeding in the rat by a mechanism involving calcitonin
gene-related peptide receptors. Endocrinology 1996;137:3260–4.
[35] Tsujikawa K, Yayama K, Hayashi T, Matsushita H, Yamaguchi T, Shigeno T,
et al. Hypertension and dysregulated proinﬂammatory cytokine production in
receptor activity-modifying protein 1-deﬁcient mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2007;104:16702–7.
[36] Tuppo EE, Arias HR. The role of inﬂammation in Alzheimer’s disease. Int J
Biochem Cell Biol 2005;37:289–305.
[37] Uzan B, Villemin A, Garel JM, Cressent M. Adrenomedullin is anti-apoptotic
in osteoblasts through CGRP1 receptors and MEK-ERK pathway. J Cell Physiol
2008;215:122–8.
[38] Wen YD, Zhang HL, Qin ZH. Inﬂammatory mechanism in ischemic neuronal
injury. Neurosci Bull 2006;22:171–82.
[39] Zaremba J. Contribution of tumor necrosis factor alpha to the pathogenesis of
33 stroke. Folia Morphol (Warsz) 2000;59:137–43.
[40] Zheng Z, Lee JE, Yenari MA. Stroke: molecular mechanisms and potential targets
for treatment. Curr Mol Med 2003;3:361–72.

