RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS

STROKE

Meddling with the mind

S.Bradbrook/NPG

B cells may
contribute to
the cognitive
decline that is
seen in some
patients after
stroke

Individuals who suffer a stroke are
at an increased risk of subsequently
developing dementia, but the reasons
for this are unclear. A new study in
the Journal of Neuroscience by Marion
Buckwalter and colleagues suggests
that B cells could be the missing link.
B cells had not previously
been associated with stroke, but
they are known to contribute to
other neurological diseases. This
prompted the authors to investigate
the role of B cells in a new mouse
model of stroke that they recently
developed, known as DH stroke, in
which distal middle cerebral artery
occlusion is performed and followed

by a period of hypoxia. DH stroke
produces a lesion adjacent to, but
not incor­porating, the hippocampus.
Importantly, unlike other mouse
models of stroke, DH stroke does not
cause immediate cognitive impairment
in mice.
When the authors assessed brain
tissue from mice with DH stroke, they
found that there is a delayed infiltration of B cells into stroke-induced
lesions. Very few B cells could be
detected in lesions 1 week after stroke,
but there was marked infiltration
of B cells into these sites at 7 weeks
and 12 weeks. Histological analyses
showed that B cells in the lesions
colocalized with CD11c+ cells and
T cells. Plasma cells were also present
in the lesions and extensive antibody
deposition was seen in both the stroke
region and adjacent areas at 7 weeks
after stroke. Additional experiments
suggested that although antibody
may have entered the brain following
disruption of the blood–brain barrier,
at least some of it was being produced
locally by plasma cells in the lesion.
Most of the antibody found in
the brain at 7 weeks after stroke
induction was located in the hippo­
campus. Long-term potentiation
(LTP; the process through which
synaptic strength is persistently
increased) is one of the main mechanisms involved in memory storage
in the hippo­campus. Notably, the
antibody deposition that occurred
after stroke induction was associated
with impaired LTP that got progressively worse from 7 to 12 weeks.
The impairment of LTP was also
associated with short-term memory
deficits in mice, as assessed by studies

NATURE REVIEWS | DRUG DISCOVERY	

using Y mazes. Strikingly, μMT mice,
which lack mature B cells, did not
experience LTP deficits or show
cognitive impairment after stroke,
despite developing lesions that were
similar to those of wild-type mice
in terms of size and T cell infiltrates.
Furthermore, mice treated with
B cell-depleting antibodies at 5 days
after stroke induction were also
protected from developing cognitive
defects at 7 weeks.
Finally, the authors assessed B cell
density and antibody levels in postmortem brain tissue from patients
who had experienced stroke and
dementia. B cells could be detected
in the stroke core or adjacent regions
of 19 of the 21 subjects assessed, and
subjects with higher B cell densities in
the brain showed stronger immuno­
staining for IgG. Of note, B cell
densities were significantly increased
in brain tissue from individuals in the
stroke and dementia group compared
with age-matched controls that had
not been diagnosed with stroke or
dementia.
This study suggests that B cells
may contribute to the cognitive
decline that is seen in some patients
after stroke. As B cell-depleting
antibodies are already approved for
use in humans, it will be exciting to
see whether these findings can be
translated into the clinic.
Yvonne Bordon, Senior Editor,
Nature Reviews Immunology
This article is modified from the original in Nature
Rev. Immunol. (http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nri3826)
ORIGINAL RESEARCH PAPER Doyle, K. P. et al.
B-lymphocyte-mediated delayed cognitive
impairment following stroke. J. Neurosci. 35,
2133–2145 (2015)

VOLUME 14 | MARCH 2015
© 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved

