[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2012.08.289
[Link]
mailto:Dvaron@hadassah.org.il
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2012.08.289
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/00493848
Involvement of platelet derived microparticles in tumor metastasis and
tissue regeneration
David Varon⁎, Yael Hayon, Olga Dashevsky, Ela Shai
Coagulation Unit, Department of Hematology, Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel
a b s t r a c t 
Platelets play a major role in hemostasis, but are also involved in vascular biology processes such as angiogenesis
and tumor metastasis. Activated platelets release many proteins favoring wound healing and promoting
angiogenesis. Microparticles (MP) are small plasma membrane vesicles shed from cells upon their
activation or apoptosis. Platelet-derived microparticles (PMP) constitute the majority of the pool of MP circulating
in the blood. PMP express and may transfer functional receptors, stimulate the release of cytokines,
activate intracellular signaling pathways, promote angiogenesis, and are involved in tissue regeneration and
cancer metastasis. We investigated the effect of PMP on cancer cells metastasis and their potential beneficial
effect in an ischemic stroke model.
© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Platelets are key players in hemostasis, but are also involved in fundamental
processes of vascular biology such as angiogenesis, tissue
regeneration, and tumor metastasis. Platelets act as circulating sensors
in health and disease. Activated platelets release many proteins favoring
wound healing and promoting angiogenesis. These include PDGF,
FGF, IGF-1, VEGF and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) as well
as a multitude of chemokines and cytokines. Other pro-angiogenic
mediators from platelets include angiopoietin (ANG), stromal cellderived
factor-1 (CXCL12), matrix metalloproteinases 1 (MMP-1),
MMP-2 and MMP-9.
Microparticles (MP) are small plasma membrane vesicles shed from
cells upon their activation or apoptosis. Platelet-derived microparticles
(PMP) constitute the majority of the pool of MP circulating in the blood.
PMP can express and transfer functional receptors from platelet
membranes, increase expression of adhesion molecules on cells, stimulate
the release of cytokines, activate intracellular signaling pathways
, alter vascular reactivity, promote angiogenesis in vitro and in
vivo models, and are involved in tissue regeneration and cancer
metastasis [1]. The role of PMP in cancer development is unknown
but a high PMP level is highly correlated with aggressive tumors
and a poor clinical outcome.
It was demonstrated that PMP serve as chemoattractants for several
lung cancer cell lines, activating phosphorylation of signaling molecules
and secretion of angiogenic factors. Intravenous injection of PMP-
covered lung cancer cells into mice resulted in significant increase of
metastatic foci in mice lungs and in bone marrow. Other studies have
shown that PMP, in addition to their pro-coagulant and inflammatory
effects, promote all stages of angiogenesis in-vivo and are capable to
improve reperfusion in a rat myocardial infarction model [2]. Furthermore
, PMP participate actively in metastasis and tumor development
as well as in neurogenerative diseases.
The goal of our studies was to investigate the effect of PMP on
the metastasis process of cancer cells and on the other hand the
beneficial effect of PMP in treatment of ischemic stroke.
We demonstrated that PMPfirmly adhere to prostate cancer cells and
significantly increase their adhesion to endothelial cells, as well as to ECM
components under flow condition. We also showed that PMP facilitate
tumor cell invasive properties through increase in metalloproteinases
(MMP-2) synthesis and secretion [3]. In vivo experiments have shown
that PMP enhance prostate cancer cell accumulation in the mice lung
first half-hour after IV injection, and yield more neoplastic foci in lung.
Microarray analysis of prostate cancer cells revealed upregulation
of genes associated with tumor progression and downregulation of
tumor suppression related genes. We studied one of the significantly
upregulated gene Interleukin-8 (IL-8), which is involved in angiogenesis
, tumorigenicity, and metastasis. According to our results PMP
increase IL-8 secretion from prostate cancer cells by affecting transcription
and translation.
To examine the advantageous effects of PMP in-vivo, we used a
stroke model in rats.
We delivered PMP via a biodegradable polymer to the brain surface
or by direct stereotatic injection to the lateral ventricles after
permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion (PMCAO) in rats. Rats
were tested for the neurological severity score and infarct volumes
were measured. Immunohistochemistry was used to determine the
fate of newborn cells and to count blood vessels in the ischemic brain.
The results show that PMP led to a dose dependent increase in cell
proliferation, neurogenesis and angiogenesis at the infarct boundary
zone and significantly improved behavioral deficits [4].
Thrombosis Research 130 (2012) S98–S99
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Dvaron@hadassah.org.il (D. Varon).
0049-3848/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2012.08.289
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Thrombosis Research
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/thromres
(8.0.0.2542,1950554044 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2012.02.030
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2012.02.030
Ourin-vitrowork demonstrated that incubation with PMP leads to
increased embryonic neural stem cell (eNSC) proliferation and survival
and increased the differentiation potential of eNSC to glia and
neurons. These effects were mediated by a number of growth factors,
including FGF2, VEGF and PDGF, working in concert and associated
with increments in ERK and Akt phosphorylation; which are both
implicated in cell survival, angiogenesis and proliferation [5].
We also studied proteome of PMP originated from platelets activated
with shear compared to platelets activated by thrombin. We
showed differences in regulation of proteins related to cell assembly,
organization and morphology [6].
Taken together our results demonstrate that PMP serve as a
mini-storage system of multiple growth and pro-survival factors
and activate classical intracellular signaling cascades such as PI3
kinase (PI3K), Akt and ERK pathways. Exposure of cells to PMP amplify
key functions of those cells, leading to enhanced proliferation, maturation
, survival, differentiation and release of trophic factors. These
events, that are useful in wound healing or treatment of ischemic
tissues, are destructive when related to cancer metastasis.
Conflict of interest
None.
References
[1] Kim HK, Song KS, Chung JH, Lee KR, Lee SN. Platelet microparticles induce
angiogenesis in vitro. Br J Haematol Feb 2004;124(3):376-84.
[2] Brill A, Dashevsky O, Rivo J, Gozal Y, Varon D. Platelet-derived microparticles
induce angiogenesis and stimulate post-ischemic revascularization. Cardiovasc
Res Jul 1 2005;67(1):30-8.
[3] Dashevsky O, Varon D, Brill A. Platelet-derived microparticles promote invasiveness of
prostate cancer cells via upregulation of MMP-2 production. Int J Cancer Apr 15
2009;124(8):1773-7.
[4] Hayon Y, Dashevsky O, Shai E, Varon D, Leker RR. Platelet Microparticles Promote
Neural Stem Cell Proliferation, Survival and Differentiation. J Mol Neurosci Jan 31
2012;47:659-65.
[5] Hayon Y, Dashevsky O, Shai E, Brill A, Varon D, Leker RR. Platelet Microparticles Induce
Angiogenesis and Neurogenesis after Cerebral Ischemia. Curr Neurovasc Res
2012;9(3):185-92.
[6] Shai E, Rosa I, Parguiña AF, Motahedeh S, Varon D, García A. Comparative analysis of
platelet-derived microparticles reveals differences in their amount and proteome
depending on the platelet stimulus. J Proteomics Mar 5 2012 [Epub], http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jprot.2012.02.030.
S99 D. Varon et al. / Thrombosis Research 130 (2012) S98–S99
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-454110717)
