Journal of Neuroscience Research 93:1814–1825 (2015)

Human Umbilical Cord Blood-Derived
Mesenchymal Stem Cells Improve
Functional Recovery Through
Thrombospondin1, Pantraxin3, and
Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor in the
Ischemic Rat Brain
Hyung Woo Park,1,2,3 Hyo-Eun Moon,1,2,3 Hye-Soo R. Kim,1,2,3
Seung Leal Paek,1,2,3,4 Yona Kim,1,2,3 Jong Wook Chang,5 Yoon Sun Yang,6
KwanWoo Kim,1,2,3 Wonil Oh,6 Jae Ha Hwang,1,2,3 Jin Wook Kim,1,2,3
Dong Gyu Kim,1,2,3 and Sun Ha Paek1,2,3*
1

Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
3
Ischemic/Hypoxic Disease Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
4
Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
5
Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine Center, Research Institute for Future Medicine,
Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea
6
Biomedical Research Institute, Medipost Co., Ltd., Seoul, Korea
2

Cell therapy is a potential therapeutic method for cerebral
ischemia, which remains a serious problem. In the search
for more effective therapeutic methods, many kinds of
stem cells from various tissues have been developed and
tested as candidate therapeutic agents. Among them,
human umbilical cord blood (hUCB)-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are widely used for cell therapy
because of their genetic flexibility. To confirm that they
are effective and understand how they affect ischemic
neural cells, hUCB-MSCs were directly administered ipsilaterally into an ischemic zone induced by middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO). We found that the neurobehavioral performance of the hUCB-MSC group was
significantly improved compared with that of the vehicleinjected control group. The infarct was also remarkably
smaller in the hUCB-MSC group. Additionally, hUCBMSC transplantation resulted in a greater number of
newly generated cells and angiogenic and tissue repair
factors and a lower number of inflammatory events in the
penumbra zone. To determine why these events
occurred, hUCB-MSCs were assayed under hypoxic and
normoxic conditions in vitro. The results showed that
hUCB-MSCs exhibit higher expression levels of thrombospondin1, pantraxin3, and vascular endothelial growth
factor under hypoxic conditions than under normoxic
conditions. These results were found to be correlated
with our in vivo immunofluorescent staining results. On
the basis of these findings, we suggest that hUCB-MSCs
may have a beneficial effect on cerebral ischemia, espeC 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
V

SIGNIFICANCE:
Human umbilical cord blood derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUCBMSCs) are increasingly used to repair neurodegenerative disease.
Despite their success related to repair defects, hUCB-MSCs have drawbacks such as a limited sub-mechanism and sub-optimal biological
properties in brain ischemic stroke. Various studies have shown that
the therapeutic possibility of hUCB-MSCs can be originated to neurogenesis and paracrine effect. Unfortunately, such studies are not enough
to prove related sub-materials in neurogenesis or paracrine effect. The
present study provides quantitative data relating TSP1, PTX3 and
VEGF which improved motor function in ischemic brain. As such,
our finding can help improve current stroke treatment.

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online version of
this article.
Contract grant sponsor: Korea Institute of Planning & Evaluation for
Technology in Food, Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries, Republic of
Korea; Contract grant number: 311011-05-3-SB020; Contract grant
sponsor: Korea Healthcare Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health
& Welfare, Republic of Korea; Contract grant numbers:
HI09C13540100, HI10C14110400, HI12C02050101.
*Correspondence to: Sun Ha Paek, MD, PhD, Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799,
Korea. E-mail: paeksh@snu.ac.kr
Received 30 December 2014; Revised 16 June 2015; Accepted 17 June
2015
Published online 2 September 2015 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jnr.23616

Cord Blood-Derived Stem Cells for Ischemia
cially through angiogenesis, neurogenesis, and antiinflammatory effects, and thus could be used as a therapeutic agent to treat neurological disorders such as cerebral ischemia. VC 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
Key words: human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal
stem cell; ischemia; cytokine; angiogenesis; neurogenesis

Ischemic stroke is becoming an increasingly significant
health problem worldwide in terms of morbidity, mortality,
and health care costs. So far, the available treatment options
for this disease are generally limited to mechanical or pharmacological (rt-PA) reperfusion, but many ischemic stroke
patients cannot benefit from such interventions. Therefore,
the demand for alternative therapeutic strategies is high. In
recent years, cell transplantation therapeutic methods have
been considered as a working treatment for many clinical
disorders (Enomoto et al., 2004; Pluchino et al., 2005). In
these studies, neural stem cells were obtained, most commonly from fetuses, to explore their potential usage for neural regeneration. However, because of their ethically limited
availability, alternative sources of cells for neural transplantation, such as bone marrow, adipose, and umbilical cord
blood (UCB), have been evaluated (Rogers and Casper,
2004; Pluchino et al., 2005).
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), in particular bone
marrow stromal cells, are known to provide therapeutic
benefits for cerebral ischemia. In addition to their differentiation into osteoblasts, chondroblasts, adipocytes, and
hematopoiesis-supporting stromal cells, MSCs have the
potential to differentiate into neurons and glia in vitro
and in vivo (Kan et al., 2005). In animal models with cerebral ischemia, transplanted MSCs have been found to
migrate toward the injured site when administrated intravenously. Several studies have shown that MSCs promote
endogenous cellular proliferation, reduce apoptosis, and
decrease neurological deficits after cerebral ischemia
(Chen et al., 2001b; Iihoshi et al., 2004).
In particular, UCB stem cells, when used for cell
therapy, have advantages over alternative stem cell sources. For instance, UCB cells have a larger portion of mesenchymal progenitor cells per volume and are more
pluripotent and genetically flexible than bone marrowderived MSCs (Erices et al., 2000; Gang et al., 2004). In
addition, it has been suggested that, because they are not
as mature as other adult stem cells, they do not elicit alloreactive responses (Di Nicola et al., 2002; Kang et al.,
2005). Furthermore, UCB stem cells have been shown to
have lower carcinogenic potential than embryonic stem
cells (Kuh et al., 2005).
More recently, UCB stem cells have been shown to
differentiate into neural cells in vitro. In addition, functional
recovery after transplantation of UCB stem cells into an
injured area of the spinal cord in vivo (Zhao et al., 2004)
and the efficacy of intravenous administration of UCB stem
cells in traumatic brain injury (Lu et al., 2002) have been
demonstrated. Furthermore, the transplantation of UCB
stem cells combined with neurotrophic factors has been
reported to result in functional recovery (Kuh et al., 2005).
Journal of Neuroscience Research

1815

UCB derived MSCs and umbilical cord (UC)-derived
MSCs have mediated revascularization in animal models of
vascular or hindlimb ischemia as well as in an ischemic
stroke model (Aranguren et al., 2008; Lim et al., 2011; Lin
et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2012). However,
it is still unclear why these results appear and which molecules are involved in the process of functional recovery.
The evidence outlined here suggests that human
UCB-MSCs (hUCB-MSCs) can be designed for effective
treatment of severe ischemic vascular diseases. The aim of
this study was to determine whether hUCB-MSCs do
indeed exert protective and rejuvenating effects in an experimental ischemia model and to evaluate growth factors or
cytokines that are associated with such phenomena.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Cell Cultures
This study was approved by the Institutional Review
Board of Medipost Co., Ltd. Isolation and multiplication of
hUCB-MSCs were performed as previously described (Yang
et al., 2004) by Medipost Co., Ltd., from whom we obtained a
sample. Briefly, after informed maternal consent, hUCB was
collected from the umbilical veins of deliveries by inserting a
16-gauge needle connected to a hUCB collection bag containing 44.8 ml CPDA-1 anticoagulant (Greencross Co., Yongin,
Kyunggi-do, Korea). hUCB was collected by gravity. hUCBMSCs were harvested within 24 hr after collection in all cases,
and cell viability was more than 90%. All cells were prepared in
an adherent cell state at Medipost Co., Ltd. and used in the cell
transplantation experiment.
Surgical Procedure
All animals were cared for in accordance with the NIH
Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals (National Institutes of
Health Publication No. 85-23, revised 1985), and the protocol
was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments at the Biomedical Research Institute of Seoul National
University Hospital (IACUC No. 11-0114). All surgeries were
designed to cause as little pain to the animals as possible.
Transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) was
induced with the intraluminal vascular occlusion method, as has
been previously described (Shin et al., 2008, 2010). Twenty adult
male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 250–300 g were anesthetized by an intramuscular injection of a Zoletil 50 (75 mg/kg of
zolazepam and tiletamine) and Rompun (10 mg/kg of xylazine)
mixture. A 4-0 surgical suture with a length of 20.0–22.0 mm
and a rounded tip made by heating was slotted from the external
carotid artery into the lumen of the internal carotid artery until it
blocked the origin of the MCA. Two hours after MCAO, animals were reanesthetized and reperfusion was performed by withdrawal of the suture. After surgery, 15 of the 20 rats survived, so
in total 15 rats were randomly assigned to control and experimental groups (control n 5 8, experimental n 5 7).
The Focused Protein Array
The hUCB-MSCs were thawed in a dish and incubated under normal conditions (a-MEM; Invitrogen,

1816

Park et al.

Carlsbad, CA) for 3 days. Then, the cells were incubated
under oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD) conditions for 24
hr; for this, the culture medium was replaced by glucose-free
Earle’s balanced salt solution purged by nitrogen gas for 10
min (pO2  5–6%). The cells were then placed in a chamber filled with 5% CO2 and 95% N2 for 2 hr, and control
cells were incubated in glucose-free Earle’s balanced salt
solution in a normoxic incubator for the same time period.
OGD was terminated by returning cells to normal culture
conditions. The culture media were collected, and each
medium was analyzed with the human angiogenesis array
panel A (proteome profiler; R&D Systems, Minneapolis,
MN). All focused protein array analyses were performed
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts
of culture supernatants were diluted and mixed with a cocktail of biotinylated angiogenesis-detection antibodies and
incubated with (capture) antibody membranes overnight at
48C. After unbound material had been washed away, the
membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated streptavidin. Chemiluminescence was used for signal detection. Positive controls were located in the upper left corner (two
spots), lower left corner (two spots), and lower right corner
(two spots) of each array kit. Horseradish peroxidase substrate
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) was used to detect protein expression, and data were captured by exposure to Kodak BioMax
Light films. Arrays were scanned into a computer, and optical density measurements were obtained with Image Pro Plus
v 5.1 (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD; Fig. 5).
Cell Transplantation
On the second day after the MCAO operation, rats in
the experimental group were injected with a total volume of
5 ml hUCB-MSCs (5.0 3 105 each; G19; kindly donated by
Medipost Co., Ltd.) containing 13 PBS at the anteroposterior,
11.0 mm from the bregma, laterally 13.0 mm and dorsoventrally –5.0 mm, according to the stereotaxic atlas of Paxinos and
Watson (1986), and hUCB-MSCs had been labeled with CMDiI beforehand (Molecular Probes; Fig. 1A). Rats in the control group were injected with 5 ml of 13 phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) on the same day and at the same site.
Behavioral Tests
All behavior tests were conducted in blinded fashion. At
1, 2, and 4 weeks after cell administration, a limb placement
test (LPT) was performed, as described by Schallert et al. (2000)
but with a slight modification. The rats had been habituated to
handling prior to the tests. Behavioral testing consisted of tests
in three domains: visual forward, visual lateral, and proprioception. The “visual forward” test allows observation of the forelimb flexion by holding up the tail and was scored as follows: 0
for normal stretch and 1 for abnormal flexion. The “visual lateral” test allows observation of the forelimb stretch by stimulating
the whiskers while the examiner holds the rat’s trunk, and the
“proprioception” test allows observation of the stepping up of
the forelimb and hindlimb on the table and is administered by
pulling down the forelimb and hindlimb below the level of the
table three times each. These two tests were scored using a scale
from 0 to 3: 0 for normal lifting, 1, 2, and 3 for abnormal lift-

ing, whereby a score was given according to the number of
times abnormal stretching was observed. The maximum score
was 10.
Locomotor ability was measured with the rotarod test.
All rats were trained at a constant speed of 30 rpm for 600 sec
on 3 successive days prior to MCAO surgery and were tested
three times on an accelerated rotarod from 4 to 40 rpm 2 days
after surgery. The time taken (seconds) for the rats to drop to
the bottom was measured, and the data are presented as a percentage of presurgery data (Fig. 1A).
Immunohistochemistry
The rats were deeply anesthetized with a Zoletil 50
(75 mg/kg of zolazepam and tiletamine) and Rompun (10 mg/
kg of xylazine) mixture and perfused transcardially with approximately 50 ml of 0.9% NaCl (with heparin), followed by
approximately 50 ml of ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde. The
fixed brains were removed and postfixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hr. The brains were then transferred sequentially
at 1-day intervals into 10%, 20%, and 30% sucrose until they
sank to the bottom of the container. The brains were sliced
into 30-lm-thick sections coronally with a cryostat (Leica CM
3000; Leica, Solms, Germany). Every fifth section was Nissl
stained with 0.1% cresyl violet (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).
The
sections
were
processed
for
doubleimmunofluorescent staining of nestin, laminin, PSA-NCAM,
GFAP, and MAP2. Briefly, slices were washed with 13 PBS
and permeabilized with PBS containing 0.05% (vol/vol) saponin and 5% (vol/vol) normal goat serum (NGS) for 30 min.
Nonspecific binding was blocked with 1.5% NGS for 30 min.
Slices were first labeled with rabbit antilaminin (1:400; Sigma)
and with mouse antinestin (1:400; Millipore, Bedford, MA). In
addition, double labeling of mouse antinestin (1:400; Millipore)/rabbit anti-GFAP (1:400; Millipore) and rabbit antihuman nuclei (1:400; Millipore)/mouse anti-PSA-NCAM
(1:100; R&D Systems) was performed. Slices were incubated
with primary antibody overnight at 48C and with fluorescentlabeled secondary antibodies (1:500) for 1 hr at room temperature. All secondary antibodies, Alexa 488 or 594 goat antimouse or rabbit IgG, were purchased from Molecular Probes
(Invitrogen). Fluorescently immunolabeled slices were analyzed
on a Meta confocal microscope (LSM 510; Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc., Jena, Germany) equipped with four lasers.
TUNEL Assay
Terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTPbiotin nick end labeling (TUNEL) assays were performed to
measure apoptotic cell death in the sham and experimental
groups with the in situ cell death detection kit TMR Red
(Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany). Briefly, frozen section tissue slides were washed three times with 13 PBS and
permeabilized for 2 min on ice. The permeabilized tissues were
washed three times with 13 PBS, and 50 ml of TUNEL reaction mixture was added to each tissue. Treated tissues were
then incubated at 378C in a humidified environment for 1 hr.
After incubation, the tissues were washed three times with 13
PBS and evaluated by fluorescent microscopy.
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Cord Blood-Derived Stem Cells for Ischemia

1817

Fig. 1. A: Schematic of the time schedule. B: Rotarod test. C: LPT.
The percentages of rotational durations relative to the pre-MCAO
level of rats receiving hUCB-MSCs were improved at 7, 14, and 28
days after cell injection compared with rats in the control group.
However, the scores for LPT were not significantly different between
the two groups; a small tendency for difference was observed. Data
are mean 6 SE. D: Reduced infarct size in rats that had received

hUCB-MSCs. Representative cresyl violet staining images (experimental group, left top and bottom; control group, right top and bottom) show that the ischemic site in the rats that had received hUCBMSCs after MCAO is significantly smaller than that of the rats in the
PBS group. E: Data are mean percentage of the infarct size 6 SE, relative to the size of the intact hemisphere. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
experimental vs. control group. Scale bar 5 1,000 mm.

Stained sections were analyzed with the NIH program
ImageJ v1.38 to measure the infarct size. Sections were scanned
with a high-resolution scanner (Epson Perfection V700 photo),
and the two hemispheres were compared in ImageJ. The infarct
size was summed and represented as a percentage of the corresponding intact hemisphere.

Quantitative Analysis
Coronal forebrain sections between the corpus callosum
and the anterior commissure were analyzed. Laminin1,
GFAP1, nestin1, PSA-NCAM1, anti-human nuclei1, and
MAP21 cells were quantified in the ischemic boundary zone
(IBZ) shown in Figure 1F. Counts were performed in the

Journal of Neuroscience Research

1818

Park et al.

frontal and parietal brain sections between the crossing of the
corpus callosum and the anterior commissure. Five regions of
interest (ROIs) were randomly selected in these different
regions. In addition, five ROIs were selected in the striatum.
All ROIs were assessed in six serial sections 150 mm apart. The
number of laminin1, GFAP1, nestin1, PSA-NCAM1, antihuman nuclei1, and MAP21 cells in each region was counted
in a low-power field (3200).
The resulting projection image was loaded into image
analysis software (Image Pro Plus; Media Cybernetics). A similar threshold was set for all images, and the area of specific
immunoreactivity was measured using an image analyzer.
Immunoreactivity was then expressed as the average number of
positive cells per cubic millimeter. Laminin-immunostained
coronal sections were used to measure vascular density, which
was calculated by dividing the area of laminin-positive vessels
by the total area of the ROIs.
Infarct Size Measurement
The tissue samples obtained for histology were immediately immersed in a 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 24 hr.
Fixed tissues were encased in OCT blocks. Tissue sections (30
lm) were cut from the OCT blocks axially and affixed to
microscopy slides. We picked five slides between the start and
endpoint of infarct. Cresyl violet staining of tissue sections was
carried out in a conventional manner. The infarct lesion was
drawn using a graphic tablet tool, and the relative infarct size
was expressed as a percentage, which was calculated by comparing the lesioned hemisphere with the intact hemisphere: Infarct
size 5 (lesion size/nonlesion size) 3 100.
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed in Graph-Pad Prism
v3.03 (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA). The quantified data for nestin, GFAP, bIII-tubulin (Tuj1), and laminin in
the control and experimental groups were analyzed by Student’s
t-test. For the behavioral study, results were analyzed by twoway repeated-measures ANOVA and were expressed as the
mean 6 SEM.

RESULTS
hUCB-MSC Treatment Improves Motor Function
in the MCAO Ischemia Model
To determine which route is more effective for cell
administration, we carried out a pilot study using both
intravenous and intraparenchymal injections. A rat model
of cerebral ischemic with intraparenchymal injection
demonstrated a better functional activity based on rotarod
and LPT than that of cerebral ischemic with intravenous
injection. As a result, all the animals used in our study
were treated intraparenchymally (Supp. Info. Figs. 1, 2).
Also, a separate pilot study was conducted to determine
how many days after the MCAO operation MSCs should
be injected to improve the functional activity of ischemic
rats (data not shown). Given these preliminary data, we
chose to administer an intraparenchymal injection 2 days
after the MCAO operation (Fig. 1A). The results show

that there were no significant group differences in rotarod
neurological outcomes before cell transplantation. However, significant functional improvement appeared in the
hUCB-MSC-treated group at all time points starting at 7
days after cell injection for both tests compared with the
control group (P 5 0.004; control n 5 8, experimental
n 5 7; Fig. 1B). Although the result of the LPT was not
significantly different at any of our time points, a small
tendency toward difference was observed (P 5 0.18; control n 5 8, injected group n 5 7; Fig. 1C). Taken
together, these results indicate that intraparenchymal
injection of hUCB-MSCs can improve functional
outcomes.
hUCB-MSC Treatment Reduces Infarct Size in the
MCAO Ischemia Model
To test whether hUCB-MSCs have the potential to
reduce infarct size in an ischemic brain, we selected five
slides between the start and the endpoint of infarct and
visualized them through cresyl violet staining. The infarcted
lesions were concentrated mainly in the cortex and striatum
at 28 days after cell transplantation (Fig. 1D). The damaged
tissue consisted of a central cavity surrounded by a scar border. The relative infarct size was expressed as a percentage,
which was calculated by comparing the lesioned hemisphere with the intact hemisphere. The infarct in the
hUCB-MSC-treated experimental group (20.38% 6 6.6%)
was significantly smaller than that of the control group
(45.92% 6 7.4%; P < 0.05; Fig. 1E). These results clearly
suggest that hUCB-MSC administration reduced the
stroke-induced infarct size.
Administered Cells Are Located in the IBZ
Prior to transplantation, cells were labeled with
CM-DiI so that they could later be located. DiI-labeled
hUCB-MSCs were injected intraparenchymally into the
MCAO experimental group (n 5 7) only, and the
injected cells were located by observation with a fluorescent microscope. At 28 days postinjection, the DiIexpressing hUCB-MSCs were observed primarily at the
lesion site, especially at the IBZ (penumbra zone). Figure
2A shows the abundance of red fluorescence in and
around the lesion, which indicates that the hUCB-MSCs
had reached the lesion site.
hUCB-MSC Administration Induces Neurogenesis
and Antiapoptotic Effects in the Ischemia Model
To examine whether the administration of hUCBMSCs induced neurogenesis, we performed immunohistochemical labeling with nestin (Fig. 2B). The nestin and
PSA-NCAM expression was located mainly in the whole
IBZ. After that, the sections were analyzed in Image Pro
Plus (control group n 5 8, experimental group n 5 7).
Figure 2B shows that the number of nestin1 cells, a
marker of neurogenesis, was significantly increased by the
hUCB-MSCs from the ipsilateral striatum to the ischemia compared with those in the control group (control
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Cord Blood-Derived Stem Cells for Ischemia

1819

Fig. 2. A: Surviving transplanted hUCB-MSCs were found in the
ischemic penumbra. DiI shows the surviving hUCB-MSCs in the
ischemic penumbra (red). B,C: The numbers of nestin1 cells were
increased by the hUCB-MSCs compared with control. D,E: Immunostaining shows that transplanted hUCB-MSCs induce the neuronal

precursor cells related to astrocytes into the IBZ. F,G: Decreased apoptotic cell death shown by TUNEL assay. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
experimental vs. control group. Scale bars 5 1,000 mm in A and B;
20 mm in D; 50 mm in F.

group 12.60% 6 3.2%, experimental group 50.20% 6
3.6%, P < 0.001). To determine whether neurogenesis
caused the proliferation of neuron- and glia-like cells, we
immunostained for markers of MAP2 and GFAP. The
PSA-NCAM1 cells were increased in all rats of the
hUCB-MSC group (control group 15.0% 6 3.0%, experimental group 30.83% 6 3.5%, P 5 0.007; Fig. 2E), but
the increase in cell numbers did not match with the antihuman nuclei. In addition, the proliferation of neuronal

progenitor cells (indicated by nestin) was correlated with
an increase in astrocytes (indicated by GFAP) and neurons (indicated by MAP2) in the hUCB-MSCadministered MCAO rats (control group 41.2% 6 5.6%,
experimental group 70.2% 6 7.7%, P < 0.05; Fig. 2E).
Furthermore, hUCB-MSCs significantly reduced the
density of apoptotic cells in the ischemic brain, as seen
by the reduced number of TUNEL1, DNA-fragmented
cells (Fig. 2F,G).

Journal of Neuroscience Research

1820

Park et al.

Fig. 3. Angiogenesis and neuroinflammation in the ischemic brain. A,B: Laminin and nestin immunostaining shows that the transplanted cells induced the vessel and neuronal precursor cells into the
IBZ. D,E: TNF-a, TGFbRII, and COX2 indicate that the degree of inflammation was decreased
in the hUCB-MSC-treated group. **P < 0.01, experimental vs. control group. Scale bars 5 1,000
mm in A; 50 mm in B,D.

hUCB-MSC Administration Induces Angiogenesis
and Anti-Inflammatory Effects
To investigate whether the hUCB-MSCs promote
angiogenesis, we performed immunohistochemical labeling
with laminin antibodies. The expression of laminin
throughout the whole brain was localized to the severe dele-

tion site (Fig. 3A). Additionally, nestin1 cells were correlated with the laminin1 line (Fig. 3B). Laminin1 cells were
more numerous in the hUCB-MSC-treated group compared with the control group (control group 37.8% 6 1.4%,
experimental group 52.8% 6 5.5%, P < 0.05; Fig. 3C). In
addition, TNF-a, TGFb receptor II (TGFbRII), and
COX2 indicated the degree of inflammation, which was
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Cord Blood-Derived Stem Cells for Ischemia

1821

Fig. 4. Confirmation for inflammation marker site. A–C: Brain section slices of 30-mm distance.
Each of the inflammation-related markers (TNF-a, TFGbRII, COX2) and the cell-type-specific
markers (GFAP, glia; Iba1, microglia) was separately stained in hUCB-MSC-treated tissues. These
show that TNF-a, TFGbRII, and COX2 are located at the same position as the astrocyte marker
GFAP rather than at the microglia marker Iba1. Scale bars 5 50 mm.

found to be decreased in the hUCB-MSC-treated group
(Fig. 3D,E). These results indicate that there is increased
angiogenesis and a decreased inflammatory response in the
hUCB-MSC-treated group. These factors were also found
to be expressed in most astrocytes (Fig. 4).
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Thus, it can be concluded that the injected
hUCB-MSCs decreased the expression level of inflammation factors released by astrocytes, and as a result, this
process improved the motor performance of MCAO
model rats.

1822

Park et al.

EGF, HGF, IGFBP-1, IGFBP-2, IGFBP-3, IL-1b, IL-8,
TGFb1, leptin, MCP-1, MIP-1a, MMP-8, MMP-9,
NRG1-b1, PTX3, PD-ECGF, PDGF-AA, PDGF-AB,
persephin, PF4, PlGF, prolactin, serpin B5, serpin E1, serpin F1, TIMP-1, TIMP-4, thrombospondin1, thrombospondin2, uPA, vasohibin, VEGF, VEGF-C, MSCsecreted PTX3, VEGF, and TSP1.
The relative expression levels of these factors were
calculated. PTX3, VEGF, and TSP1 expression levels in
MSCs were higher than their expression levels under normoxic conditions and were higher under hypoxic conditions (Fig. 5A,B). To confirm that the administration of
hUCB-MSCs induced the expression of these molecules
in vivo, we performed immunohistochemical staining
(Fig. 5D,F,H). The numbers of VEGF1 and PTX31 cells
were greater in all rat tissue slices from the hUCB-MSCtreated group compared with those in the control group
(control 31.4% 6 2.2%, experimental 41.8% 6 2.0%,
P < 0.05; Fig. 4E,G). Figure 5H shows that the relative
TSP1 intensity of randomly selected areas was significantly greater in the hUCB-MSC-treated ischemic brain
(control 37.08% 6 3.1%, experimental 48.81% 6 2.9%,
P < 0.05) than in the control.

Fig. 5. Focused protein assay and TSP1, PTX3, and VEGF immunofluorescent staining. A,B: Cytokine expression in each of the conditions with a proteome profiler. Quantification of the optical density
for angiogenic factors. Measurements were obtained in Image Pro
Plus v5.1. C–H: TSP11, PTX31, and VEGF1 cells were increased in
all rat tissue slices from the hUCB-MSC-treated group compared
with the control group. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, experimental vs. control group.

PTX3, VEGF, and TSP1 Were Induced Under In
Vitro Hypoxia and In Vivo Ischemic Conditions
When Treated With hUCB-MSCs
To determine why hypoxia and normoxia occur
following ischemia, hUCB-MSCs were assayed under
hypoxic and normoxic conditions in vitro. After 3–4 days
of culturing and 24 hr of hypoxic MSCs, the conditioned
medium was assayed with the human angiogenic array
panel A (R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. We analyzed 55 proteins at any one time.
The 55 proteins were categorized as angiogenesis–vasculogenesis, tissue repair, inflammation, and migration factors, which included the following: activin A, ADAMTS1, ANG, Ang-1, Ang-2, angiostatin, AR, artemin, TF,
CXCL16, CD26, EGF, PK1, CD105, endostatin, ET1,
FGF1, FGF-2, FGF-4, FGF-7, GDNF, GM-CSF, HB-

DISCUSSION
This study shows, most importantly, that the application
of hUCB-MSCs at 2 days after unilateral MCAO in rats
promoted angiogenesis and functional improvement, provided a protective effect with a significantly reduced
infarct size, and improved postischemic neurological deficits compared with rats treated with PBS. The functional
benefit observed following intraparenchymal hUCBMSC transplantation might result from the production of
trophic factors and cytokines by the hUCB-MSCs rather
than from the replacement or integration of hUCB-MSCs
into the cerebral tissue. Consistent with this hypothesis,
from our observations, the grafted cells did not appear to
reestablish normal tissue at 4 weeks after cell transplantation. A more reasonable hypothesis is that the interaction
of the transplanted MSCs with the host brain leads to the
production of trophic factors (Unsicker, 1993; Hedhli
et al., 2011), which could contribute to functional recovery (Herz et al., 2011; Luo et al., 2011). Our observations,
which support the view that there is a proliferation of
neuronal precursor cells (nestin1, PSA-NCAM1 cells)
and an immune reaction (increased GFAP1 and laminin1
cells and decreased TNF-a, COX2, and TGFbRII) at the
ischemic site, are also consistent with a previous hypothesis. Astrocytes can provide trophic and survival factors to
neurons, including fibroblast growth factor (FGF), glial
derived growth factor (GDNF), and neurotrophins, all of
which contribute to the reparation of early damage.
Previous studies have demonstrated the therapeutic
benefits of hMSC injections in an experimental cerebral
ischemic model (Chen et al., 2001a; Honma et al., 2006),
and we administered the number of the cells described in
the articles cited. The proposed mechanisms of these cells
involve neuroprotective effects that arise through the
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Cord Blood-Derived Stem Cells for Ischemia

consequential release or stimulation of growth factors and
cytokines, the induction of neovascularization, and the
replacement of damaged cells (Radtke et al., 2007).
MSCs appear to be a source of continuous renewal
of cells in a number of nonhematopoietic tissues and are
capable of differentiating along multiple mesenchymal cell
lineages (Prockop, 1997). The fate of the grafted cells
appears to be dictated not only by their intrinsic properties but also by the local brain environment. In damaged
brain tissue, MSCs survive and are found in the ischemic
side after intravenous MSC administration (Chen et al.,
2001b). Environmental signals can apparently elicit the
expression of pluripotentiality that extends well beyond
the accepted fate restrictions of cells originating in classical
embryonic germ layers (Jiang et al., 2010). Thus,
progenitor-like cells, such as MSCs, could be prompted
to proliferate and differentiate into neural-like cells when
placed in an ischemic microenvironment.
Transplanted MSCs were also found at the ischemic
site, suggesting that they had migrated from the graft site.
This is consistent with previously reported findings that
bone marrow cells that had been implanted into neonatal
mouse brains were found to be broadly distributed
throughout the forebrain and to line white matter tracts,
including the corpus callosum and the external capsule
(Kopen et al., 1999).
We found that nestin1 and laminin1 cells were
closely colocalized. These observations are in agreement
with our previous work from which we reported that
endogenous neurogenesis and neovascularization are substantially activated in close proximity to each other in the
ischemic brain (Shin et al., 2008). Endothelial cells have
been identified as critical components of neural stem cell
self-renewal and neurogenesis because they secrete soluble
factors that maintain CNS stem cell self-renewal; these
neurogenic factors may be enough to allow survival of
these newly born neural cells. Indeed, we found a more
pronounced rate of cell survival following hUCB-MSC
application. These activities of self-renewal and neurogenic potential could be related to the ability of hUCBMSCs to maximize interactions between endothelial cells
and the surrounding support cells and matrix (Thurston
et al., 2000; Yancopoulos et al., 2000).
To determine which factors are involved in such
phenomena, we analyzed the presence of angiogenic factors. Among them, the expression levels of PTX3, TSP1,
and VEGF were found to be increased more in hUCBMSCs than in the vehicle control, which indicates a shift
from vascular protection to angiogenesis.
Cell death commonly occurs during inflammatory
reactions. After brain ischemia, many molecules act
together in an orchestrated fashion, which has important
consequences when considering therapeutic angiogenesis
and early T-cell-related immune reaction to stroke. The
immune modulatory effect of MSCs was recognized as
the ability to suppress T-cell proliferation induced by
mitogens for T cells. Additionally, MSCs can exert this
suppressive effect on allogeneic and xenogeneic T cells.
Journal of Neuroscience Research

1823

PTX3 binds to apoptotic cells, thereby inhibiting
their recognition by dendritic cells. In addition, preincubation of apoptotic cells with PTX3 enhances C1q binding and C3 deposition on the cell surface, which together
suggests that PTX3 plays a role in complement-mediated
clearance of apoptotic cells (Gershov et al., 2000; Rovere
et al., 2000; Familian et al., 2001). Moreover, in the presence of dying cells, PTX3 restricts their cross-presentation
of antigens. These results suggest that PTX3 plays dual
roles of protection against pathogens and control of autoimmunity (Baruah et al., 2006). This is supported by data
from the hUCB-MSC-treated group, which showed an
increase in PTX3 combined with a decrease in TNF-a,
COX2, and TGFbRII. These inflammation factors are
known cytokines related to brain inflammation. Blocking
these cytokines could be an attractive pharmacological
strategy for reducing ischemic injury.
TSP1 is an extracellular matrix protein that has several effects on cell growth, adhesion, survival, and differentiation. TSP1 has been described as part of the HSC
niche (Long and Dixit, 1990) and is a member of the TSP
family. TSP1 is said to be responsible for both positive and
negative modulations of endothelial cell adhesion, motility, and growth. Moreover, TSP1 is present in SVZ and
along the entire rostral migratory stream and binds to apolipoprotein E receptor 2 and low-density lipoprotein
receptors, thereby affecting neuronal migration in the rostral migratory stream (Blake et al., 2008). Indeed, our data
show that hUCB-MSC treatment resulted in greater
numbers of MAP21, nestin1, and PSA-NCAM1 cells,
which is indicative of an increase in neurogenesis and is
possibly associated with the release of TSP1 from the
hUCB-MSCs.
VEGF is a signal protein produced by cells that stimulates vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. VEGF may play an
important role in the vascular response to cerebral ischemia because its expression in the brain is stimulated by
ischemia (Kovacs et al., 1996; Hayashi et al., 1997; Lennmyr et al., 1998; Plate et al., 1999; Zhang et al., 2002).
After focal cerebral ischemia, topical administration of
VEGF to the brain surface reduces the infarct size (Hayashi et al., 1998), intravenous application of VEGF
improves neurological outcome (Zhang et al., 2000), and
intraparenchymal administration of the anti-VEGF Ab
increases the infarct size (Bao et al., 1999). Together, these
findings are consistent with the idea that VEGF provides a
protective effect. VEGF also directly affects neurons. For
example, VEGF stimulates axonal outgrowth and
improves the survival of cultured superior cervical and
dorsal root ganglion neurons (Sondell et al., 1999, 2000).
The present study investigates VEGF in terms of three
effects that could be important determinants of cerebral
ischemia outcomes, neuroprotection, neurogenesis, and
angiogenesis, in a rat model of transient focal ischemia
induced by MCAO.
Overall, hUCB-MSCs reduced the infarct size and
attenuated postischemic neurological deficits. First, these
beneficial effects suggest that sufficient blood flow, which
results from an increased blood vessel formation, could

1824

Park et al.

contribute to the prevention of neural cell loss in the
penumbra zone of ischemic brains. Second, neurogenesis
induced by TSP1 from hUCB-MSCs may attenuate apoptotic cells. Third, anti-inflammatory effects of PTX3
release from hUCB-MSCs may rescue cells from cell
death in the initial phase of ischemia.
The most important function in an acute ischemic
area and penumbra zone is protection against neuronal
loss. Such functions prevent or decrease further progressive brain infarction and thus enhance functional preservation. Our findings suggest the possibility for a novel
approach in the management of acute ischemic stroke
with hUCB-MSCs. However, there are some limitations
in the current study that must be addressed. Usually,
Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable recommendations are employed in studies with animal models of
stroke. However, this method was not adopted in the current study, so two possible limitations are present. First,
cerebral blood flow was not measured when animal models of stroke were generated. An alternative, yet effective,
method to induce stroke in animal models previously
reported by Shin et al. (2008) was employed in this study.
Our results (Fig. 1A) clearly demonstrated that this alternative method was effective in inducing ischemic lesions
in our animal models. Second, the extent of brain injury
was not assessed to determine the therapeutic effects of
MSCs during the acute (1–3 day) and the long-term (7–30
day) periods. Thus, it is not clear how the actual infarct
size was changed throughout the entire follow-up period
after the cells were initially administered. However, the
measurement of both the brain injury at endpoint (28 days
after the cell injection) and the neurobehavior changes
during the acute and long-term periods clearly demonstrates that hUCB-MSCs could be therapeutically
exploited for the management of stroke.
In addition, it is recognized that intraparenchymal
administration of MSCs is not yet translational to clinical
practice because treatment of stroke is time constrained.
However, the core purpose of our experiments was to
examine solely the therapeutic effects of hUCB-MSCs in
rat MCAO models, and our results suggest that hUCBMSCs could be effective in treating stroke through upregulating the three proteins that are involved in angiogenesis, neurogenesis, and anti-inflammation. Further study is
required to elucidate the immune reactions for future
clinical trials with hUCB-MSCs.
In conclusion, locally injected hUCB-MSCs are
capable of responding to an ischemic lesion in the striatum by increasing neurogenesis, angiogenesis, and antiinflammatory effects related to TSP1, PTX3, and VEGF.
Injected cells were found in the penumbra zone and adjacent striatum, where they supposedly exert the protective
effects that are crucial for decreasing the size of infarct
lesions. Furthermore, it appears that the injected hUCBMSCs released neurogenic, angiogenic, and antiinflammatory factors 4 weeks after cell transplantation in
the lesion. Overall, our results support the hypothesis that
hUCB-MSCs protect against ischemic damage. Furthering our understanding of how each of the protective-

related molecules affects the ischemic zone could improve
current stroke treatments.
REFERENCES
Aranguren XL, McCue JD, Hendrickx B, Zhu XH, Du F, Chen E,
Pelacho B, Penuelas I, Abizanda G, Uriz M, Frommer SA, Ross JJ,
Schroeder BA, Seaborn MS, Adney JR, Hagenbrock J, Harris NH, Zhang
Y, Zhang X, Nelson-Holte MH, Jiang Y, Billiau AD, Chen W, Prosper
F, Verfaillie CM, Luttun A. 2008. Multipotent adult progenitor cells sustain function of ischemic limbs in mice. J Clin Invest 118:505–514.
Bao WL, Lu SD, Wang H, Sun FY. 1999. Intraventricular vascular
endothelial growth factor antibody increases infarct volume following
transient cerebral ischemia. Zhongguo Yao Li Xue Bao (Acta Pharmacol Sin) 20:313–318.
Baruah P, Propato A, Dumitriu IE, Rovere-Querini P, Russo V, Fontana
R, Accapezzato D, Peri G, Mantovani A, Barnaba V, Manfredi AA.
2006. The pattern recognition receptor PTX3 is recruited at the synapse
between dying and dendritic cells, and edits the cross-presentation of self,
viral, and tumor antigens. Blood 107:151–158.
Blake SM, Strasser V, Andrade N, Duit S, Hofbauer R, Schneider WJ,
Nimpf J. 2008. Thrombospondin-1 binds to ApoER2 and VLDL
receptor and functions in postnatal neuronal migration. EMBO J 27:
3069–3080.
Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Lu M, Zhang X, Chopp M. 2001a. Therapeutic
benefit of intracerebral transplantation of bone marrow stromal cells
after cerebral ischemia in rats. J Neurol Sci 189:49–57.
Chen J, Li Y, Wang L, Zhang Z, Lu D, Lu M, Chopp M. 2001b. Therapeutic benefit of intravenous administration of bone marrow stromal
cells after cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 32:1005–1011.
Di Nicola M, Carlo-Stella C, Magni M, Milanesi M, Longoni PD,
Matteucci P, Grisanti S, Gianni AM. 2002. Human bone marrow stromal cells suppress T-lymphocyte proliferation induced by cellular or
nonspecific mitogenic stimuli. Blood 99:3838–3843.
Enomoto M, Wakabayashi Y, Qi ML, Shinomiya K. 2004. Present situation and future aspects of spinal cord regeneration. J Orthop Sci 9:108–
112.
Erices A, Conget P, Minguell JJ. 2000. Mesenchymal progenitor cells in
human umbilical cord blood. Br J Haematol 109:235–242.
Familian A, Zwart B, Huisman HG, Rensink I, Roem D, Hordijk PL,
Aarden LA, Hack CE. 2001. Chromatin-independent binding of serum
amyloid P component to apoptotic cells. J Immunol 167:647–654.
Gang EJ, Hong SH, Jeong JA, Hwang SH, Kim SW, Yang IH, Ahn C,
Han H, Kim H. 2004. In vitro mesengenic potential of human umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 321:102–108.
Gershov D, Kim S, Brot N, Elkon KB. 2000. C-reactive protein binds
to apoptotic cells, protects the cells from assembly of the terminal complement components, and sustains an antiinflammatory innate immune
response: implications for systemic autoimmunity. J Exp Med 192:
1353–1364.
Hayashi T, Abe K, Suzuki H, Itoyama Y. 1997. Rapid induction of vascular endothelial growth factor gene expression after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Stroke 28:2039–2044.
Hayashi T, Abe K, Itoyama Y. 1998. Reduction of ischemic damage by
application of vascular endothelial growth factor in rat brain after transient ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 18:887–895.
Hedhli N, Dobrucki LW, Kalinowski A, Zhuang ZW, Wu X, Russell
RR 3rd, Sinusas AJ, Russell KS. 2011. Endothelial derived neuregulin
is an important mediator of ischemic induced angiogenesis and arteriogenesis. Cardiovasc Res 93:516–524.
Herz J, Reitmeir R, Hagen SI, Reinboth BS, Guo Z, Zechariah A, Elali
A, Doeppner TR, Bacigaluppi M, Pluchino S, Kilic U, Kilic E,
Hermann DM. 2011. Intracerebroventricularly delivered VEGF promotes contralesional corticorubral plasticity after focal cerebral ischemia
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Cord Blood-Derived Stem Cells for Ischemia
via mechanisms involving anti-inflammatory actions. Neurobiol Dis 45:
1077–1085.
Honma T, Honmou O, Iihoshi S, Harada K, Houkin K, Hamada H,
Kocsis JD. 2006. Intravenous infusion of immortalized human mesenchymal stem cells protects against injury in a cerebral ischemia model in
adult rat. Exp Neurol 199:56–66.
Iihoshi S, Honmou O, Houkin K, Hashi K, Kocsis JD. 2004. A therapeutic window for intravenous administration of autologous bone marrow after cerebral ischemia in adult rats. Brain Res 1007:1–9.
Jiang J, Lv Z, Gu Y, Li J, Xu L, Xu W, Lu J, Xu J. 2010. Adult rat mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into neuronal-like phenotype and
express a variety of neuro-regulatory molecules in vitro. Neurosci Res
66:46–52.
Kan I, Melamed E, Offen D. 2005. Integral therapeutic potential of bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells. Curr Drug Targets 6:31–41.
Kang KS, Kim SW, Oh YH, Yu JW, Kim KY, Park HK, Song CH,
Han H. 2005. A 37-year-old spinal cord-injured female patient, transplanted of multipotent stem cells from human UC blood, with
improved sensory perception and mobility, both functionally and morphologically: a case study. Cytotherapy 7:368–373.
Kim ES, Ahn SY, Im GH, Sung DK, Park YR, Choi SH, Choi SJ,
Chang YS, Oh W, Lee JH, Park WS. 2012. Human umbilical cord
blood-derived mesenchymal stem cell transplantation attenuates severe
brain injury by permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in newborn
rats. Pediatr Res 72:277–284.
Kopen GC, Prockop DJ, Phinney DG. 1999. Marrow stromal cells
migrate throughout forebrain and cerebellum, and they differentiate
into astrocytes after injection into neonatal mouse brains. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 96:10711–10716.
Kovacs Z, Ikezaki K, Samoto K, Inamura T, Fukui M. 1996. VEGF and
flt. Expression time kinetics in rat brain infarct. Stroke 27:1865–1872;
discussion 1872–1873.
Kuh SU, Cho YE, Yoon DH, Kim KN, Ha Y. 2005. Functional recovery after human umbilical cord blood cells transplantation with brainderived neutrophic factor into the spinal cord injured rat. Acta Neurochir 147:985–992; discussion 992.
Lennmyr F, Ata KA, Funa K, Olsson Y, Terent A. 1998. Expression of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors (Flt-1 and
Flk-1) following permanent and transient occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in the rat. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57:874–882.
Lim JY, Jeong CH, Jun JA, Kim SM, Ryu CH, Hou Y, Oh W, Chang
JW, Jeun SS. 2011. Therapeutic effects of human umbilical cord bloodderived mesenchymal stem cells after intrathecal administration by lumbar
puncture in a rat model of cerebral ischemia. Stem Cell ResTher 2:38.
Lin YC, Ko TL, Shih YH, Lin MY, Fu TW, Hsiao HS, Hsu JY, Fu YS.
2011. Human umbilical mesenchymal stem cells promote recovery after
ischemic stroke. Stroke 42:2045–2053.
Long MW, Dixit VM. 1990. Thrombospondin functions as a cytoadhesion molecule for human hematopoietic progenitor cells. Blood 75:
2311–2318.
Lu D, Sanberg PR, Mahmood A, Li Y, Wang L, Sanchez-Ramos J,
Chopp M. 2002. Intravenous administration of human umbilical cord
blood reduces neurological deficit in the rat after traumatic brain injury.
Cell Transplant 11:275–281.
Luo Y, Wang Y, Poynter JA, Manukyan MC, Herrmann JL, Abarbanell
AM, Weil BR, Meldrum DR. 2011. Pretreating mesenchymal stem
cells with interleukin-1b and transforming growth factor-b synergistically increases vascular endothelial growth factor production and
improves mesenchymal stem cell-mediated myocardial protection after
acute ischemia. Surgery 151:353–363.
Paxinos G, Watson C. 1986. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates, 5th
ed. San Diego: Academic Press.
Plate KH, Beck H, Danner S, Allegrini PR, Wiessner C. 1999. Cell type
specific upregulation of vascular endothelial growth factor in an MCA-

Journal of Neuroscience Research

1825

occlusion model of cerebral infarct. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58:654–
666.
Pluchino S, Zanotti L, Deleidi M, Martino G. 2005. Neural stem cells
and their use as therapeutic tool in neurological disorders. Brain Res
Brain Res Rev 48:211–219.
Prockop DJ. 1997. Marrow stromal cells as stem cells for nonhematopoietic tissues. Science 276:71–74.
Radtke C, Spies M, Sasaki M, Vogt PM, Kocsis JD. 2007. Demyelinating diseases and potential repair strategies. Int J Dev Neurosci 25:149–
153.
Rogers I, Casper RF. 2004. Umbilical cord blood stem cells. Best Pract
Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 18:893–908.
Rovere P, Peri G, Fazzini F, Bottazzi B, Doni A, Bondanza A,
Zimmermann VS, Garlanda C, Fascio U, Sabbadini MG, Rugarli C,
Mantovani A, Manfredi AA. 2000. The long pentraxin PTX3 binds to
apoptotic cells and regulates their clearance by antigen-presenting dendritic cells. Blood 96:4300–4306.
Schallert T, Fleming SM, Leasure JL, Tillerson JL, Bland ST. 2000. CNS
plasticity and assessment of forelimb sensorimotor outcome in unilateral
rat models of stroke, cortical ablation, parkinsonism, and spinal cord
injury. Neuropharmacology 39:777–787.
Shin HY, Kim JH, Phi JH, Park CK, Kim JE, Kim JH, Paek SH, Wang
KC, Kim DG. 2008. Endogenous neurogenesis and neovascularization
in the neocortex of the rat after focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Res
86:356–367.
Shin HY, Lee YJ, Kim HJ, Park CK, Kim JH, Wang KC, Kim DG,
Koh GY, Paek SH. 2010. Protective role of COMP-Ang1 in ischemic
rat brain. J Neurosci Res 88:1052–1063.
Sondell M, Lundborg G, Kanje M. 1999. Vascular endothelial growth
factor has neurotrophic activity and stimulates axonal outgrowth,
enhancing cell survival and Schwann cell proliferation in the peripheral
nervous system. J Neurosci 19:5731–5740.
Sondell M, Sundler F, Kanje M. 2000. Vascular endothelial growth factor
is a neurotrophic factor which stimulates axonal outgrowth through the
flk-1 receptor. Eur J Neurosci 12:4243–4254.
Thurston G, Rudge JS, Ioffe E, Zhou H, Ross L, Croll SD, Glazer N,
Holash J, McDonald DM, Yancopoulos GD. 2000. Angiopoietin-1
protects the adult vasculature against plasma leakage. Nat Med 6:460–
463.
Unsicker K. 1993. The trophic cocktail made by adrenal chromaffin cells.
Exp Neurol 123:167–173.
Yancopoulos GD, Davis S, Gale NW, Rudge JS, Wiegand SJ, Holash J.
2000. Vascular-specific growth factors and blood vessel formation.
Nature 407:242–248.
Yang SE, Ha CW, Jung M, Jin HJ, Lee M, Song H, Choi S, Oh W,
Yang YS. 2004. Mesenchymal stem/progenitor cells developed in cultures from UC blood. Cytotherapy 6:476–486.
Zhang L, Li Y, Zhang C, Chopp M, Gosiewska A, Hong K. 2011.
Delayed administration of human umbilical tissue-derived cells
improved neurological functional recovery in a rodent model of focal
ischemia. Stroke 42:1437–1444.
Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Jiang Q, Zhang R, Davies K, Powers C, Bruggen
N, Chopp M. 2000. VEGF enhances angiogenesis and promotes
blood–brain barrier leakage in the ischemic brain. J Clin Invest 106:
829–838.
Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Tsang W, Soltanian-Zadeh H, Morris D, Zhang
R, Goussev A, Powers C, Yeich T, Chopp M. 2002. Correlation of
VEGF and angiopoietin expression with disruption of blood–brain barrier and angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 22:379–392.
Zhao ZM, Li HJ, Liu HY, Lu SH, Yang RC, Zhang QJ, Han ZC.
2004. Intraspinal transplantation of CD341 human umbilical cord blood
cells after spinal cord hemisection injury improves functional recovery
in adult rats. Cell Transplant 13:113–122.

