Life Sciences 134 (2015) 68–72

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/lifescie

Electro-acupuncture up-regulates astrocytic MCT1 expression to
improve neurological deﬁcit in middle cerebral artery occlusion rats
Yan Lu a, Haijun Zhao a, Yuan Wang a, Bingbing Han a, Tong Wang b, Hong Zhao c, Kemi Cui c, Shijun Wang a,⁎
a
b
c

Department of Experimental Acupuncturology, College of Acumox and Tuina, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250355, China
School of Nursing, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250355, China
Department of Systems Medicine & Bioengineering, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Houston, TX 77030, United States

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 12 February 2015
Received in revised form 20 April 2015
Accepted 9 May 2015
Available online 31 May 2015
Keywords:
Electro-acupuncture (EA)
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
Focal cerebral ischemia
Monocarboxylate transporter (MCT)
Astrocyte
Lactate metabolism

a b s t r a c t
Aims: Cerebral ischemia is one of the common diseases treated by electro-acupuncture (EA). Although the clinical
efﬁcacy has been widely afﬁrmed, the mechanisms of action leading to the health beneﬁts are not understood. In
this study, the role of EA in modulating the lactate energy metabolism and lactate transportation was explored on
the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) ischemic rat model.
Main methods: Repeated EA treatments once daily for 7 days were applied to the MCAO rats and neurological
function evaluation was performed. Brain tissues were harvested for lactate concentration examination, immunohistochemical staining, Western blot and qRT-PCR analyses for the expressions of lactate transporter (monocarboxylate transporter 1, MCT1) and glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP).
Key ﬁndings: The animal behavioral tests showed that the 7-day EA treatments signiﬁcantly promoted the recovery of neurological deﬁcits in the MCAO rats, which correlated with the enhanced lactate energy metabolism in
the ischemic brain. In the cortical ischemic area of the MCAO rats, EA treatments led to the activation of astrocytes, and induced a further increase of lactate transporter (monocarboxylate transporter 1, MCT1) expression
in astrocytes at both protein and mRNA levels.
Signiﬁcance: Our results suggest that the EA treatments activated lactate metabolism in the resident astrocytes
around the ischemic area and up-regulated the expression of MCT1 in these astrocytes which facilitated the
transfer of intracellular lactate to extracellular domain to be utilized by injured neurons to improve the neurological deﬁcit.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Background
Electro-acupuncture (EA) is the modern application of traditional
Chinese acupuncture combined with electrotherapy. Cerebral ischemia
is one of the common diseases treated by EA in East Asian countries,
and the clinical efﬁcacy has been widely afﬁrmed. In animal experiments, repeated EA treatments have been demonstrated to accelerate
the restoration of function and help heal the cerebral tissue lesion during cerebral ischemia–reperfusion [9]. Disruption of cerebral energy
metabolism occurs during ischemia because of glucose and oxygen deprivation. Studies have shown that lactate is the major energy substrate
that has been overproduced by astrocytes in the injured brain and
plays neuroprotective role [1]. Speciﬁcally, lactate is considered as an
obligatory energy substrate for surviving neurons during the recovery
period after ischemia [15]. EA treatment has been examined to signiﬁcantly increase the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in rat ischemic brain
cells [16], as well as increase the plasma level of lactate in senile mice
⁎ Corresponding author at: 4655 Daxue Road, Changqing District, Jinan, Shandong
250355, China. Tel.: +86 0531 89628505.
E-mail address: feichanglulu@gmail.com (S. Wang).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2015.05.014
0024-3205/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

and ischemia patients [14,17]. However, in order to utilize this energy
substrate for neurons to survive during the recovery period, changes
in the expression of speciﬁc lactate transporters on various cell types
in the ischemic micro-environment might be necessary.
Monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) are responsible for up-taking
and releasing of energy substrates including lactate [4]. The MCT family
has 14 members, 6 of which have been functionally characterized. Of
these, only MCT1–MCT4 catalyze proton-coupled transport of lactate.
MCT1 is expressed in most human cells, whereas MCT2 is absent in
human tissues. MCT3 expression is largely restricted to the retinal pigment epithelium. MCT4 is expressed strongly only in glycolytic tissues
(e.g. white muscle) that must export large amounts of lactic acid. In
this work, we examined the changes in the expression of MCT1 in a
rat model of brain ischemia.
In the study, we found that the increased expression of astrocytic
MCT1 in the ischemic brain tissue have been involved in the compensatory mechanism of energy metabolism after cerebral ischemia. EA could
improve the recovery of neurological function in MCAO rats by stimulating the lactate energy metabolism of activated astrocytes and further
up-regulation of MCT1 in the ischemic brain tissue, which plays an essential role in restoration of brain energy metabolism.

Y. Lu et al. / Life Sciences 134 (2015) 68–72

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Animals
Healthy male Wistar rats were used for the study (SPF grade,
12 week-aged, body weight 200–220 g), and were purchased from Beijing WeitongLihua Experimental Animal Technology Co., Ltd. The rats
were reared in cages where the room temperature was 22 ± 2 °C and
the relative humidity was 40%–60%. The experiment began after three
day feeding adaptation. All experimental procedures involving rats
were approved by the Animal Research and Comparative Medicine
Committee of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine in
accordance with the guidelines of IACUC and the regulations.
2.2. Model establishment and experimental grouping
Rats with focal cerebral ischemia model were established by the
method of middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) with modiﬁcations
[10,11]. Thirty-two rats received the MCAO surgery, and were evaluated
for their neurological function deﬁcits by a four-point scale (0–4) neurobehavioral test right after awaking from anesthesia (0: no deﬁcit, 1:
failure to extend left forepaw fully, 2: circling to the left, 3: falling to
the left, 4: no spontaneous walking and loss of consciousness) [10].
Twenty-four out of the 32 MCAO rats with the scores of 2–3 were randomly divided into three groups: model group, EA treatment group
and control EA group (n = 8, for each group). Eight rats received
sham-operation (the same surgical procedures except inserting the
nylon monoﬁlament) (sham group), and 8 rats without any operation
were served as normal group. The neurological function deﬁcit scale
score of the rats in the sham group and normal group were 0.
2.3. EA treatment
Rats in the EA treatment group and control EA group received repeated EA once daily for 7 days. The ﬁrst EA treatment was right after
the neurobehavioral test, within 2 h of ﬁnishing the MCAO surgery.
Acupuncture was applied with metal needles at 13 mm-length and
0.20 mm-diameter. In the EA treatment group, needles were inserted
bilaterally into PC6 (Neiguan) in depth of 2 mm and LI11 (Quchi) in
depth of 4 mm. In the control EA group, needles were obliquely inserted
into the muscles between the iliac crest and ribs in depth of 2 mm. Per
the “Map of the experimental animal acupoints” formulated by National
Acupuncture Research Institute of China, PC 6 is located at 3 mm above
the wrist between the radius and ulna on the rat's forelimbs, and LI11 is
located at the outside front of elbow near the radius. These two
acupoints are commonly used in cerebral ischemia clinic and practically,
it's easier to operate on rats than other acupoints on the head or face.
The control EA treatment was performed in off-meridian points,
which there is no evidence to show their therapeutic effects. The
needles were connected with HANS electro-acupuncture therapy apparatus (Jisheng Medical Technology Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China). The following parameters were applied for the treatment: sparse-dense wave (2/
15 Hz), intensity at 1 mA, 20 min each session. There was no acupuncture in the normal group, sham group and model group.

69

0.5 cm and caudal 0.5 cm of the brain. The brain slice was ﬁxed in 4%
paraformaldehyde solution, embedded with parafﬁn, and then continuously sectioned every 5 μm for immunohistochemical staining.
The rest of 3 rats from each group were deeply anesthetized and
their brains were rapidly harvested on an ice tray. A 1 cm-thickness coronal brain slice was harvested similarly as described above. The brain
slice was grinded in liquid nitrogen for 3 aliquots. One was used for lactate concentration examination, and the other two were used for MCT1
Western blot and qRT-PCR test separately.
2.5. Lactate examination
The lactate concentration was tested by the commercial lactate
assay kit (Catalog number: A019-2, Engineering Institute of Nanjing
Jiancheng, China) as described before [3].
2.6. Immunohistochemistry
The 2-step plus ploy-HRP Anti-mouse/Rabbit IgG Detection System
was used to examine the expression of MCT1 (rabbit anti-MCT1 monoclonal antibody, 1:300, cat# AB3540P, from Chemicon Ltd) and GFAP
(mouse anti-GFAP monoclonal antibody, 1:1000, cat# sc-58766, from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology) in the 5 μm-thickness brain sections. The microscopic images of the staining were taken under the 10× and 20× objectives of a BX51 microscope (Olympus).
2.7. Western blot
One aliquot brain tissue was thawed and added with RIPA lysate to
extract total protein, and then the following procedures were performed including SDS-PAGE gel (12%) electrophoresis, transmembrane,
antibody hybridization and exposure imaging. QuantityOne software
was used to analyze the strip grey value of the exposure image, with
the β-actin as an internal reference.
2.8. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR)
The target gene sequence was obtained from NCBI gene library,
using Primer Premier 5.0 (Canadian Premier Life Insurance Company)
software to design primers by Beijing xlltech Co. Ltd, China with
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GADPH) as an internal
reference. The primer sequences of GFAP are: F-AGAAAACCGCATCACC
ATTC, R-GCACACCTCACATCACATCC. The primer sequences of MCT1: FTCGGTATCTTTGGATGGAGAGG, R-TGGTAACTTCATTTGGCTTCCC.
One aliquot brain tissue was used to extract total RNA using the
TRIzol kit (Invitrogen). Aliquots of total RNA were reversely transcribed
to cDNA using random primers and superscript III reverse transcription
kit. cDNA equivalent to 200 ng of total RNA was subjected to the qRTPCR analysis by the ABI 7500 Fast (Applied Biosystems Company),
with the cycling condition as 95 °C for 2 min, and then 94 °C for 20 s,
60 °C for 20 s, and 72 °C for 30 s for 40 cycles. The ABI 7500 Fast system
software was used to analyze and calculate the expression level of
mRNA. The sample from the normal group was used a control. The
gene with F value more than 1 is considered upregulated.

2.4. Neurobehavioral tests, tissue collection and sample preparation

2.9. Statistical analysis

Neurological function deﬁcit score for each rat in the EA group was
evaluated twice daily (before and 30 min after EA treatment), for the
7 day-treatment duration. Right after the last behavioral test, 5 rats
from each group of the 5 groups were anesthetized by intra-peritoneal
injection sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg), and then perfused with saline (0.9%) via the left ventricular to aorta followed with 4% phosphatebuffered paraformaldehyde. Rat brains were carefully and rapidly removed after perfusion. A 1 cm-thickness coronal brain slice was harvested from the starting point of middle cerebral artery to rostral

All data were analyzed using the SPSS19.0 software (Chicago, IL,
USA). All the results were expressed with Mean ± SD and tested for normality. The before and after EA treatment group comparison was analyzed by Paired-Samples T Test. All other two group comparisons were
analyzed by In-dependent-Samples T Test (LSD method for homogeneity of variance, and Tamhan's T2 method for heterogeneity of variance).
For all statistical tests, a value of P b 0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant. All ﬁgures were performed using GraphPad Prism 5.0 Software
(GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA).

70

Y. Lu et al. / Life Sciences 134 (2015) 68–72

3. Results
3.1. EA treatments improved the neurological deﬁcit in the MCAO rats
The MCAO surgery increased the neurological deﬁcit scores of the
rats from 0 to 2.80 ± 0.53 (P b 0.05). After 7-day EA treatment, the
score of the MCAO rats decreased markedly to 1.50 ± 0.38 (P b 0.05,
vs model group), while the neurological deﬁcits of the rats in control
EA and model groups had slightly recovery (2.48 ± 0.25 and 2.50 ±
0.27, respectively). The scores of the rats in the sham group were always
0 even after sham surgery. These results indicated that the compensatory ability of the mice only led to a limited recovery, but the EA treatments signiﬁcantly promoted the recovery of neurological deﬁcits in
the MCAO rats.
3.2. EA treatments increased the lactate concentration in the ischemic brain
tissue
The ischemic brain tissues were homogenized to examine both the
intracellular and extracellular lactate concentrations. Comparing with
the lactate concentration in the normal group (0.42 ± 0.05 mmol/g protein), there was no signiﬁcant difference of that in the sham group
(0.41 ± 0.06 mmol/g protein). However, we detected an obviously
higher concentration of lactate in the rats in model group (0.54 ±
0.03 mmol/g protein) and even in the control EA group (0.51 ±
0.02 mmol/g protein) (P b 0.05, vs sham and normal groups). EA treatment with the PC6 (Neiguan) and LI11 (Quchi) acupoints further induced the elevation of lactate concentration in the MCAO rats (0.67 ±
0.04 mmol/g protein) (P b 0.05, vs model and control EA groups).

These results suggested that the increased lactate metabolism was associated with the body compensation in response to the brain ischemia,
and the EA treatments could further stimulate the lactate metabolism
to improve the neurological function in the MCAO rats.
3.3. EA treatments up-regulated the MCT1 expression and activated astrocytes in MCAO rat brain
In the brains of normal rats, MCT1 protein was examined widely
expressed in the membrane and cytoplasm of microvascular endothelial
cells in the cortex of frontal lobe, parietal lobe, occipital lobe, temporal
lobe and hippocampus, as well as the ependymal-lining cells adjacent
to the hippocampus (Fig. 1). In the cortical ischemic area of MCAO
rats, while MCT1 protein expressed at a less amount in the microvascular endothelial cells, we examined a marked increase of MCT1 expression in astrocytes (Fig. 1). In the non-ischemia cortical area of MCOA
rats, MCT1 expressed similarly as in the normal rat in the microvascular
endothelial cells but not astrocytes. EA treatment induced an even
higher expression of the MCT1 protein in the astrocytes than those in
the non-EA treated MCAO mice, and we also observed an increase of
MCT1 expression in endothelial cells. The brain expression of MCT1 in
the sham group didn't show any signiﬁcant changes when comparing
with that in normal rats, in terms of both MCT1 distribution and expression amount.
Along with the changes of MCT1 expression, we observed a similar
increased expression of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in the ischemic area after EA treatments. Speciﬁcally, there were more GFAPpositive astrocytes in the region of the ischemic hippocampus in
model group rats, and these astrocytes were with bigger cell body,

Fig. 1. Representative immunohistochemical staining images of MCT1 and GFAP in the ischemic brain tissue sections of each group. A. MCT1-immuno reactivity was detected as brown
signals mainly located in the microvascular endothelial cells in the rat brain of Normal rat. Enhanced MCT1-immuno reactivities were examined in the cortical ischemic necrosis area
of EA group. B. GFAP-immuno reactivity was detected as brown signals located in the cytoplasm, cell membrane or protuberance of astrocytes in the cerebral cortex of Normal rat.
More activated GFAP-positive astrocytes were examined in the ischemic cerebral cortex region in the EA group with enlarged cell bodies, coarse projections and strong staining intensities.
Scale bar: 100 μm.

Y. Lu et al. / Life Sciences 134 (2015) 68–72

thicker projections and more intensive staining of GFAP than those in
the hippocampus and cerebral cortex in normal group and sham
group rats (Fig. 1).
In addition to the immunochemistry staining, immune-blotting
methods were used to further conﬁrm the ﬁndings. We found that the
expressions of GFAP and MCT1 protein in model group were higher
than those in sham group (P b 0.05), and their expressions in EA
group were signiﬁcantly higher than those in model group (P b 0.05)
(Fig. 2).
EA has been reported to be able to regulate gene expression as well
as protein activation [5,8]. To further trace the origin of the elevated
protein expressions, the mRNA expressions of MCT1 and GFAP were detected. The results showed a concordance of the increased mRNA expression with protein expression of both genes in the EA group
comparing with those in model group (P b 0.05) (Fig. 3). These results
further elucidated the mechanism behind the correlation of neurological improvement and increased lactate metabolism in the MCAO rats,
which is, EA treatment activated lactate metabolism in the resident astrocytes around the ischemic area and up-regulated the expression of
MCT1 in these astrocytes which facilitated the transfer of intracellular
lactate to extracellular domain to be utilized by injured neurons.

4. Discussion
To our best knowledge, this study provided the ﬁrst evidence that
consecutive EA treatments could stimulate the lactate energy metabolism in the ischemic brain to improve the neurological function recovery
in MCAO rats. Furthermore, the EA treatment could activate astrocytes
to increase their activities, and up-regulate the astrocytic expression
of MCT1, which facilitated the transportation and utilization of lactate
to be used by injured neurons in cerebral ischemia to meet their energy
needs.
Brain is the most active organ of energy metabolism, but has the
least energy and oxygen reserve, thus is extremely sensitive to ischemia
and hypoxia injury. After the cerebral ischemia injury, a series of cascade reaction will occur. First, the aerobic metabolism decreases, while
the anaerobic glycolysis increases. Second, with the persistent ischemia,
anaerobic glycolysis will get into the exhaustion stage, where the cerebral function obstacle is manifested by the release of excitatory amino
acids and the cerebral edema. Our results on the profound effects of
EA treatment in enhancing the astrocytic expression of lactate transporter suggested that EA could provide instant protection to the neurons by transferring energy in early ischemia. Previous studies have
reported that in the later stage of ischemia in rat, EA treatment reduced
the release of glutamate and alleviated brain edema [7]. Taken together,
it's thought that EA treatment has multifaceted effects through a comprehensive mechanism.

71

Fig. 3. mRNA expressions of GFAP and MCT1 in the ischemic brain tissue of each group.
Total RNA from the brain tissue of 3 rats in each group were analyzed by qRT-PCR.
*P b 0.05, vs. Normal and Sham; #P b 0.05, vs. Model. The quantiﬁcation data based on
the 2−△△Ct values were obtained from three independent experiments on 3 tissue samples in each group.

The astrocyte–neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis (ANLSH) was proposed by Pellerin and Magistretti in early 1990s and has been widely
recognized since then [13]. The ANLSH principle is that the brain could
regulate energy metabolism to adapt to the changes in brain activity
with the involvement of both neurons and astrocytes. Though glucose
is the substantial energy source of brain activity, the lactate formed by
metabolizing is not just an acid effect indicator when hypoxia happens,
but an important compensatory and main energy resource for neurons
in the ischemic/hypoxic condition. Our results demonstrated that the
increased lactate metabolism was associated with the body compensation in response to the brain ischemia, and the EA treatments could further stimulate the lactate metabolism to improve the neurological
function in the MCAO rats. In parallel, we observed the up-regulation
of MCT1 expression in various types of cells by the EA treatments.
These correlative results may indicate that 1) the lactate transfer between astrocytes and neurons is critical to the injured neurons to maintain their proper function; 2) the EA treatments is beneﬁcial to the
ischemia through enhancing the astrocyte–neuron lactate shuttle.
Previous studies showed that lactate is produced mainly by astrocytes [2]. The energy depletion of brain results in the increasing of extracellular glutamate concentration. Astrocytes absorb glutamate through
excitatory amino acid transporters along with the Na+ inﬂux, which activates the Na+–K+–ATP enzyme and increases the consumption of
ATP. A further activation of the glycolytic enzyme is triggered by the
ATP consumption in astrocytes and will lead to the increasing in anaerobic glycolysis, which converts glucose into large amounts of lactic acid.
Another important resource of brain lactic acid is from brain glycogen

Fig. 2. Protein expressions of GFAP and MCT1 in the ischemic brain tissue of each group. A. Protein lysates from the brain tissue of 3 rats in each group were analyzed by Western blot.
**P b 0.01, vs. Normal and Sham; #P b 0.05, vs. Model. B. The quantiﬁcation data were obtained from three independent experiments on 3 tissue samples in each group.

72

Y. Lu et al. / Life Sciences 134 (2015) 68–72

decomposition. The glycogen that was stored in astrocytes could be
decomposed with rapid metabolic activation in response to cerebral ischemia and cerebral anoxia. Our studies demonstrated that the EA
treatments enhanced the expression of MCT1 in astrocytes, and thus
the lactate produced by astrocytes could be transported to neurons as
an energy substrate to maintain critical functions.
Astrocytic lactate has its special distribution mechanism to be
provided to neurons. When intracellular lactate accumulates to certain content, it cannot passively diffuse through the cell membrane,
but is actively transported through the speciﬁc MCTs into the cellular
matrix, forming a “pool of lactate”. Neurons could easily intake lactic
acid through its membrane MCTs, and then convert it into pyruvate,
along with the three carboxylic acid cycles of aerobic metabolism [6].
In the present study, we observed a same pattern of widely distributed MCT1-positive cells in the microvessel endothelial in normal rat
brain [4]. But in the cortical ischemic area of rats, a marked increase
of MCT1 in locally activated astrocytes was examined. The MCT1positive astrocytes were in the close vicinity to neurons, which
makes it is suitable for the release/retake of lactate. In addition to astrocytic MCT1, elevated expression of MCT1 in the microglial cells of
ischemic penumbra has been reported to provide an energy source
for the microglial cells to fuel their migration and phagocytosis to repair the ischemia [12]. In our study, we could not exclude the possible contribution of microglias into the improved neurological
function under the EA treatment. But from the morphological observation, we could see that astrocytes were closely wrapped around
neurons and they are the most widely distributed colloid cells at ischemic penumbra. Nevertheless, it's still worth exploring in details
whether EA treatment would affect the MCT1 expression or function
in microglias, and at what disease progression stage the role of microglia maybe more protrusive than astrocytes.
Ischemic cerebrovascular disease is one of the highest attentions in
neurology because of its high morbidity and high rate of disability. Acupuncture, the most well-known complementary and alternative medical approach, has been applied to cure ischemia stroke for more than
3000 years. The clinical effectiveness of acupuncture on cerebral ischemia has been widely afﬁrmed, and has become an indispensable method of treating ischemic cerebral apoplexy. The current animal study
again corroborated the treatment efﬁcacy, and more importantly, further justiﬁed the multifaceted mechanism, which we believe that
these will help foster and enhance the world-wide popularization of
acupuncture application.

5. Conclusions
EA treatments could improve the neurological deﬁcits in the MCAO
rats through activating the lactate metabolism in the ischemic brain
area and up-regulating the astrocytic expression of MCT1 to facilitate
the transfer of intracellular lactate to extracellular domain to be utilized
by injured neurons.

Conﬂict of interest statement
The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.

Author contributions
Conception and design: SJW and YL. Administrative support: SJW.
Collection and assembly of data: YL, HJZ, SJW, BBH, TW. Data analysis
and interpretation: YL, BBH, YW, HZ, KC. Manuscript writing and revising: YL, HJZ, SJW, BBH, YW, HZ and KC.
Acknowledgments
This study is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 81072762).
References
[1] T. Chen, Y.Z. Qian, A. Rice, J.P. Zhu, X. Di, R. Bullock, Brain lactate uptake increases at
the site of impact after traumatic brain injury, Brain Res 861 (2000) 281–287.
[2] C.P. Chih, E.L. Roberts Jr., Energy substrates for neurons during neural activity: a critical review of the astrocyte–neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis, Journal of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism: Ofﬁcial Journal of the International Society of Cerebral
Blood Flow and Metabolism 23 (2003) 1263–1281.
[3] B. Deng, H. Xu, J. Zhang, J. Wang, L.C. Han, L.Y. Li, et al., Neuroprotective effects of
sevoﬂurane against electromagnetic pulse-induced brain injury through inhibition
of neuronal oxidative stress and apoptosis, PLoS One 9 (2014) e91019.
[4] A.P. Halestrap, D. Meredith, The SLC16 gene family-from monocarboxylate transporters (MCTs) to aromatic amino acid transporters and beyond, Pﬂugers Arch Eur J Physiol 447 (2004) 619–628.
[5] M.S. Hong, H.K. Park, J.S. Yang, H.J. Park, S.T. Kim, S.N. Kim, et al., Gene expression proﬁle
of acupuncture treatment in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced
Parkinson's disease model, Neurol Res 32 (Suppl. 1) (2010) 74–78.
[6] T. Kitano, N. Nisimaru, E. Shibata, H. Iwasaka, T. Noguchi, I. Yokoi, Monocarboxylates
and glucose utilization as energy substrates in rat brain slices under selective glial
poisoning—a 31P NMR study, Mol Cell Biochem 244 (2003) 77–81.
[7] X. Li, P. Luo, Q. Wang, L. Xiong, Electroacupuncture pretreatment as a novel avenue
to protect brain against ischemia and reperfusion injury, Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine: eCAM 2012 (2012) 195397.
[8] D. Lin, I. De La Pena, L. Lin, S.F. Zhou, C.V. Borlongan, C. Cao, The neuroprotective role
of acupuncture and activation of the BDNF signaling pathway, Int J Mol Sci 15
(2014) 3234–3252.
[9] H. Liu, X. Shen, H. Tang, J. Li, T. Xiang, W. Yu, Using microPET imaging in quantitative
veriﬁcation of the acupuncture effect in ischemia stroke treatment, Sci Report 3
(2013) 1070.
[10] E.Z. Longa, P.R. Weinstein, S. Carlson, R. Cummins, Reversible middle cerebral artery
occlusion without craniectomy in rats, Stroke; A Journal of Cerebral Circulation 20
(1989) 84–91.
[11] Y. Lu, S.J. Wang, X.T. Song, Effects of electroacupuncture on glucose transporter-1 expression of hippocampal microvascular endothelial cells in rats with focal cerebral
ischemia]. Zhen ci yan jiu=Acupuncture research, Zhongguo yi xue ke xue yuan
Yi xue qing bao yan jiu suo bian ji 35 (2010) 118–123.
[12] T.J. Moreira, K. Pierre, F. Maekawa, C. Repond, A. Cebere, S. Liljequist, et al., Enhanced
cerebral expression of MCT1 and MCT2 in a rat ischemia model occurs in activated
microglial cells, Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism: Ofﬁcial Journal of
the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 29 (2009)
1273–1283.
[13] L. Pellerin, P.J. Magistretti, Glutamate uptake into astrocytes stimulates aerobic glycolysis: a mechanism coupling neuronal activity to glucose utilization, Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 91 (1994) 10625–10629.
[14] W. Qiao-feng, G. Ling-ling, Y. Shu-guang, Z. Qi, L. Sheng-feng, Z. Fang, et al., A(1)H
NMR-based metabonomic study on the SAMP8 and SAMR1 mice and the effect of
electro-acupuncture, Exp Gerontol 46 (2011) 787–793.
[15] A. Schurr, R.S. Payne, J.J. Miller, M.T. Tseng, B.M. Rigor, Blockade of lactate transport
exacerbates delayed neuronal damage in a rat model of cerebral ischemia, Brain Res
895 (2001) 268–272.
[16] W.Q. Tian, Y.G. Peng, S.Y. Cui, F.Z. Yao, B.G. Li, Effects of electroacupuncture of different intensities on energy metabolism of mitochondria of brain cells in rats with cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury, Chinese Journal of Integrative Medicine (2013).
[17] Q. Wu, Q. Zhang, B. Sun, X. Yan, Y. Tang, X. Qiao, et al., 1H NMR-based metabonomic
study on the metabolic changes in the plasma of patients with functional dyspepsia
and the effect of acupuncture, J Pharm Biomed Anal 51 (2010) 698–704.

