Neuroscience Letters 573 (2014) 1–6

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neuroscience Letters
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neulet

Neuroprotective effects of therapeutic hypercapnia on spatial
memory and sensorimotor impairment via anti-apoptotic
mechanisms after focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
Tao Tao a,b , Meng Zhao a,b , Wanchao Yang a,b , Yulong Bo a,b , Wenzhi Li a,b,∗
a
Department of Anesthesiology, the Second Afﬁliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin Medical University, 246 Xuefu Road, Nangang District,
Heilongjiang Province, Harbin 150081, China
b
Hei Long Jiang Province key Lab of Research on Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Harbin Medical University, 246 Xuefu Road, Nangang District,
Heilongjiang Province, Harbin 150081, China

h i g h l i g h t s
• Hypercapnia attenuates neuronal apoptosis caused by stroke.
• Hypercapnia improves impaired spatial memory and sensorimotor.
• Hypercapnia exerts neuroprotection through anti-apoptotic mechanisms.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 23 January 2014
Received in revised form 10 April 2014
Accepted 30 April 2014
Available online 9 May 2014
Keywords:
Therapeutic hypercapnia
Focal cerebral ischemia
Spatial memory
Apoptosis

a b s t r a c t
A number of studies have demonstrated that therapeutic hypercapnia ameliorates neurological deﬁcits
and attenuates the histological damage of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury. However, the effects
of therapeutic hypercapnia on impaired spatial memory have not been reported. Here we aimed to
investigate the effects and mechanisms of therapeutic hypercapnia on spatial memory in a rat model of
focal cerebral ischemia induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion/reperfusion (MCAO/R). Adult male
rats were randomly assigned into three experimental groups: sham (sham operation), IR (MCAO/R),
and hypercapnia [arterial blood CO2 tension (PaCO2 ) 80–100 mmHg + IR] groups. Sensorimotor deﬁcits
and spatial memory testing were evaluated by an 18-point scoring system and an 8-arm radial maze
task, respectively. The hippocampal histological damage and the percentage of apoptotic neurons were
evaluated by hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining as well as ﬂow cytometry. Western blotting was
used to investigate the changes of the apoptosis-related Bcl-2 and Bax proteins. The results indicated
that hypercapnia treatment signiﬁcantly improved the abilities of impaired sensorimotor and spatial
memory after MCAO/R. Moreover, hypercapnia treatment signiﬁcantly increased the percentage of surviving neurons and decreased the percentage of apoptotic neurons in the hippocampus after MCAO/R
damage. The expressions of anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2 and pro-apoptotic protein Bax were signiﬁcantly increased and decreased in the hypercapnia treated rats, respectively. These ﬁndings suggest that
therapeutic hypercapnia can attenuate neuronal apoptosis and improve impaired spatial memory and
sensorimotor after MCAO/R, which may be attributable to its anti-apoptotic effects through modulation
of apoptosis-related protein.
© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Anesthesiology, the Second Afﬁliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin Medical University, 246 Xuefu Road,
Nangang District, Heilongjiang Province, Harbin 150081, China.
Tel.: +86 18045159998; fax: +86 451 86605028.
E-mail addresses: taot1985@gmail.com (T. Tao),
michele zm@126.com (M. Zhao), dachao 1980@126.com (W. Yang),
boyulong163@163.com (Y. Bo), wenzhili9@126.com (W. Li).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2014.04.051
0304-3940/© 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Ischemic brain injury, including stroke, is one of the leading
causes of long-term disability and mortality and is being increasingly recognized as a signiﬁcant disorder that threatens human
health and life [1–3]. Ischemic brain injury often accompanies
neuronal dysfunction and cell death, particularly in hippocampal
pyramidal neurons, which is correlated with spatial memory [4].

2

T. Tao et al. / Neuroscience Letters 573 (2014) 1–6

Although ischemia-induced memory deﬁcits cause high morbidity
in clinical cases, and despite extensive research, few neuroprotectants to date have been successfully developed from bench to
bedside.
Therapeutic hypercapnia is induced by adding carbon dioxide (CO2 ) to inspired gas and has been regarded as an effective
strategy for lung, myocardial, intestinal, and central nervous
system ischemic injury models [5–7]. Our previous studies suggest that therapeutic hypercapnia [arterial blood CO2 tension
(PaCO2 ) 80–100 mmHg] ameliorates neurological deﬁcits and
attenuates histological damage in both focal and global cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion injury models [8,9]. However, the effects and
mechanisms of therapeutic hypercapnia on impaired spatial memory in a focal cerebral ischemia model have not been reported. In
addition, many studies have shown that variations of apoptosisrelated proteins, Bcl-2 and Bax, play an important role in neuronal
death after MCAO/R [10,11]. Thus, the aim of this study was to
evaluate the effects of therapeutic hypercapnia on impaired spatial memory and sensorimotor dysfunction after MCAO/R in rats
and to explore whether this hypercapnia-induced neuroprotection
is modulated by apoptosis-related proteins.

2. Materials and methods
Please see details in the supplementary material.

2.1. Experimental animals
Adult male Sprague Dawley rats weighing 250–280 g were
purchased from Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co.
Ltd. (Beijing, PR China). All animal experiments were approved
by the guidelines of Institute for Laboratory Animal Research of
Harbin Medical University and were carried out in accordance with
the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National
Research Council, 1996, USA).

2.4. Therapeutic hypercapnia
Therapeutic hypercapnia was performed as described previously [9]. Physiologic variables were recorded at ﬁve time points
including after 90 min of ischemia and every 30 min after the start
of reperfusion (reperfusion 30, 60, 90, and 120 min).

2.5. Sensorimotor scoring
A blinded observer evaluated sensorimotor scores at every designated time-point using a scoring system utilized an 18-point scale
as described previously [12].

2.6. Radial arm maze
Spatial memory testing was carried out using an 8-arm radial
maze task (Xinruan Information Technology Co. Ltd., Shanghai,
China), as previously reported [13]. Rats were randomly allocated
to one of three experimental groups and were tested for spatial
memory on days 1, 3, 7, 14, 21, 28 by a blinded observer and reference memory error, working memory error, and distance travelled
were recorded.

2.7. Histological examination
At 24 h after reperfusion, rats were deeply anesthetized and
decapitated, and the brains were removed, and embedded in parafﬁn. Parafﬁn-embedded tissues were sectioned at 5 ␮m at the level
of the hippocampus according to standard procedures. The sections were processed for HE staining, which was used to count the
number of dead cells in the hippocampus. The density of surviving neurons was expressed as the number of cells per mm length
measured along the hippocampal CA1 pyramidal layer.

2.8. Analysis of apoptosis by ﬂow cytometry
2.2. Experimental protocol
Eighty-four rats were randomly assigned into 3 experimental
groups: sham group (sham operation, n = 28), IR group (MCAO/R,
n = 28), and hypercapnia group (PaCO2 80–100 mmHg + IR, n = 28).
The rats in the sham group underwent left common carotid artery
(CCA) and external carotid artery (ECA) exposure without middle
cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion, followed by inhalation of 30% O2
for 2 h. In the IR group, the MCA was occluded for 90 min under the
same anesthetic conditions and surgical procedures as the Sham
group, followed by reperfusion and inhalation of 30% O2 for 2 h.
In the hypercapnia group, rats received the same IR protocol and
the same fraction of inspired oxygen as described for the IR group,
with hypercapnia applied at the beginning of reperfusion. Animals
were tested at 24 h, 72 h, 7 days, 14 days, 21 days, and 28 days
to evaluate spatial memory, and sensorimotor function. Twentyfour hours after reperfusion, a subset of the rats was sacriﬁced and
their brains were quickly harvested for hematoxylin and eosin (HE)
staining, western blotting, and ﬂow cytometry (The experimental
protocol is shown in Fig. 1A).

2.3. MCAO/R model
MCAO/R rats were generated as previously described [9].
Regional cerebral blood ﬂow (rCBF) was monitored by laser Doppler
ﬂowmeter (PeriFlux system 5000, Preimed AB, China).

Apoptosis was assessed by an Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide
(PI) dual staining kit (556547, FITC Annexin V Apoptosis Detection
Kit I, BD Biosciences, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Analyses were performed with Cell Quest Pro software (BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA) and ﬂow cytometry (BD FACSCaliburTM
Flow Cytometry, BD Biosciences, USA.). For each sample, data from
10,000 cells were recorded in list mode on logarithmic scales. There
are four quadrants represent dead neurons, late apoptotic neurons, normal neurons, early apoptotic neurons, respectively in ﬂow
cytometry results. The percentage of apoptotic cell was calculated
using 100 × (early + late) apoptotic neurons number/total neurons
number.

2.9. Western blot analysis
Twenty-four hours after surgery, rats were sacriﬁced under deep
anesthesia. Hippocampal samples were stored at −80 ◦ C until analysis, when western blot and protein extraction were performed as
described previously [14]. The primary antibodies were against Bcl2, Bax (1:1000, Cell Signaling Technology Inc., Danvers, MA, USA)
and secondary antibodies (1:5000, Rockland Inc., Gilbertsville, PA,
USA). Blot bands were densitometrically quantiﬁed with Image J
software (v1.33, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). ␤-Actin (1:1000, ZSGBBio, Beijing, China) was blotted on the same membrane as a loading
control. The quantiﬁed values were expressed as a percentage of
sham (100%).

T. Tao et al. / Neuroscience Letters 573 (2014) 1–6

3

Fig. 1. (A) Experimental timeline. (B) Neuroprotection on sensorimotor by hypercapnia after focal cerebral ischemia. (C–F) Effects of hypercapnia on MCAO/R–induced
impairment of spatial memory in an 8-arm radial maze test in rats [mean (SE bars)]: (C) number of working memory errors, (D) number of reference memory errors, and
(E) average distance travelled. (F) Traces of rats travelled in different groups. *p < 0.05 versus sham group, #p < 0.05 versus IR group, †p < 0.05 versus hypercapnia and sham
group (n = 8).

2.10. Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were carried out using SAS (version 9.13,
SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Data are expressed as the
mean ± standard error of mean (SEM). Physiological parameters,
arterial blood gases, variables in radial arm maze, and sensorimotor
scoring were analyzed using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a post-hoc test. Surviving neuron cell
counting, percentages of apoptotic cells, and the protein levels of
Bcl-2 and Bax were assessed with one-way ANOVA followed by a
post hoc test. All p-values are two-tailed and p < 0.05 was considered to be signiﬁcant for all statistical analyses in this study.
3. Results
3.1. Physiological data
There were no signiﬁcant differences in body weight, rectal temperature, and fasting blood–glucose (FBG) among the three groups
(date not shown). MAP and arterial blood gases parameters are presented in Supplementary material. Ninety minutes after MCAO/R,
MAP, PaCO2 , PaO2 , and pH differed during reperfusion due to a different fraction of inspired gas in the hypercapnia group compared
with the IR and sham groups. There were no signiﬁcant differences
in the other variables among the three groups.
3.2. Hypercapnia improved sensorimotor and memory deﬁcits
outcome
3.2.1. Sensorimotor deﬁcits
A signiﬁcant improvement in sensorimotor score was observed
at both 24 and 72 h after hypercapnia treatment (Fig. 1B). However,

no signiﬁcant differences were found among the three groups in
sensorimotor score after 7 days (data not shown). As expected,
sham-operated animals did not show any deﬁcits.

3.2.2. Spatial memory deﬁcits
Twenty-eight days after MCAO/R, rats subjected to hypercapnia treatment committed fewer working memory errors than
rats in IR group, although this difference was not statistically
signiﬁcant (Fig. 1C). For reference memory errors, hypercapnia
treatment resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease on day 7, 14, 21,
28 in hypercapnia group compared with IR group (Fig. 1D).
Hypercapnia treatment signiﬁcantly prevented the increase in
distance travelled by MCAO/R on day 21 and 28 (Fig. 1E and
F). Sham-operated animals did not show signiﬁcantly memory
deﬁcits. In addition, rats in the hypercapnia group entered fewer
arms and travel shorter distances than rats in the IR group
(Fig. 1F).

3.3. Histological changes after cerebral ischemia/reperfusion and
following hypercapnia
HE-stained brain sections in the hippocampal CA1 area showed
partial cell death, neuronal loss, cell shrinkage, nuclear condensation, and fragmentation. We also found that a 90 min MCAO/R
approach caused extensive hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neuronal
death in the 24 h after reperfusion (Fig. 2B and E). There was little neuronal damage in the CA1 region of the sham rats, compared
to the IR group (Fig. 2A, D and G), whereas hypercapnia treatment
had a signiﬁcantly protective effect from MCAO/R damage (Fig. 2C,
F and G).

4

T. Tao et al. / Neuroscience Letters 573 (2014) 1–6

Fig. 2. Neuronal damage in the hippocampus of rats was assessed by histological examination. (A and D) Sections showed normal neurons in sham rats. (B and E) Sections
at 24 h after ischemia showed partial cell death, neuronal loss, cell shrinkage, nuclear condensation, and fragmentation. (C and F) Hypercapnia treatment afforded neuroprotection against ischemia/reperfusion induced neuron damage by reducing neuron loss at 24 h after ischemia (A–C, HE stain is 40 time; D–F, HE stain is 400 time). (G) The
proportion of surviving neurons was dramatically reduced in IR group compared with sham group, whereas hypercapnia treatment prevented cell death caused by MCAO/R.
In panels A, B and C, boxes with letters D, E and F were inserted indicating the regions selected and enlarged at higher magniﬁcations. Scale bars: A, B and C = 2 mm; D, E and
F = 100 ␮m. *p < 0.05 vs. Sham, #p < 0.05 vs. IR (n = 4).

3.4. Apoptosis assay assessed by ﬂow cytometry (FCM)
Neuronal apoptosis in the hippocampal CA1 area was detected
by FCM at 24 h after MCAO/R. The distribution of apoptotic neurons
showed that few apoptotic neurons were found in the Sham group
(Fig. 3A), many apoptotic neurons were induced in the IR group
(Fig. 3B), and the level of apoptosis was signiﬁcantly decreased in
the Hypercapnia group compared to the IR group (Fig. 3C). As shown
in Fig. 3D, the percentage of apoptotic neurons was signiﬁcantly
higher in the IR group compared with the sham group, and it was
signiﬁcantly lower in hypercapnia group compared to IR group 24 h
after MCAO/R.
3.5. Hypercapnia treatment exerted a neuroprotective function
via modulating the Bcl-2 and Bax expression
Our results showed that Bcl-2 levels were signiﬁcantly
decreased and Bax levels were increased in the IR group compared
with the sham group. Hypercapnia treatment ameliorated the
MCAO/R-induced decrease in Bcl-2 and increase in Bax (Fig. 4A–C).
4. Discussion
The present study shows that rats with hypercapnia treatment (PaCO2 80–100 mmHg) had neuroprotective effects on
spatial memory, and sensorimotor impairment in rats with

MCAO/R-induced ischemia. Our ﬁndings demonstrated that moderate hypercapnia provided neuronal protection through an
anti-apoptotic mechanism, which involved regulating the expression of apoptosis-related molecules.
Previous studies [5–7] have shown the effects of hypercapnia
on lung, cardio- and neuro-protection. However, few studies have
been conducted to study the protective effects of hypercapnia on
the abilities of spatial memory after MCAO/R. It is well known
that MCAO/R is associated with a high incidence of memory [4,15]
and sensorimotor dysfunction [14], and some studies have focused
on attenuating such impairment. Roberge’s study indicated that
short-term food restriction (40% less food over a 3-month period)
could attenuate ischemia-induced spatial memory deﬁcits, despite
extensive CA1 ischemic injury [15], and 17␤-estradiol treatment
combined with an enriched environment accelerated cognitive
recovery after focal brain ischemia [16]. To our knowledge, the
present study is the ﬁrst to assess the neuroprotective effects of
hypercapnia on spatial memory and sensorimotor impairment in
after focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion.
In the present study, hypercapnia treatment improved impaired
spatial memory and sensorimotor dysfunction after a 90 min
MCAO/R. However, the results differed regarding the long-term
protective effect of hypercapnia treatment on spatial memory.
A signiﬁcant improvement of hypercapnia treatment on sensorimotor dysfunction was also found at both 24 and 72 h after
MCAO/R but not after 7 days, which suggests that the sensorimotor

T. Tao et al. / Neuroscience Letters 573 (2014) 1–6

5

Fig. 3. The results of apoptotic neurons in the rat hippocampus in Sham, IR, and Hypercapnia groups at 24 h after ischemia. The level of apoptotic neurons was measured
by ﬂow cytometry (1, 2, 3, and 4 quadrants represent dead neurons, late apoptotic neurons, normal neurons, early apoptotic neurons, respectively). (A–C) The results of
apoptotic neurons in sham, IR, and hypercapnia groups, respectively. (D) The percentage of apoptotic neurons of different groups at 24 h after ischemia, *p < 0.05 vs. sham;
#p < 0.05 vs. IR (n = 4).

dysfunction was self-healing to some extent. This may be due to
the different locations of impaired neurons, which are responsible
for sensorimotor function and the spatial memory ability. Previously studies have demonstrated that the neurons responsible for
spatial memory are located in the hippocampal CA1 region and
are vulnerable to cerebral ischemia [17,18], which may contribute
to spatial memory dysfunction. Whereas the scoring system of
sensorimotor dysfunction used in the present study was designed
to detect motor function of limbs and somatosensory function,
which represented in the cortex, in particular the agranular

cortex [19]. Within minutes of MCAO, the cortex may be damaged
with necrotic cell death core and an encircled zone, referred
to as “ischemic penumbra”. In the ischemic penumbra, rather
than necrosis, neurons apoptosis makes it possible that there is
potentially recovery for a period after stroke onset [20]. Therefore,
the relative position of somatic sensorimotor representation may
explain the earlier recovery of sensorimotor ability after MCAO/R.
Moreover, Barth’s study suggested that the recovery following
cortex lesion may be mediated by the intact hemisphere or may
involve interhemispheric compensatory changes [19].

Fig. 4. Effects of hypercapnia on apoptotic mediators. (A) Western blot analysis for the expression of hippocampal Bcl-2, Bax and ␤-actin in the sham, IR and hypercapnia
groups, respectively. (B and C) Quantiﬁcation of Western blot bands compared with sham (100%). *p < 0.05 vs. sham, #p < 0.05 vs. IR (n = 4).

6

T. Tao et al. / Neuroscience Letters 573 (2014) 1–6

In the present study, exogenous inhaled carbon dioxide during the hypercapnia treatment leads to a series of physiological
changes, in particular the increase in PaO2 levels. Increased oxygen pressure is important for the protection of brain tissue after
ischemic stroke. However, it may also lead to the formation of more
oxygen-derived free radicals, which increases the chance of injury
from oxidative stress. Previous studies [21,22] demonstrated that
therapeutic hypercapnia can inhibit the formation of free radicals
and lipid peroxidation, which may reduce brain injury caused by
oxidative stress. Therefore, the increased PaO2 after hypercapnia
treatment may not cause the brain injury that result after oxidative
stress.
In addition, histological examinations of hippocampal and
related apoptotic proteins were analyzed to elucidate the protective mechanisms induced by hypercapnia. In the present study,
HE-stained brain sections in hippocampal CA1 areas showed that
a 90 min MCAO/R approach caused extensive pyramidal neuronal
death in the 24 h after reperfusion, whereas hypercapnia treatment conferred signiﬁcantly protective effects on MCAO/R damage.
These results were consistent with the functional assessment
of sensorimotor and spatial memory. Apoptosis is the process
of programmed cell death, which is an important form of neuronal death. Neuronal apoptosis can be modulated by a number
of gene products, in particular the Bcl-2 family of proteins. The Bcl2 family of proteins has expanded signiﬁcantly and includes both
pro- as well as anti-apoptotic molecules. Among them, Bcl-2 and
Bax are the typical anti- and pro-apoptotic proteins, respectively.
The interaction of Bcl-2 and Bax is from the dimerization process
between them, which is mediated by the structurally homologous regions. This is an important form for the achievement or
regulation of functions. Voehringer et al.’s study [23] suggested that
Bcl-2 over-expression can lead to the accumulation of glutathione
in nucleus, which can then lead to changes of redox equilibrium
in the nucleus and the reduction of caspase activity, which thereby
inhibits apopotosis. Moreover, Li’s study indicated that Bcl-2 participates in neuronal plasticity [18]. As expected, our data showed that
hypercapnia treatment conferred neuroprotection was associated
with the apoptosis related proteins Bcl-2 and Bax. Bcl-2 expression was signiﬁcantly increased in hypercapnia treated rats after
MCAO/R in comparison with MCAO/R treated rats, which suggests
that the neuroprotective effect of hypercapnia against apoptosis
in the hippocampal CA1 was mediated by Bcl-2 up-regulation. In
addition, the protein Bax also plays an important role in regulating
apoptotic cell death. We found that pro-apoptotic Bax expression
was signiﬁcantly decreased by hypercapnia treatment in hypercapnia rats, which indicated that effect of hypercapnia treatment
on apoptosis involves Bax. These data strongly suggest that the
neuroprotective effect of hypercapnia was correlated with the
apoptosis-related proteins Bcl-2 and Bax.
In conclusion, our data indicate that hypercapnia attenuates
neuronal apoptosis and improves impaired spatial memory and
sensorimotor ability after MCAO/R. These effects may be due to the
anti-apoptotic effects of up-regulating Bcl-2 and down-regulating
Bax from hypercapnia. Furthermore, our study suggested that
hypercapnia maybe a potential therapeutic strategy to decrease
the damage caused by neurodegenerative diseases such as
stroke.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by The National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 81171076). The authors thank Professor
Mei-na Liu and Yu-peng Wang for their excellent statistical analysis
support.

Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found,
in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.
2014.04.051.
References
[1] G.S. Krause, K. Kumar, B.C. White, S.D. Aust, J.G. Wieqenstein, Ischemia, resuscitation, and reperfusion: mechanisms of tissue injury and prospects for
protection, Am. Heart J. 111 (1986) 768–780.
[2] W. Rosamond, K. Flegal, K. Furie, A. Go, K. Greenlund, N. Haase, S.M. Hailpern,
M. Ho, V. Howard, B. Kissela, S. Kittner, D. Lloyd-Jones, M. McDermott, J. Meigs,
C. Moy, G. Nichol, C. O’Donnell, V. Roger, P. Sorlie, J. Steinberger, T. Thom, M.
Wilson, Y. Hong, American Heart Association Statistics, C., Stroke Statistics, S.,
Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2008 Update: a report from the American
Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee,
Circulation 117 (2008) e25–e146.
[3] M.L. Hackett, J.R. Duncan, C.S. Anderson, J.B. Broad, R. Bonita, Health-related
quality of life among long-term survivors of stroke: results from the Auckland
Stroke Study, 1991–1992, Stroke 31 (2000) 440–447.
[4] F. Pu, K. Motohashi, T. Kaneko, J. Takata, N. Egashira, R. Oishi, T. Okamoto, Y.
Sei, T. Yokozawa, K. Mishima, K. Iwasaki, M. Fujiwara, Neuroprotective effects
of Kangen-karyu on spatial memory impairment in an 8-arm radial maze and
neuronal death in the hippocampal CA1 region induced by repeated cerebral
ischemia in rats, J. Pharmacol. Sci. 109 (2009) 424–430.
[5] M.N. Chonghaile, B.D. Higgins, J. Costello, J.G. Laffey, Hypercapnic acidosis
attenuates lung injury induced by established bacterial pneumonia, Anesthesiology 109 (2008) 837–848.
[6] F. Nomura, M. Aoki, J.M. Forbess, J.E. MayerJr, Effects of hypercarbic acidotic
reperfusion on recovery of myocardial function after cardioplegic ischemia in
neonatal lambs, Circulation 90 (1994) II321–II327.
[7] R.C. Vannucci, J. Towﬁghi, D.F. Heitjan, R.M. Brucklacher, Carbon dioxide protects the perinatal brain from hypoxic-ischemic damage: an experimental
study in the immature rat, Pediatrics 95 (1995) 868–874.
[8] Q. Zhou, B. Cao, L. Niu, X. Cui, H. Yu, J. Liu, H. Li, W. Li, Effects of permissive
hypercapnia on transient global cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats,
Anesthesiology 112 (2010) 288–297.
[9] T. Tao, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Xu, W. Li, M. Zhao, Therapeutic hypercapnia
improves functional recovery and attenuates injury via antiapoptotic mechanisms in a rat focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion model, Brain Res. 1533 (2013)
52–62.
[10] M.L. Smith, G. Bendek, N. Dahlgren, I. Rosén, T. Wieloch, B.K. Siesjö, Models
for studying long-term recovery following forebrain ischemia in the rat. 2: A
2-vessel occlusion model, Acta Neurol. Scand. 69 (1984) 385–401.
[11] H.J. Xi, T.H. Zhang, T. Tao, C.Y. Song, S.J. Lu, X.G. Cui, Z.Y. Yue, Propofol improved
neurobehavioral outcome of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion rats by regulating
Bcl-2 and Bax expression, Brain Res. 1410 (2011) 24–32.
[12] J.H. Garcia, S. Wagner, K.F. Liu, X.J. Hu, Neurological deﬁcit and extent of neuronal necrosis attributable to middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats: statistical
validation, Stroke 26 (1995) 627–634.
[13] R.A. Paganelli, A. Benetolli, K.C. Lima, L.A. Cestari-Junior, L.A. Favero Filho, H.
Milani, A novel version of the 8-arm radial maze: effects of cerebral ischemia
on learning and memory, J. Neurosci. Methods 132 (2004) 9–18.
[14] T. Tsubokawa, V. Jadhav, I. Solaroglu, Y. Shiokawa, Y. Konishi, J.H. Zhang,
Lecithinized superoxide dismutase improves outcomes and attenuates focal
cerebral ischemic injury via antiapoptotic mechanisms in rats, Stroke 38 (2007)
1057–1062.
[15] M.C. Roberge, J. Hotte-Bernard, C. Messier, H. Plamondon, Food restriction
attenuates ischemia-induced spatial learning and memory deﬁcits despite
extensive CA1 ischemic injury, Behav. Brain Res. 187 (2008) 123–132.
[16] I. Söderström, M. Strand, A.C. Ingridsson, S. Nasic, T. Olsson, 17beta-estradiol
and enriched environment accelerate cognitive recovery after focal brain
ischemia, Eur. J. Neurosci. 29 (2009) 1215–1224.
[17] Z. Li, S. Cui, Z. Zhang, Q. Xie, W. Cai, M. Sokabe, L. Chen, DHEA-neuroprotection
and -neurotoxicity after transient cerebral ischemia in rats, J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 29 (2009) 287–296.
[18] Z. Li, L. Pang, F. Fang, J. Zhang, M. Xie, L. Wang, Resveratrol attenuates brain damage in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemia via up-regulation of hippocampal
Bcl-2, Brain Res. 1450 (2012) 116–124.
[19] T.M. Barth, T.A. Jones, T. Schallert, Functional subdivisions of the rat somatic
sensorimotor cortex, Behav. Brain Res. 39 (1990) 73–95.
[20] M.D. Ginsberg, The new language of cerebral ischemia, AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol.
18 (1997) 1435–1445.
[21] J.G. Laffey, D. Engelberts, B.P. Kavanagh, Buffering hypercapnic acidosis worsens
acute lung injury, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 161 (2000) 141–146.
[22] S. Rehncrona, H.N. Hauge, B.K. Siesjo, Enhancement of iron-catalyzed free radical formation by acidosis in brain homogenates: differences in effect by lactic
acid and CO2 , J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 9 (1989) 65–70.
[23] D.W. Voehringer, D.J. McConkey, T.J. McDonnell, S. Brisbay, R.E. Meyn, Bcl-2
expression causes redistribution of glutathione to the nucleus, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 2956–2960.

