From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.

l l l THROMBOSIS AND HEMOSTASIS

Comment on Verhenne et al, page 1715

Platelet-derived VWF
in
the stroke spotlight
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Veronica H. Flood

MEDICAL COLLEGE OF WISCONSIN

In this issue of Blood, Verhenne et al present data showing the role of
platelet-derived von Willebrand factor (VWF) in mediating ischemic stroke injury
using a murine model.1 They created mice with either endothelial VWF or
platelet-derived VWF and examined each phenotype for bleeding and thrombosis.
Their intriguing ﬁndings were that mice lacking platelet-derived VWF, but
with adequate endothelial VWF stores, demonstrated normal hemostasis in
a tail bleeding model and normal carotid artery thrombosis. Mice with only
platelet-derived VWF had defective hemostasis and defective carotid artery
thrombosis, but experienced signiﬁcant cerebral infarction using a stroke model
with middle cerebral artery occlusion (see ﬁgure). In contrast, minimal infarcts
were seen for VWF-deﬁcient mice. These data suggest that platelet-derived
VWF plays a speciﬁc role in stroke pathology.

V

WF is synthesized in both endothelial
cells and megakaryocytes. Release of
VWF from endothelial cells provides a supply
of plasma VWF to participate in coagulation,
fulﬁlling VWF’s purpose as a carrier protein
for factor VIII and as a link between exposed
collagen and platelets via binding sites for
various vascular collagens as well as platelet
glycoprotein Ib (GPIb). VWF is also stored in
platelet a granules for potential release at sites
of injury. The relative importance of these
2 pools of VWF, however, has not been well

studied, and based on current data, there
may be signiﬁcant differences in their roles.
Supporting evidence for the lack of necessity
for platelet-derived VWF in routine
hemostasis and thrombosis is provided by
Kanaji et al,2 who also demonstrated that
endothelial VWF was sufﬁcient, although
in their model, platelet-derived VWF did
provide some beneﬁt as well.
These data raise the question of what makes
platelet-derived VWF so special, and what
characteristics impart this stroke-speciﬁc

Platelet-derived VWF mediates ischemic stroke injury. This figure shows representative coronal brain sections 24 hours
after induction of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in wild-type mice (WT), mice completely lacking VWF (VWF KO),
mice expressing VWF only in platelets (VWF PLT), and mice expressing VWF only in endothelial cells (VWF EC). White
indicates areas of infarct; pink shows unaffected brain tissue. This figure has been modified from Figure 4A in the article by
Verhenne et al that begins on page 1715. Professional illustration by Luk Cox, Somersault18:24.

1640

phenotype? Platelet-derived VWF has
a different glycosylation proﬁle, different
afﬁnities for platelet surface receptors, and
different multimer distribution, with
preferential expression of high molecular
weight multimers. Differential glycosylation
of platelet-derived VWF may explain
many of these ﬁndings.3 The pathological
consequences of ultralarge VWF multimers
are best illustrated in patients with
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
where a microangiopathic anemia and
thrombocytopenia result in part from lack
of ADAMTS13 cleavage of these ultralarge
multimers and subsequent activation of
the alternate complement pathway.4
Platelet binding to VWF can also occur
via a binding site on VWF for platelet
GPIIbIIIa, and abrogation of that interaction
results in decreased time to vessel occlusion
in a ferric chloride model.5 However, GPIb
appears to be the major mechanism for
platelet-VWF interactions in general and
for platelet-derived VWF pathology in
stroke speciﬁcally. Verhenne et al use an
anti-GPIba antibody in their stroke model
and show a corresponding reduction in the
effect of platelet-derived VWF, as would be
expected if GPIb is the major driver in this
interaction.1
Platelets themselves have been implicated
in stroke, with aspirin playing a key role in
treatment and prevention.6 The paradigm in
which antiplatelet agents are used, however,
has generally been that of preventing platelet
aggregation rather than preventing release of
prothrombotic VWF. Mice deﬁcient in VWF
present with decreased infarct size and less
neurologic changes compared with WT mice,7
and humans with von Willebrand disease
have a reduced prevalence of stroke and other
arterial thromboses.8 Although elevated VWF
levels have clearly been associated with arterial
thrombosis and stroke, there is also some
evidence that ADAMTS13 plays a role, with
lower ADAMTS13 levels corresponding to
higher stroke risk.9 The association between
stroke and ADAMTS13 could be explained by
the increase in high-molecular-weight VWF
multimers seen in ADAMTS13 deﬁciency.
The data on platelet-derived VWF and
stroke are somewhat limited in terms of the
models used. Tail bleeding times, although
routinely used to assess hemostasis in mouse
models, do not necessarily readily correlate
to human hemostasis. Ferric chloride models,

BLOOD, 1 OCTOBER 2015 x VOLUME 126, NUMBER 14

From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.

although again in routine use, present
a decidedly nonphysiologic challenge.
Stroke can occur through multiple
mechanisms, with varying degrees of
dependence on coagulation factors,
platelets, and platelet-derived VWF. The
experiments described by Verhenne et al,
however, do document a clear role for
platelet-derived VWF that is speciﬁc to
ischemic stroke injury.
The insights provided by Verhenne et al
raise more questions than they answer. Mice
are certainly not humans, and therefore their
model requires further study to understand
whether or not this pathophysiology is
replicated beyond the murine setting.
Human and murine VWFs are also not
identical. All strokes are not created equal,
and platelet-derived VWF may not be
relevant in all settings. However, these data
do provide an intriguing base for further
study of platelet-derived VWF and lend
credence to its importance in particular aspects
of hemostasis. Plasma VWF has received
much attention, in part due to the fact that
it is relatively easy to measure. It is only fair
that platelet-derived VWF enjoy its role in
the spotlight, and perhaps this will yield
improved understanding of hemostasis and
improved therapies for disease in which
platelet-derived VWF plays a key role.
Conﬂict-of-interest disclosure: V.H.F. has
served as a consultant for Baxter. n

7. Kleinschnitz C, De Meyer SF, Schwarz T,
et al. Deﬁciency of von Willebrand factor protects
mice from ischemic stroke. Blood. 2009;113(15):
3600-3603.
8. Sanders YV, Eikenboom J, de Wee EM, et al; WiN
Study Group. Reduced prevalence of arterial thrombosis in
von Willebrand disease. J Thromb Haemost. 2013;11(5):
845-854.

9. Sonneveld MAH, de Maat MPM, Leebeek FWG. Von
Willebrand factor and ADAMTS13 in arterial thrombosis:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood Rev. 2014;
28(4):167-178.
DOI 10.1182/blood-2015-08-661439
© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology

l l l TRANSPLANTATION

Comment on Weber et al, page 1723

How’s your microbiota?
Let’s
check your urine.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Robert R. Jenq

MEMORIAL SLOAN KETTERING CANCER CENTER

In this issue of Blood, Weber and colleagues demonstrate that in the ﬁrst 10 days
following allogeneic hematopoietic transplantation, urinary 3-indoxyl sulfate
is a biomarker of intestinal microbiota health and predicts reduced intestinal
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and treatment-related mortality, as well as
improved overall survival.1

REFERENCES
1. Verhenne S, Denorme F, Libbrecht S, et al.
Platelet-derived VWF is not essential for normal
thrombosis and hemostasis but fosters ischemic
stroke injury in mice. Blood. 2015;126(14):1715-1722.
2. Kanaji S, Fahs SA, Shi Q, Haberichter SL,
Montgomery RR. Contribution of platelet
vs. endothelial VWF to platelet adhesion and
hemostasis. J Thromb Haemost. 2012;10(8):
1646-1652.
3. McGrath RT, van den Biggelaar M, Byrne B, et al.
Altered glycosylation of platelet-derived von Willebrand
factor confers resistance to ADAMTS13 proteolysis.
Blood. 2013;122(25):4107-4110.
4. Turner N, Sartain S, Moake J. Ultralarge von
Willebrand factor-induced platelet clumping and activation
of the alternative complement pathway in thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura and the hemolytic-uremic
syndromes. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2015;29(3):
509-524.
5. Marx I, Christophe OD, Lenting PJ, et al. Altered
thrombus formation in von Willebrand factor-deﬁcient
mice expressing von Willebrand factor variants with
defective binding to collagen or GPIIbIIIa. Blood. 2008;
112(3):603-609.
6. Sandercock PA, Counsell C, Tseng MC, Cecconi E.
Oral antiplatelet therapy for acute ischaemic stroke.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;3:CD000029.

Urinary 3-indoxyl sulfate generation. Orally ingested proteins are enzymatically cleaved to produce tryptophan, which is then
metabolized by tryptophanase-expressing intestinal bacteria into indole and absorbed by the intestinal tract. Microsomal
enzymes in the liver then process indole into 3-indoxyl sulfate, which is excreted into the urine and can be quantified by liquid
chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Professional illustration by Ken Probst, Xavier Studio.

BLOOD, 1 OCTOBER 2015 x VOLUME 126, NUMBER 14

1641

From www.bloodjournal.org by guest on October 4, 2016. For personal use only.

2015 126: 1640-1641
doi:10.1182/blood-2015-08-661439

Platelet-derived VWF in the stroke spotlight
Veronica H. Flood

Updated information and services can be found at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/content/126/14/1640.full.html
Articles on similar topics can be found in the following Blood collections
Free Research Articles (4076 articles)
Information about reproducing this article in parts or in its entirety may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#repub_requests
Information about ordering reprints may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/misc/rights.xhtml#reprints
Information about subscriptions and ASH membership may be found online at:
http://www.bloodjournal.org/site/subscriptions/index.xhtml

Blood (print ISSN 0006-4971, online ISSN 1528-0020), is published weekly by the American Society
of Hematology, 2021 L St, NW, Suite 900, Washington DC 20036.
Copyright 2011 by The American Society of Hematology; all rights reserved.

