MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 11: 4109-4114, 2015

Early metabolic changes following ischemia onset in rats:
An in vivo diffusion-weighted imaging and 1H-magnetic
resonance spectroscopy study at 7.0 T
GEN YAN1,2, ZHUOZHI DAI2,3, YINGHUA XUAN4 and RENHUA WU2,3
1

Department of Radiology, Affiliated Hospital, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214062;
Department of Radiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Shantou University Medical College;
3
Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Imaging, Shantou, Guangdong 515041;
4
Department of Basic Medicine, Jiangnan University Medical School, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122, P.R. China
2

Received March 13, 2014; Accepted January 2, 2015
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3283
Abstract. Despite improvements in imaging techniques, it
remains challenging to quantitatively assess the time of ischemic onset of an acute ischemic stroke. It is crucial to evaluate
the early signs of infarction, which are predictive of responses
to recombinant tissue plasminogen activator within a treatment
window of 4.5 h after stroke induction. The aim of the present
study was to assess and quantify the onset time for hyperacute
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) ischemic stroke by
measuring the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) of diffusion‑weighted imaging (DWI) and 1H‑magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS) at 7.0 T. DWI, conventional T2‑weighted
imaging (T2WI) and subsequent focal ADCs were employed
to evaluate ischemic brain lesions in a rat model of MCAO
(n=20) at different time‑points following a stroke. A quantitation of local changes in metabolite concentrations within the
lesions was performed using MRS. Proton metabolites were
quantified automatically using LCModel software. At 30 min
after MCAO, intense signals were observed in the DWI spectra
of all animals. No abnormal signal was observed within 3 h by
T2WI. ADC images of the central area, peripheral striping and
on the fringes of the infarction demonstrated a lower signal
than that of the normal side. The ADC decreased significantly
within 30 min after infarction, followed by a gradual elevation
in volatility levels and then becoming relatively stable at a lower
level 3 h later. MRS exhibited a consistent elevation of lactate
and reduced N‑acetyl aspartic acid. Glutamate and taurine
reached a maximum 2 h after MCAO and began to decrease
1 h later. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that

Correspondence to: Professor Renhua Wu, Department of

Radiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Shantou University
Medical College, 22 Dongxiabei Road, Shantou, Guangdong 515041,
P.R. China
E‑mail: rhwu@stu.edu.cn

Key words: magnetic resonance spectroscopy, diffusion-weighted
imaging, ischemic stroke, time window

hyperacute ischemic stroke can be quantitatively detected with
the application of ADC, DWI and MRS. These methods may
also be used to quantitatively assess the ischemic onset time of
a hyperacute stroke.
Introduction
As the development of therapeutics for ischemic injury
continues, brain imaging is taking an increasingly important
role in the initial evaluation of patients with acute stroke (1).
Exclusion of cerebral hemorrhage by computed tomography
(CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is necessary for
any acute intervention in ischemic stroke (1,2). At present, the
American Heart Association Stroke Council recommend the
administration of intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen
activator (rtPA) within a 4.5-h thrombolytic therapy time
window for patients with acute ischemic stroke (2,3). Despite
its potential effectiveness, no objective assessment or quantitative criteria exist to evaluate factors governing the 4.5-h time
window. Intracranial hemorrhage remains the major risk of
intravenous rtPA treatment (2).
With the potential of rtPA treatment, interest in using CT
to identify the preliminary changes of ischemic brain injury
(early infarct signs) or arterial occlusion (hyperdense vessel
signs), which may affect treatment decisions is increasing. In
addition, sulcal effacement and loss of gray‑white differentiation in the cortical ribbon (particularly at the lateral margins
of the insula) or lentiform nucleus can often be detected
within 6 h in up to 82% of patients with large‑vessel anterior
circulation occlusions (4). Such symptoms often result in
poorer outcomes (5). Standard MRI sequences (T1 weighted,
T2 weighted and proton density) often do not reveal changes
resulting from acute ischemia (6,7). The mismatch between
magnetic resonance (MR), diffusion‑weighted imaging (DWI)
and perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI) in the visualization
of the penumbra has been suggested to guide thrombolytic
therapy. However, several studies have indicated that, at least
under certain circumstances, the initial diffusion abnormality
is reversible and that visually thresholded perfusion volumes
overestimate the penumbra (8,9). Sequential MRI studies

4110

YAN et al: AN in vivo DWI AND 1H-MRS STUDY AT 7.0 T

Figure 1. Slices of (A) T2‑weighted image, (B) DWI and (C) ADC map of a rat 10 min after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Hyperintense lesions in the right corpus
striatum and parietal cortex are clearly identified on DWI, and a corresponding reduction in ADC values (hypointense) was observed on the ADC map, whereas
no lesion signs were observed on the T2‑weighted image acquired 10 min after ischemia onset. ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; DWI, diffusion‑weighted
imaging.

performed on patients treated with thrombolytic therapy
have revealed that an MRI may visualize the salvaged
mismatch‑defined penumbral tissue in smaller volumes of
infarction among patients with successful recanalization (9).
It is well known that diffusion MRI and proton MR spectroscopy (MRS) can evaluate early metabolite alterations in
acute stroke in humans and animals (10). Several studies have
demonstrated that MRI is the modality of choice for studies
of early stroke brain injury in humans (11) and in a rat middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model (12). MR-based
DWI is sensitive to changes in the magnitude and direction
of water diffusion. Numerous studies have demonstrated that
the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), a parameter derived
from DWI, is reduced in the hyperacute phase of an ischemic
event, resulting from the influx of water from the extracellular space into the intracellular space (13,14). Proton MRS
can provide information on the severity of ischemic injury
by measuring the levels of metabolites following cerebral
ischemia (15). In particular, a decrease in N‑acetyl‑aspartate
(NAA) has been observed to correlate with neuronal loss
and is a predictor of outcome following stroke and traumatic
brain injury (16). Recent studies on ischemic mice or human
patients with traumatic brain injury revealed that important
metabolite concentration changes occurred prior to the
appearance of abnormalities and which could not be detected
by MRI (17), suggesting that MRS is better at detecting early
tissue damage or compromised cell function. Following the
progression of ischemic injury, proton MRS may be a valuable
tool for providing information on the timing and pattern of
acute metabolic changes, as increased quantities of lactate are
detected in the early stages of stroke and are prognostic (18).
In the present study, a rat model of MCAO was used to
continuously assess and quantify brain alterations at 1‑h
intervals within the first 3 h after stroke onset using multiparametric MRI. The early neurochemical changes in ischemic
brain tissue and their role in early ischemic damage in vivo
were further investigated.

Materials and methods
Animal model. Adult male Sprague‑Dawley rats, aged
7‑8 weeks old and weighing 250‑280 g, were used in all
experiments. Rats were obtained from the Shantou University
Medical College Laboratory Animal Center (Shantou, China).
The animals were housed under standard laboratory conditions
with a 12‑h light/dark cycle at a room temperature of 24±1˚C
and a relative humidity of 45±5%. All experimental procedures were approved by the Care of Experimental Animals
Committee of Shantou University (Shantou, China) and were
performed in accordance with their guidelines. Permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion (pMCAO) was induced
using a previously described method of intraluminal vascular
occlusion (19). Rats subjected to pMCAO were subjected to a
consistent and reproducible ischemic lesion in the unilateral
striatum and cortex. Briefly, a 20-mm incision was made at
the center of the neck and the right common carotid artery,
external carotid artery (ECA) and internal carotid artery
(ICA) were exposed under an operating microscope (SXP‑1C;
Shanghai Medical Equipment Co., Shanghai, China). The ECA
and ICA were temporarily clamped using microsurgical clips.
A 5‑0 silk suture was tied loosely at the origin of the ECA and
ligated at the distal end of the ECA. A length of 4‑0 monofilament nylon suture (18.5‑19.5 mm), determined by the animal's
weight and with its tip rounded by heating near a flame, was
introduced into the ECA lumen through a small puncture.
The silk suture surrounding the ECA origin was tightened
around the intraluminal nylon suture to prevent bleeding and
the microsurgical clips were removed. The nylon suture was
gently advanced from the ECA into the lumen of the ICA until
it blocked the origin of the MCA. Immediately following the
occlusion, the rat was positioned in an animal holder equipped
with a birdcage radio frequency coil manufactured in house.
MRI and localized proton MR spectroscopy acquisition. For
in vivo MRI and 1H MRS, animals were initially anesthetized

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 11: 4109-4114, 2015

4111

Figure 2. Alterations in the ADC values in damaged areas within 3 h of ischemia onset. The ADC significantly decreased in all damaged areas at 0.5 and
2.5 h after ischemia onset. At each time-point, the ischemic area exhibited gradually reduced ADC values from the periphery to the center (3, center). ADC,
apparent diffusion coefficient.

A

B

C

D

Figure 3. 1H‑MRS of a normal rat and 1H‑MRS of a rat with MCAO 1 h after the onset of ischemia. (A) In vivo 1H‑NMR spectra acquired from the corresponding
brain regions. (B) Multislice diffusion‑weighted axial images of the brain of a rat with MCAO with the volumes of interest centered in the ischemic lesion
regions. Representative spectra were obtained from the ischemic lesion regions of each group (3.5x3.5x3.5 mm) and were fitted using the LCModel. Spectra
were acquired with an ultra‑short echo‑stimulated echo acquisition pulse sequence (echo time/repetition time/average=2/5,000/160). (C) 1H‑MRS of the brain
of a normal rat and (D) 1H‑MRS of the brain of a rat with MCAO 1 h after ischemia onset. The Lac peak (1.33 ppm) was significantly higher and its area was
larger in the MRS of the rat with MCAO, while the NAA peak (2.02 ppm) was lower and its area was smaller as compared to that in the MRS of the normal rat.
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; Lac, lactate; NAA, N‑acetyl aspartate.

using a chamber pervaded with 5% isoflurane (Sigma‑Aldrich,
St.  Louis, MO, USA) in oxygen. Subsequently, the mice
were anesthetized through a mask by spontaneous inhalation of 1.5‑2.0% isoflurane and air using an anesthesia unit.
Anesthetized rats were placed in the prone position with the
head ﬁrmly ﬁxed on a palate holder equipped with an adjustable nose cone. MR imaging was performed on 12 animals
using a 7.0 T horizontal DriveDrive 2 MR system (Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with a 160-mm bore
magnet and a 400 mT/m actively shielded gradient coil. For
proton spectra signal excitation and reception, a dedicated
animal brain surface coil (20  mm, 157‑350  MHz, Agilent
Technologies) was used.

A scout view was initially obtained to verify the animal's
position and the image quality. T2 weighted images (sequence,
rapid acquisition with a relaxation enhancement; repetition
time (TR)/echo time (TE), 2,000/48 ms; number of acquisitions,
4; slice thickness, 1.0 mm; matrix, 192x192) were obtained.
Diffusion‑weighted indices were acquired from a multi‑shot
fast spin‑echo trace sequence (TR, 3,000 ms; TE, 36 ms; b,
1,000 s/mm2; Δ,14.65 ms; duration, 5 ms, average, 4; matrix,
128x128). In vivo proton spectra volumes of interest (VOI) were
positioned in regions with ischemic lesions (3.5x3.5x3.5 mm)
based on multi‑slice axial diffusion‑weighted images. The VOI
was adjusted to minimize intracranial lipid contamination.
Localized shimming in the VOI was performed automatically

4112

YAN et al: AN in vivo DWI AND 1H-MRS STUDY AT 7.0 T

Figure 4. 1H‑MRS of a rat with MCAO 1, 2 and 3 h after the onset of ischemia. Taurine and glutamate concentrations in the ischemic regions at different
time-points following MCAO are shown. Error bars indicate the standard deviation (n=10/group). *P<0.05 vs. 1 and 3 h post ischemia. MCAO, middle cerebral
artery occlusion; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

based on three dimensional field mapping, leading to a water
line width ranging from 15 to 20 Hz. An ultra short echo time
stimulated echo acquisition pulse sequence was used for acquisition of the proton spectra in the VOI (TR/mixing time/TE,
5,000/12.72/2.35  ms; spectral width, 5,000  Hz; number of
excitations, 160; scan time, 13 min). The water signal from
the VOI was suppressed by variable power radio frequency
pulses with optimized relaxation delays. To compensate for
eddy currents, a water reference scan was acquired, which also
served as an internal reference for absolute quantification.
In vivo proton spectra were analyzed using the
LCModel  6.3‑1B software (LCModel Inc., Oakville, ON,
Canada) (20), which calculates the best fit to the experimental
spectrum as a linear combination of model spectra (simulated
spectra of brain metabolites). Raw data free induction decays
were used as the standard data input. The water‑suppressed
time domain data were analyzed between 0.2 and 4.0 ppm
without further T1 or T2 correction. The following 17 metabolites were included in the basis set: Alanine (Ala), aspartate
(Asp), creatinine (Cr), γ‑aminobutyric acid (GABA), glucose
(Glc), glutamate (Glu), glutamine (Gln), glutathione (GSH),
glycerophosphorylcholine (GPC), phosphorylcholine (PCho),
myo‑ionositol (mIns), lactate (Lac), N‑acetyl aspartate (NAA),
N‑acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), phosphocreatine (PCr),
scyllo‑inositol (Scy) and taurine (Tau). In addition, macromolecules were also included in the basis set. To obtain more reliable
results, only the sums of metabolites (NAA+NAAG, Glu+Gln,
GPC+PCho and Cr+PCr) were estimated. The other metabolites,
including mIns and Tau, were individually quantified.
The standard error estimates and Cramer Rao lower bounds
(CRLBs) were used to provide useful estimates of reliability
and uncertainty for each metabolite peak in the LCModel
spectra (20). CRLBs have been used to provide acceptable
reliability for estimates of ﬁtting uncertainty.
Statistical analysis. The SPSS software package version 12.01
(SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for statistical analysis.
Data for each metabolite were assessed for homogeneity of
variance and a one‑way analysis of variance with a Bonferroni
post hoc test was used to compare the means of the metabolite
ratios for each time-point group. P<0.05 was considered to
indicate a statistically significant difference.

Figure 5. Magnetic resonance‑based method to predict the onset time of
ischemic lesions in animal models. Green (short‑duration ischemia without
a lesion) and orange bars (short‑duration ischemia with a lesion) represent
the period during which an abnormality was detected by the corresponding
technique. DWI, diffusion‑weighted imaging; NAA, N‑acetyl aspartate; Lac,
lactate; Glu, glutamate; Tau, taurine; ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient;
T2WI, T2‑weighted imaging.

Results
For all 20 MCAO rats, the infarct was not observable by T2WI
within 6 h from the onset of ischemia. However, abnormal
hyperintensity signals were observed by DWI in the striatum
and parietal cortex of all MCAO rats 10 min and 6 h after the
onset of ischemia. The ADC demonstrated abnormal, hypointense signals in the same area and at the same time-point (Fig. 1).
The baseline mean ADC was (7.573±0.553)x10 ‑4 mm 2/sec,
comparable to values previously reported  (21). At 30  min
after MCAO, the ADC decreased from (4.7571±1.423)x10 ‑4
to (5.7318±1.031)x10 ‑4 mm 2/sec. The ADC values increased
gradually from the center towards the periphery of the
damaged areas at the 0.5  h and 2.5  h time‑points. At 3  h
after the onset of ischemia, the ADC values were the same
across all areas (Fig. 2). Typical water‑suppressed proton MR
spectra of the rat brain from the region of the ischemic lesion
and the ipsilateral hemisphere (Fig. 3) represent the spectral
quality consistently achieved in the present study. Generally,
short echo time localization methods minimize T2 relaxation
effects, which increases the sensitivity and reliability of the
metabolite quantification (22). The high spectral resolution
allowed for unambiguous signal assignment. In addition to the

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 11: 4109-4114, 2015

commonly observed 1H-MRS signals of the methyl resonances
of NAA, Cr and Cho, spectral patterns of other metabolites,
including Glu, Gln, GABA, mIns and Tau were discernible in
the 1H‑MRS spectra with a CRLB ≤15% from the two brain
regions. The Lac peak was higher and the NAA peak lower in
the central damaged area than that on the contralateral side
at the 1 h time‑point for all 12 MCAO rats (Fig. 3). 1H‑MRS
for each time-point after the onset of ischemia are shown in
Fig. 4. Within the first 2 h, the concentrations of Glu and Tau
increased gradually and then decreased significantly in the
following 3 h (Fig. 4).
Discussion
High DWI signal intensities in the right corpus striatum and
parietal cortex of the Sprague‑Dawley rats were observed
following 30  min of middle cerebral artery occlusion in
the present study, but no intensity changes were observed
in the same regions by T 2WI, even after 6 h of occlusion.
The present finding was consistent with that of a previous
study (23). DWI is a highly sensitive and specific technique
for the early diagnosis of acute cerebral ischemia and is
currently in use for the diagnosis and decisions on therapy
of patients with stroke. Signal intensity in DWIs exhibited
little change during the first hour after symptom onset and
decreased thereafter, but all lesions remained hyperintense
throughout the follow‑up period. This pattern of signal
intensity on DWI was most likely the result of the effects
of two factors: Water diffusivity and intrinsic T 2  properties (T 2 shine‑through) of the tissue being examined (24).
Since the DWI signal remained high for a long period (up to
three days in the present study), it is not ideal for estimating
lesion age. However, the combined interpretation of T 2WI
and DWI may be insightful, as in cases where visual inspection of T2WI shows normal results while DWI shows highly
abnormal signals, the stroke lesion age can be estimated as
6 h or less.
ADC is a parameter used for the quantitative assessment
of the extent and severity of cerebral ischemic injury (13).
A severe ADC decline in energy‑depleted tissue can be
explained by anoxic depolarization during MCAO, leading
to an intracellular Na+ accumulation and water shift from
the extracellular to the intracellular space (cytotoxic edema).
Quantitative ADC voxel compartmental analysis revealed
heterogeneity in the spatial‑temporal profile of the ischemic
penumbra and infarction. The ADC increased gradually
from the center to the periphery of the damaged area at
the 0.5 h and 2.5 h time-points after permanent MCAO.
However, 3 h after the onset of ischemia, the ADC values
were equivalent across the entire region. The present results
indicated that an ADC map may provide useful information
regarding the age of ischemic lesions at 3 h. These results
provided a novel method to evaluate lesion age in a rat
model of MCAO model, while previous methods were not
sufficient to adequately and accurately characterize these
conditions (14). Predictive algorithms also have the potential
to serve as promising metrics for screening thrombolytics for
acute ischemic stroke (4).
Glu is an excitatory neurotransmitter, which stimulates
postsynaptic neurons, whereas GABA and Tau are inhibitory

4113

neurotransmitters that reduce the excitability of neurons. The
homeostasis of the metabolism of Glu and GABA is usually
dependent on the interaction between neurons and astrocytes
under physiological conditions. Previous studies revealed
that the concentrations of Glu, GABA and Tau decreased
concurrently 4 and 8 h after MCAO, respectively (25,26). In
the present study, the extracellular content of excitatory amino
acids (Glu and Asp) and inhibitory amino acids (GABA and
Tau) reached a maximum in rats 1‑2 h after MCAO and began
to decrease 3  h after MCAO, which was consistent with a
previous study (27). Increases in extracellular Glu may lead
to cell death by excitotoxicity, and therefore, it may be vital
to detect Glu in patients with stroke in order to make prompt
treatment decisions. The methods developed in the present
study provide tools for screening patients for thrombolytic
therapy. Combined analysis of DWI infarct size and location
may provide important information about when Glu and Tau
are at their highest levels, which may be used for selecting
treatments for acute MCAO ischemic stroke within 2 h of
onset.
These MR‑based findings provide a relatively accurate
method to predict the age of acute ischemic lesions in animal
models (Fig. 5). Indeed, the final goal of our ongoing studies
is to assess whether combined T2WI, ADC and MRS can be
used for early diagnosis and to determine the onset time of
acute ischemic stroke in human patients. Further studies are
required to extend the present findings to humans. Precise
knowledge of the onset time of thrombolytic stroke is important, but there are difficult questions based on the definition
of acute ischemic stroke. The MR‑based methods described
in the present study are more objective than relying solely on
the traditional image reading methods used by radiologists to
estimate acute ischemic stroke lesion age and to select patients
for treatment trials.
In conclusion, hyperacute cerebral infarction can be sensitively and specifically detected with the application of ADC
on DWI and MRS. MR‑based methods may also be used to
quantitatively assess the ischemic onset time of hyperacute
ischemic stroke. Objective and quantitative assessments of
lesion age in hyperacute ischemic stroke are useful parameters
for the identification of potential therapies in clinical trials and
individualized treatments for stroke patients.
Acknowledgements
The present study was supported in part by a grant from
The National Natural Science Foundation of China
(grant no. 30930027) and a postdoctoral research fellowship
from the Li Ka Shing foundation.
References
 1.	Adams HP Jr, del Zoppo G, Alberts MJ, et al: Guidelines for the
early management of adults with ischemic stroke. Circulation 115:
e478‑e534, 2007.
 2.	Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP, et al: Guidelines for the early
management of patients with acute ischemic stroke a guideline
for healthcare professionals from the american heart association/American stroke association. Stroke 44: 870‑947, 2013.
  3.	Cho KH, Ko SB, Kim DH, et al: Focused update of Korean
clinical practice guidelines for the thrombolysis in acute stroke
management. J Korean Stroke 14: 95‑105, 2012.

4114

YAN et al: AN in vivo DWI AND 1H-MRS STUDY AT 7.0 T

 4.	Moulin T, Cattin F, Crepin‑Leblond T, et al: Early CT signs
in acute middle cerebral artery infarction Predictive value
for subsequent infarct locations and outcome. Neurology 47:
366‑375, 1996.
 5.	Von Kummer R, Allen KL, Holle R, et al: Acute stroke:
usefulness of early CT findings before thrombolytic therapy.
Radiology 205: 327‑333, 1997.
 6.	Mohr JP, Biller J, Hilal SK, et al: Magnetic resonance versus
computed tomographic imaging in acute stroke. Stroke 26:
807‑812, 1995.
 7.	Lee DH, Kang DW, Ahn JS, Choi CG, Kim SJ and Suh DC:
Imaging of the ischemic penumbra in acute stroke. Korean J
Radiol 6: 64‑74, 2005.
 8.	Sobesky  J, Zaro Weber  Oz, Lehnhardt  F, et al: Does the
mismatch match the penumbra? Magnetic resonance imaging
and positron emission tomography in early ischemic stroke.
Stroke 36: 980‑985, 2005.
 9.	Kidwell CS, Alger JR and Saver JL: Beyond mismatch evolving
paradigms in imaging the ischemic penumbra with multimodal
magnetic resonance imaging. Stroke 34: 2729‑2735, 2003.
10.	Hacke W, Albers G, Al‑Rawi Y, et al: The desmoteplase in acute
ischemic stroke trial (DIAS) a phase II MRI‑based 9‑h window
acute stroke thrombolysis trial with intravenous desmoteplase.
Stroke 36: 66‑73, 2005.
11.	 Kertesz A, Black SE, Nicholson L and Carr T: The sensitivity
and specificity of MRI in stroke. Neurology 37: 1580‑1580, 1987.
12.	Baird AE and Warach S: Magnetic resonance imaging of acute
stroke. J Cerebr Blood F Metab 18: 583‑609, 1998.
13.	Warach S, Gaa J, Siewert B, Wielopolski P and Edelman RR:
Acute human stroke studied by whole brain echo planar
diffusion‑weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Ann Neurol 37:
231‑241, 1995.
14.	Kim Jh, Na DG, Chang KH, et al: Serial MR analysis of early
permanent and transient ischemia in rats: diffusion tensor
imaging and high b value diffusion weighted imaging. Korean J
Radiol 14: 307‑315, 2013.
15.	Parsons MW, Barber PA, Desmond PM, et al: Acute hyperglycemia adversely affects stroke outcome: a magnetic resonance
imaging and spectroscopy study. Ann neurol 52: 20‑28, 2002.

16.	Gilla rd  J H, Ba rker  PB, Van  Zijl  C, Br yan  R N and
Oppenheimer SM: Proton MR spectroscopy in acute middle
cerebral artery stroke. AJNR 17: 873‑886, 1996.
17.	Berthet C, Lei H, Gruetter R and Hirt L: Early predictive
biomarkers for lesion after transient cerebral ischemia. Stroke 42:
799‑805, 2011.
18.	Cvoro V, Wardlaw JM, Marshall I, et al: Associations between
diffusion and perfusion parameters, N‑acetyl aspartate and
lactate in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 40: 767‑772, 2009.
19.	Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R: Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20: 84‑91, 1989.
20.	Provencher SW: Automatic quantitation of localized in vivo 1H
spectra with LCModel. NMR Biomed 14: 260‑264, 2001.
21.	Neumann‑Haefelin T, Kastrup A, de Crespigny A, et al: Serial
MRI after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats: dynamics of
tissue injury, blood‑brain barrier damage and edema formation.
Stroke 31: 1965‑1972; discussion 1972‑1963, 2000.
22.	Pfeuffer J, Provencher SW and Gruetter R: Water diffusion in rat
brain in vivo as detected at very largeb values is multicompartmental. MAGMA 8: 98‑108, 1999.
23.	Sicard KM, Henninger N, Fisher M, Duong TQ and Ferris CF:
Differential recovery of multimodal MRI and behavior after
transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. J Cerebr Blood F
Met 26: 1451‑1462, 2006.
24.	Le Bihan D, Breton E, Lallemand D, Grenier P, Cabanis E and
Laval‑Jeantet M: MR imaging of intravoxel incoherent motions:
application to diffusion and perfusion in neurologic disorders.
Radiology 161: 401‑407, 1986.
25.	Pascual JM, Carceller F, Roda JM and Cerdán S: Glutamate,
glutamine and GABA as substrates for the neuronal and glial
compartments after focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Stroke 29:
1048‑1057, 1998.
26.	al‑Nazhan  S, Andreasen  JO, al‑Bawardi  S and al‑Rouq  S:
Evaluation of the effect of delayed management of traumatized
permanent teeth. J Endod 21: 391‑393, 1995.
27.	Graham SH, Chen J, Sharp FR and Simon RP: Limiting ischemic
injury by inhibition of excitatory amino acid release. J Cerebr
Blood F Metab 13: 88‑97, 1993.

