12446 • The Journal of Neuroscience, September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Neurobiology of Disease

In Vivo Inhibition of miR-155 Promotes Recovery after
Experimental Mouse Stroke
Ernesto Caballero-Garrido,1 Juan Carlos Pena-Philippides,1 XTamar Lordkipanidze,2 Denis Bragin,1 Yirong Yang,3
Erik Barry Erhardt,4 and X Tamara Roitbak1
1

Department of Neurosurgery, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, 2Ilia State University, 0162 Tbilisi,
Georgia, and 3BRaIN Imaging Center and College of Pharmacy and 4Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque,
New Mexico 87131

A multifunctional microRNA, miR-155, has been recently recognized as an important modulator of numerous biological processes. In
our previous in vitro studies, miR-155 was identified as a potential regulator of the endothelial morphogenesis. The present study
demonstrates that in vivo inhibition of miR-155 supports cerebral vasculature after experimental stroke. Intravenous injections of a
specific miR-155 inhibitor were initiated at 48 h after mouse distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (dMCAO). Microvasculature in
peri-infarct area, infarct size, and animal functional recovery were assessed at 1, 2, and 3 weeks after dMCAO. Using in vivo two-photon
microscopy, we detected improved blood flow and microvascular integrity in the peri-infarct area of miR-155 inhibitor-injected mice.
Electron microscopy revealed that, in contrast to the control group, these animals demonstrated well preserved capillary tight junctions
(TJs). Western blot analysis data indicate that improved TJ integrity in the inhibitor-injected animals could be associated with stabilization of the TJ protein ZO-1 and mediated by the miR-155 target protein Rheb. MRI analysis showed significant (34%) reduction of infarct
size in miR-155 inhibitor-injected animals at 21 d after dMCAO. Reduced brain injury was confirmed by electron microscopy demonstrating decreased neuronal damage in the peri-infarct area of stroke. Preservation of brain tissue was reflected in efficient functional
recovery of inhibitor-injected animals. Based on our findings, we propose that in vivo miR-155 inhibition after ischemia supports brain
microvasculature, reduces brain tissue damage, and improves the animal functional recovery.
Key words: ischemia; microRNA; microvasculature; neuroprotection; regeneration; stroke

Significance Statement
In the present study, we investigated an effect of the in vivo inhibition of a microRNA, miR-155, on brain recovery after experimental cerebral ischemia. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing the efficiency of intravenous anti-miRNA injections
in a mouse model of ischemic stroke. The role of miRNAs in poststroke revascularization has been unexplored and in vivo
regulation of miRNAs during the subacute phase of stroke has not yet been proposed. Our investigation introduces a new and
unexplored approach to cerebral regeneration: regulation of poststroke angiogenesis and recovery through direct modulation of
specific miRNA activity. We expect that our findings will lead to the development of novel strategies for regulating neurorestorative processes in the postischemic brain.

Introduction
Stroke-induced cerebral endothelial injury and inflammation
impair endothelial function and thus increase cerebrovascular

Received April 28, 2015; revised July 22, 2015; accepted Aug. 6, 2015.
Author contributions: T.R. designed research; E.C.-G., J.C.P.-P., T.L., D.B., Y.Y., and T.R. performed research; T.R.
contributed unpublished reagents/analytic tools; E.C.-G., J.C.P.-P., T.L., D.B., Y.Y., E.B.E., and T.R. analyzed data; T.R.
wrote the paper.
This work was supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke–National Institutes of Health (Grants R21NS064185 and R01NS082225) and by a University of New Mexico (UNM) Behavioral Health BBI/CoBRE Research Award. We thank Gavin Picket and Jamie Padilla from the UNM KUGR
(Keck-UNM Genomics Resource) Affymetrix Facility for their help in miRNA analysis and Zurab Surviladze for
sharing his expertise in cell signaling pathways. Transmission electron microscopy imaging was performed in

permeability and blood– brain barrier (BBB) leakage, leading
to primary and secondary ischemic brain injury (del Zoppo et
al., 2003; Brouns et al., 2009). Functional recovery is highly
dependent on the effective restoration of blood supply to the
damaged but viable peri-infarct area (Navaratna et al., 2009).

the UNM Health Science Center Electron Microscopy Facility. Confocal images were generated in the UNM
Cancer Center Fluorescence Microscopy Facility.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Tamara Roitbak, Department of Neurosurgery, University of New
Mexico Health Sciences Center, 1101 Yale Blvd, Albuquerque, NM 87106-3834. E-mail: troitbak@salud.unm.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1641-15.2015
Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3512446-19$15.00/0

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

Therefore, extensive investigation has been concentrated on
poststroke vascularization with the aim of promoting the recovery process (Xiong et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2014).
Ischemic stroke induces significant changes in the gene profile
of the neurovascular elements (Carmichael, 2003; Liu et al.,
2007). microRNAs (miRNAs) are recently identified short
mRNA-interfering molecules that regulate gene expression and
thus significantly influence essential cellular processes (Kato et
al., 2008; Fabian et al., 2010). miRNAs control posttranscriptional gene expression in many tissues, including the brain; are
highly expressed in the vasculature; and serve as critical modulators for vascular cell functions (Suárez et al., 2007; Costa et al.,
2013; Pecot et al., 2013). Considerable changes in miRNA profiles
are associated with stroke at different perfusion times after experimental ischemia (Huang et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2010). Our previous studies demonstrated that miR-155 negatively regulates
proangiogenic signaling pathways in mouse brain endothelial
cells. Inhibition of miR-155 significantly enhanced, whereas
overexpression significantly inhibited, in vitro endothelial morphogenesis (Roitbak et al., 2011). We therefore speculated that
miR-155 could also coordinate vascular functions in vivo.
miR-155 has been implicated in regulating various physiological and pathological processes such as hematopoietic lineage
differentiation, immunity, inflammation, cancer, and cardiovascular diseases (Faraoni et al., 2009; O’Connell et al., 2010). miR155 is specifically expressed in hematopoietic cells and cells
involved in vascular remodeling, including B cells, T cells, monocytes, and granulocytes, as well as endothelial cells and smooth
muscle cells (Landgraf et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2012). miR-155
regulates the development of inflammatory T cells and promotes
tissue inflammation. Specific inhibition of this miRNA is accompanied by reduced inflammation, which makes it a promising
therapeutic target in proinflammatory conditions (KurowskaStolarska et al., 2011; Murugaiyan et al., 2011). Among other
functions, miR-155 is significantly associated with endothelial
and vascular function: its specific inhibition results in increased
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression and nitric
oxide (NO) production and reduction of vascular inflammation,
whereas overexpression alters endothelial cell morphology and
impedes endothelial cell migration (Sun et al., 2012; Weber et al.,
2014). miR-155 ⫺/⫺ mice also exhibit accelerated wound healing
processes, thus demonstrating an increased regeneration capacity
(van Solingen et al., 2014). Interestingly, miR-155 is among the
miRNAs significantly affected by cerebral ischemia (Liu et al.,
2010).
Systemic administration of the miRNA inhibitors and mimics
to regulate the activity of specific miRNAs had recently been
identified as attractive target for therapeutic intervention
(Linnstaedt et al., 2010; Zhang et al., 2013). In vivo regulation of
miRNA activity is expected to provide a future therapeutic
potential for the treatment of cancer and cardiovascular and
diseases (Shi et al., 2010; Moon et al., 2013); delivery of synthetic miRNAs and miRNA inhibitors to tumor tissue is already used in animal studies (Takeshita et al., 2010; Wiggins et
al., 2010).
A subacute phase of ischemia is associated with postischemic
vascular remodeling (Ding et al., 2008; Beck et al., 2009) and our
aim is to find a way to promote this natural regeneration
process. The present investigation introduces a novel approach to cerebral regeneration: regulation of the vascular
functions and overall recovery through direct modulation of
specific miRNA activity.

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12447

Materials and Methods
Animal groups. The experimental procedures were performed in accordance with the University of New Mexico Office of Animal Care Compliance. All institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of
laboratory animals were followed. Two-month-old C57BL/6 male mice
(Jackson Laboratories) were used in our experiments. In total, 120 mice
were subjected to the experimental cerebral ischemia; 59 were used for
the in vivo evaluation of cerebral blood flow and capillary density and
permeability and 22 were used for MRI-based evaluation of the brain
injury and cerebral perfusion. An additional 20 mice were used for the
pilot studies to assess the efficiency of miR-155 in vivo inhibition and for
sham surgeries. A total of 50 mice were used for the concomitant behavioral studies. Experimental groups included intact mice, sham-operated
mice, mice subjected to distal middle cerebral artery occlusion (dMCAO)
and specific miR-155 inhibitor injections (Inhibitor group), and mice
subjected to dMCAO and control (scrambled) miRNA inhibitor injections (Control group).
dMCAO procedure. dMCAO was used as an experimental model of
cortical ischemia (Kuraoka et al., 2009; Pena-Philippides et al., 2014).
This model produces an infarct in the frontal and parietal cortex, which
over time progresses into adjacent temporal, frontal, and cingulate cortex. In addition to its high reproducibility and survival rate, the advantage of this model is that it produces a smaller infarct comparable to
human stroke (Carmichael, 2005). In addition, dMCAO induces mostly
cortical ischemia and thus represents a convenient model for in vivo
imaging, which is limited by its depth penetration capacities. dMCAO
was performed on 2-month-old male C57BL/6 mice (Jones et al., 2008;
Kuraoka et al., 2009). The mice were anesthetized using isoflurane gas
(induction dosage 2–3%; maintenance dosage 1.5–2%) and a mixture of
O2:N2O gases in the ratio 2:1 delivered during the surgery. The middle
cerebral artery (MCA) was exposed via a transtemporal approach (Jones
et al., 2008; Kuraoka et al., 2009). A small burr hole (located 1 mm rostral
to the fusion of zygoma and squamosal bone and 3 mm ventral to the
parietal bone) was made on the left side of the skull surface and the MCA
was coagulated with low-heat electrocautery (Bovie Medical). In shamoperated animals, the MCA was exposed but not coagulated.
miRNA inhibitor injections. Our study used a novel, second-generationspecific inhibitor for miR-155, which has been recently developed by
Exiqon. Specific miRNA inhibitors are designed using novel locked nucleic acid (LNA) technology, which greatly increases the affinity of the
inhibitors for their target miRNAs and improves their resistance to enzymatic degradation. These features are especially important for the in
vivo studies because the oligonucleotides have high knock-down efficiency at low concentrations, which reduces the risk of negative and
off-target side effects. Injections of a specific anti-miR-155 miRCURY
LNA inhibitor or control inhibitor (scrambled oligonucleotide) from
Exiqon were initiated 48 h after dMCAO and performed for 3 consecutive days. Oligonucleotides were introduced via mouse lateral tail vein;
the dose was 10 mg/kg in saline, total injected volume was 100 ␮l.
In vivo two-photon laser scanning microscopy. In vivo two-photon laser
scanning microscopy (2PLSM) was performed 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO as described previously (Kleinfeld et al., 1998; Bragin et al., 2011).
Imaging was performed at the stereotactic coordinates 2 mm caudal and
2.5 mm lateral to bregma through the optical windows (1 mm 2) over
both lesioned and nonlesioned hemispheres. According to 2PLSM measurements and MRI performed 24 h after dMCAO, this region is characterized by reduced blood flow and is localized within ⬃400 ␮m from the
infarct border. Based on our own measurements and on the existing
literature, this region was defined as a peri-infarct area of stroke (Li et al.,
2008; Murphy et al., 2009; Ueno et al., 2012; López-Valdés et al., 2014).
An Olympus BX51WI upright microscope and water-immersion LUMPlan FL/IR 20⫻/0.50 W objective were used for the imaging. Excitation
(740 nm) was provided by a Prairie View Ultima multiphoton laser scan
unit powered by a Millennia Prime 10 W diode laser source pumping a
Tsunami Ti:sapphire laser (Spectra-Physics) tuned up to 810 nm center
wavelength. Images (512 ⫻ 512 pixels, 0.15 ␮m/pixel in the x- and
y-axes) or line scans were acquired using Prairie View software. Cranial
windows (1 mm in diameter) for the imaging were made at the stereo-

12448 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

tactic coordinates bregma ⫺2 mm and L 2.5 mm over both lesioned and
nonlesioned hemispheres.
Microvascular red blood cell (RBC) flow velocity was measured by the
line scan mode of 2PLSM. Blood plasma was labeled by the injection of
⬃100 ␮l of fluorescein-labeled dextran (70 kDa; Sigma-Aldrich) at an
initial concentration of 150 ␮M. Fluorescence was band-pass filtered at
500 –550 nm. A total of ⬃100 microvessels (2–50 ␮m diameter) per
hemisphere in an imaging volume of 500 ⫻ 500 ⫻ 300 ␮m ⫽ 0.075 mm 3
were scanned. A line scan through a microvessel led to a sequence of
alternating bright and dark diagonal bands in a space–time image corresponding to labeled fluorescent plasma and unlabeled dark RBCs and
slope of the stripes inversely reflects RBC velocity. The width, sharpness,
and angle of the dark bands representing the RBC motion, as well as the
distance between them, were evaluated to calculate the RBC flow velocity
in offline analyses using Rincon version 7.7 software.
Evaluation of microvessel density. The 3D anatomy of the vasculature in
the region of interest was reconstructed from z-series of 2D (planar)
scans (500 ⫻ 500 ␮m) obtained at consecutive depths in the cortex with
10 ␮m steps from brain surface to 300 ␮m in depth. In offline analyses
using ImageJ, the microvessel diameters were measured to differentiate
capillaries from other microvessels and density was quantified assuming
that one capillary is a microvessel from bifurcation to bifurcation. The
capillaries were identified by diameters (3– 8 ␮m) (Schiszler et al., 2000),
mean of ⬃5 ␮m (Motti et al., 1986; Seylaz et al., 1999), tortuosity, and
single-file RBCs (Hudetz et al., 1995; Hauck et al., 2004).
Microvascular BBB permeability. BBB permeability was evaluated by
measuring perivascular tissue fluorescence in planar images of the cortex
taken at 50 ␮m depth 30 min after fluorescein dextran injection, as
described previously (Bragin et al., 2011; Bragin et al., 2013). In offline
analyses using ImageJ, the fluorescence of five randomly chosen regions
of interest over the vessel areas and five to 10 areas over perivascular brain
parenchyma in both lesioned and nonlesioned/intact hemispheres were
measured. The obtained measurements in the interstitial space were normalized to the maximal fluorescence intensity in the blood vessels and
expressed as a percentage fluorescence intensity (modified from Egawa et
al., 2013). Thirty minutes after fluorescein-dextran injection in a healthy
brain, bright vessels filled with fluorescein-dextran are seen clearly over
the dark background of unstained tissue, reflecting intact BBB. Increased
perivascular tissue fluorescence due to fluorescein leakage from microvessels into the brain parenchyma indicates impaired BBB.
Electron microscopy. For electron microscopy (EM), mice were perfused with 0.5% glutaraldehyde, 2.5% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M Sorensen’s buffer. Cortical tissue (1⫻1 mm) was dissected from the areas
imaged during 2PLSM analysis (identified by the cranial window openings) from the hemisphere both ipsilateral and contralateral to ischemic
damage. Samples were fixed in 2% osmium, dehydrated, embedded in
Araldite, thin-sectioned to 80 –90 nm, and stained with 4% uranyl acetate
in methanol followed by lead citrate as described previously (Lippman et
al., 2008). Images were acquired using a Hitachi H7500 transmission
electron microscope equipped with an AMT X60 camera. Three to four
animals per experimental group (Control and Inhibitor) were used for
analysis; high-magnification (800 –15,000⫻) images were taken both in
the lesioned and intact hemispheres. The following analysis methods
were used for the ultastructural evaluation of capillaries and neurons.
To evaluate the vascular damage and TJ integrity 7 d after dMCAO,
205 capillaries (⬍8 ␮m in diameter) from the lesioned and unlesioned
hemispheres were imaged and analyzed. On average, 85– 87 capillaries/
group were evaluated in the lesioned hemispheres and 30 – 40 in the
intact hemispheres. Endothelial cell integrity, intracellular (inside the
endothelial cells and pericytes) and perivascular vacuoles, perivascular
astrocytic processes, and basal lamina were evaluated to assess microvascular damage. The major ultrastructural criterion for TJ integrity was an
existence of the intermediate dark (electron-dense) layer that is formed
by multilayered membrane units of the TJs (Castejón, 2012). Capillaries
with all intact TJs were considered normal/intact, whereas capillaries
with at least one partially or fully opened/disrupted TJ unit were considered partially opened or opened, respectively. In addition, 186 capillaries
from the lesioned and unlesioned hemispheres of both groups of animals

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

were imaged and analyzed for assessment of microvasculature 21 d after
dMCAO.
To evaluate neuronal damage 21 d after dMCAO, 430 neurons from
the lesioned and unlesioned hemispheres were imaged and analyzed.
On average, 172 neurons per group were evaluated in the lesioned
hemispheres of the Control and Inhibitor groups and 43 neurons/
group in the nonlesioned hemispheres of both groups. Major criteria
for neuronal damage evaluation were as follows: shape and integrity of
the nuclei, presence of intracellular vacuoles, mitochondrial swelling, ER
dilation and damage, chromatin accumulation, and overall cytoplasm
appearance.
MRI. T2-weighted MRI. Infarct size was evaluated using MRI at 24 h
and 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO using a 4.7 T Biospec dedicated research
MR scanner (Bruker) equipped with a single tuned surface coil for mouse
brain (RAPID Biomedical). The mice were anesthetized using isoflurane
gas (induction dosage 2–3%; maintenance dosage 1.5–2%) and a mixture
of O2:N2O gases in the ratio 2:1 delivered during the measurements.
Real-time monitoring of physiological parameters (heart rate and respiratory rate) was performed during the entire duration of the study. A
tri-pilot scan using gradient echo sequence was used to acquire initial
localizer images. T2-weighted MRI was performed with a fast spin-echo
sequence (RARE), TR/TE ⫽ 5000/56 ms, FOV ⫽ 4 cm ⫻ 4 cm, slice
thickness ⫽ 1 mm, interslice distance ⫽ 1 mm, number of slices ⫽ 12,
matrix ⫽ 256 ⫻ 256, number of average ⫽ 3.
Infarct volume was calculated based on the widely used method proposed previously (Swanson et al., 1990) using ImageJ analysis software.
The optical density threshold was determined for the gray matter in the
unlesioned control hemisphere in each slice and used for the recognition
of normal gray matter in the lesioned hemisphere. The areas of noninfarcted (normal) brain tissue were measured in nonlesioned intact ( I)
and lesioned ( L) hemispheres in each T2-weighted MRI slice. The
measured areas were summarized and the respective VI and VL volumes were calculated by multiplying each sum by the distance between slices (1 mm). The infarction volume was expressed as a
percentage of the volume of the control hemisphere, using the following formula: %I ⫽ 100 ⫻ (VI ⫺ VL)/VI.
Quantitative measurements of cerebral blood flow using MRI. In the
same MRI sessions, tissue perfusion was measured using noninvasive
arterial spin labeling method (ASL) (Kim, 1995). The sequence Flowsensitive Alternating Inversion Recovery Rapid Acquisition with Relaxation Enhancement (FAIR-RARE) was used to implement ASL with
parameters: TE/TR ⫽ 46/16000 ms, FOV ⫽ 2.56 cm ⫻ 2.56 cm, slice
thickness ⫽ 1 mm, number of slices ⫽ 1, matrix ⫽ 128⫻128. A perfusion
map was calculated using the ASL Perfusion Processing macro in ParaVision 5.1 (Bruker). Perfusion associated with specific areas of the brain
was determined using interpolation method and corresponding T2weighted MRI scans. Cortical areas of interest from the L and I hemispheres were selected from the corresponding T2-weighted MRI scans
and interpolated to perfusion maps. Because the exact borders of the
peri-infarct region are difficult to define, the measurements were performed in the whole sensorimotor cortex area adjacent to the dMCAOinduced cortical lesion and the analogous area of the intact hemisphere.
Similar to infarct size measurements, brain tissue perfusion in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the lesion was expressed as a percentage of that in the
intact hemisphere.
PCR. Three and 7 d after completion of miR-155 or control inhibitor
injections (which started 48 h after dMCAO and lasted for 3 consecutive
days) in dMCAO-subjected mice, 3 brains per experimental group (Inhibitor and Control) were used to generate separate sample triplicates for
the analyses. Brain cortices were dissected and stored in RNAlater solution (Ambion). Total RNA was isolated using mirVana miRNA (Ambion) isolation kit from the hemispheres ipsilateral to dMCAO injury.
qRT-PCR was used to evaluate miR-155 expression in the samples using
a TaqMan MicroRNA reverse transcription kit and miR-155 specific
TaqMan microRNA assay (Ambion). PCR array experiments were performed in collaboration with the University of New Mexico CUGR
(Keck-UNM Genomic Resource) Affymetrix facility. Expression of miR155 target genes was assessed using miR-155 Targets PCR Array (Qiagen). Mouse Cytokines and Chemokines PCR Array (Qiagen) was used

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

to evaluate the expression of major pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the RNA samples. All measurements and data
quantification were performed by the Qiagen Company Sample and Assay Technologies team. The obtained raw data were analyzed using RT2
Profiler software (Qiagen). Only the genes with consistent expression
levels (within the triplicate samples) were used for statistical analysis. The
fold changes of gene expressions (Inhibitor vs Control group) were calculated and the transcripts that showed ⱖ1.5-fold change in expression
(either upregulated or downregulated) were retained. At the final step,
statistical significance ( p ⬍ 0.05) and reliability of the results was evaluated automatically.
Western blot analysis. Three and 7 d after 3 consecutive miR-155 inhibitor or control nucleotide injections in dMCAO-subjected mice, 3
brains per experimental group (Inhibitor and Control) were used to
generate separate sample triplicates. Brain cortices were dissected on ice
and rapidly frozen. For tissue lysate preparation, brain tissue was homogenized in tissue extraction buffer (Invitrogen catalog # FNN0071; 5 ml
per 1 g of brain tissue) with the addition of protease inhibitor mixture
(Sigma-Aldrich). The samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 min
and supernatant was collected and kept on ice. Protein concentration was
determined for each sample using the DC protein assay kit from Bio-Rad.
The proteins were separated on 4 –20% gradient Criterion precast gels
(Bio-Rad). A broad-range molecular weight calibration marker from
10,000 to 250,000 MW (Bio-Rad) was used as a standard. The expression
levels of SMAD1 and SMAD5 proteins were detected using specific Antibody Sampler Kits (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The expression of the mTOR pathway
components, including Rictor, was detected using mTOR Pathway and
mTOR Substates Antibody Sampler Kits (Cell Signaling Technology) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The following primary
antibodies were also used: rabbit polyclonal anti-NOS (Cell Signaling Technology) and anti-eNOS (Millipore) antibodies; rabbit polyclonal anti-ZO-1
antibodies from Millipore and Life Technologies; rabbit monoclonal antiRhoA and rabbit polyclonal anti-Claudin-1 (Cell Signaling Technology);
and mouse monoclonal anti-Claudin-5, rabbit polyclonal anti-VECadherin, and mouse monoclonal anti-Occludin-1 (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). Rabbit monoclonal Phospho-Akt (Ser473 and Thr308) and Rheb
(Ras homolog enriched in brain) antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology. Loading was confirmed by comparing GAPDH and actin immunoreactivity across the lanes using mouse monoclonal anti-GAPDH
(Millipore) and monoclonal anti-actin (Sigma-Aldrich). Horseradish
peroxidase-labeled secondary antibodies were from Cell Signaling Technology and GE Healthcare. Incubation with both primary and secondary antibodies was performed for 1 h at room temperature. Experiments were
performed in triplicate (3 mice per group). The density of the protein bands
was determined using ImageJ software, normalized by actin or GAPDH
expression, and quantified using Microsoft Excel software.
Immunohistochemistry and fluorescence microscopy. Animals were perfused with PBS and 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and brains were removed and fixed in PFA and subsequently cryoprotected in 30% sucrose.
The brains were sectioned along the rostral– caudal axis; 16 ␮m coronal
sections were mounted and subjected to immunostaining. Briefly, the
slices were postfixed with 4% PFA, quenched with 50 mM NH4Cl, and
permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS; 10% normal goat serum
was used as a blocking buffer. Tissue slides were incubated with primary
(fluorophore-conjugated or unconjugated, 1:100 dilution) antibodies
overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies were as follows: rabbit polyclonal
anti-Claudin-1 (Cell Signaling Technology); mouse monoclonal antiClaudin-5 and mouse monoclonal anti-Occludin-1 (Invitrogen/Life
Technologies); Alexa Fluor 488 anti-mouse CD-31 (BioLegend); eFluor
570 anti-ZO-1 (eBioscence); and and Cy-3-conjugated anti-NeuN antibody (Millipore). Cy3- or Rhodamine-conjugated secondary antibodies
were used at a 1:250 dilution (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories).
DAPI staining was used to visualize nuclei. The incubations were performed in the humidity chamber.
Visualization of cerebral vasculature using lectin staining. The concept
and methods for vascular labeling with lectins were adopted from
methods described previously (Laitinen, 1987; Porter et al., 1990).
Vasculature was visualized using fluorescence staining of brain slices

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12449

with rhodamine-conjugated Griffonia simplificolia lectin (0.01 mg/ml;
Vector Laboratories) or Texas red-conjugated tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) lectin (0.01 mg/ml; Vector Laboratories). Imaging was performed using a Zeiss LSM510-META confocal microscope.
Assessment of brain tissue damage. Brain slices were immunostained
with Cy-3-conjugated anti-NeuN antibody and imaged using a Nikon
Eclipse Ti microscope and Nis Elements, Advanced Research version
4.30.01 software. Six to seven animals per group and 10 –15 brain sections per mouse (16 ␮m thickness) were used for the analysis. Because, at
this late stage after dMCAO, the necrotic tissue disappears (due to development of cystic zone), the whole-brain lesion volume was measured
according to the indirect method by assessing the size differences between the remaining lesioned and nonlesioned contralateral hemispheres and using methods described previously (Bouet et al., 2009;
Lubjuhn et al., 2009). In each section, the areas of both hemispheres were
measured using ImageJ software. The infarction of the remaining tissue
(in the lesioned hemisphere) was detected by the unstained regions of the
section. The infarct area and volume were calculated as described for the
MRI-based measurements.
Functional recovery assessment: adhesive removal test. The pattern of
sensorimotor deficits and subsequent recovery was performed in parallel
with the in vivo imaging experiments and compared between the control
inhibitor, specific miRNA inhibitor-injected, sham-operated, and intact
animals (10 –12 mice/group). The bilateral asymmetry/adhesive removal
test was performed as described previously (Bouet et al., 2009). Two
adhesive tapes (⬃0.4 cm 2) were applied with equal pressure on each
animal paw. The order of placement of the adhesive (right or left) was
alternated between each animal and each session. The mouse was placed
in a transparent plastic box and the times to contact and to remove each
adhesive tape were collected, with a maximum of 120 s. Experimenters
were blind with regard to the mice groups. Mice were trained daily before
(5 d before surgery) and after dMCAO (reminder sessions at days 3–5
after dMCAO). Postsurgery testing was monitored for 25 d after dMCAO
(single trial per test day; the in vivo imaging day was skipped). Two
parameters were monitored for each paw: contact time (point that the
mouse reacts to the presence of adhesive strips) and adhesive removal
time. Performances of the 3 final days of each week were averaged as a
block.
Gait analysis/CatWalk test. Gait analysis was performed using the CatWalk automated gait analysis system (Noldus), which is a sensitive tool to
assess animal gait and locomotion. The mouse voluntarily traverses a
glass walkway and its footprints are captured and quantified with camera
and specialized software to generate numerous parameters for qualitative
and quantitative analysis of individual footprints and gait. The animals
(three experimental groups: Inhibitor, Control, and Intact animal
groups, n ⫽ 12 animals per experimental group) were trained on the
walkway until at least 3 compliant (1–5 s duration, maximum deviation
60%) runs were performed successfully and recorded according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The recorded data were analyzed using CatWalk XT versin 10.5.505 software. Animals were trained 1 week before
and 2 d after dMCAO and subsequently tested once a week 7, 14, and 21 d
after dMCAO (Balkaya et al., 2013).
Animal weight monitoring. Body weight was monitored in three groups
of animals, consisting of Inhibitor, Control, and Intact animals (n ⫽ 12
mice per experimental group). The animals were weighted daily starting
at day 0 (before dMCAO surgery) and continuing for 21 d after dMCAO.
Statistical analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad
Prism version 6.05 or R software. Student’s t test was performed for the
Western blot (WB) analysis. Group comparisons using two-way ANOVA
followed by Sidak’s multiple-comparisons test was performed for quantification of blood flow velocity, microvessel density, and permeability
(2-photon microscopy studies). One-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s
multiple-comparisons test was used for behavioral tests and weight gain
analysis. For quantification of the MRI data (infarct size and tissue perfusion), mixed-model repeated-measures with Wald tests between
groups were used, followed by Sidak’s familywise error rate correction for
multiple-comparisons within each hypothesis. ANCOVA was used to
assess relationships between the improvements in sensorimotor deficits
and infarct size by week, with Wald tests between groups.

12450 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

Results
Efficiency of in vivo miR-155 inhibition
Mice received intravenous injections of
FITC-conjugated specific miR-155 inhibitor or control scrambled oligonucleotide
48 h after dMCAO; injections lasted for 3
consecutive days. At 3 and 7 d after the last
injection (7 and 11 d after dMCAO), the
brains were collected for fluorescence
microscopy and PCR analyses. Confocal
microscopy detected FITC-conjugated
inhibitor associated with cerebral blood
vessels (Fig. 1A, arrows); some inhibitor
molecules also crossed the BBB and were
seen to be distributed within the brain tissue (Fig. 1A, stars). qRT-PCR of the samples collected 3 d after the last injection
showed, on average, ⬃50% inhibition of
miR-155 expression in the inhibitorinjected (Inhibitor) compared with the
scrambled oligonucleotide-injected (Control) animal groups (Fig. 1B, left graph).
miR-155 expression returned back to control levels 7 d after the last anti-miR-155 injection (data not shown). Functional
efficiency of the in vivo miR-155 inhibition
was evaluated in the samples collected from
the Inhibitor and Control groups at 3 d after
the last injection. miR-155 Targets PCR Array analysis demonstrated significantly
(⬎2-fold, p ⬍ 0.05) increased expression
of 4 miR-155 direct target genes in the
Inhibitor group (compared with Control). Among these genes were: bioinformatically (TargetScan) predicted Dhx40
(DEAH box polypeptide 40), Dync1i1
(dynein cytoplasmic 1 intermediate chain
1), and Zfp652 (encoding zinc finger protein 652), as well as the experimentally
verified (Zhu et al., 2011) Agtr1a gene encoding Angiotensin II receptor type A
(Fig. 1B, right graph). WB analysis demonstrated significantly increased expression of three miR-155 target proteins in
the Inhibitor samples compared with
Control samples (Fig. 1C). These proteins
included TGF-␤/BMP (transforming growth
factor-␤/bone morphogenetic protein)
signaling pathway molecule SMAD5 (Rai
et al., 2010; Yin et al., 2010), mTOR
(mammalian target of rapamycin) signaling pathway component Rictor
(Wan et al., 2014), and NO signaling
factor eNOS. The average expression
levels of miR-155 target protein SMAD1
(Yin et al., 2010) were slightly elevated,
whereas SMAD5 levels were increased
by 20.5% and Rictor was increased
⬃2.3-fold (131.4%). Robust increase in
eNOS levels is in agreement with the
findings that eNOS is directly targeted
by miR-155 (Sun et al., 2012). Together,
these results confirm the efficiency of

Figure 1. Evaluation of in vivo miR-155 inhibition efficiency 3 d after specific inhibitor injections. A, Distribution of
injected FITC-conjugated miR-155 inhibitor (Exiqon) was assessed 3 d after 3 consecutive days of intravenous injections in
dMCAO-subjected mice. Vasculature was visualized using fluorescence staining of the brain slices with Rhodamineconjugated Griffonia simplificolia lectin (red on left and middle panels); endothelial cells were labeled with Texas redconjugated Tomato lectin (red on the right panel; blue indicates DAPI staining). Confocal microscopy imaging detected
FITC-positive oligonucleotides (green, arrows) associated with the wall and lumen of the cerebral blood vessels (left panel
and orthogonal image projections on middle panel) and incorporated within blood vessel endothelium (right). FITCconjugates were also seen in the brain parenchyma (stars), demonstrating BBB permeability of the injected inhibitor. Scale
bars, 10 ␮m. B, Left, MiR-155 expression in the lesioned hemispheres of the animals injected with specific anti-miR-155
(black bar) or scrambled control (white bar) 3 d after the last injection (qRT-PCR with TaqMan miR-155 primers). Right,
miR-155 Targets PCR Array was performed to detect the expression of miR-155 target genes in the same samples. miR-155
inhibition resulted in significant (⬎2-fold, p ⬍ 0.05) increase in expression of 4 direct miR-155 target genes. Error bars
indicate SD. C, Expression of miR-155 target proteins in samples from the Inhibitor (lane I and black bars on graph) and
Control (lane C and white bars on graph) groups. GAPDH expression was used for a loading control. Protein bands were
quantified using ImageJ software and relative density values (normalized to GAPDH expression) were plotted on the
graph. For all experiments: *p ⬍ 0.05, **p ⬍ 0.01, Student’s t test. Error bars indicate SD. n ⫽ 3 mice per group.

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

the in vivo miR-155 inhibition in the mouse brain subjected to
dMCAO and 3 d of anti-miR-155 injections.
In vivo miR-155 inhibition results in the improved blood flow
and supports cerebral microvasculature after dMCAO
2PLSM was used to evaluate the functional cerebral vasculature
in the Control and Inhibitor groups, at 7, 14 and 21 d after
dMCAO. The representative z-projection planar scans in Figure
2, A and B, demonstrate the microvascular network (visualized by
the intravenous fluorescent dextran injection) in the peri-infarct
area of the control and inhibitor-injected mice, respectively.
High-magnification scans visualizing the RBC motion in the individual capillaries (Fig. 2 A, B, boxed) from the control (Fig.
2C,E) and miR-155 inhibitor-injected (Fig. 2 D, F ) animals demonstrate an increased blood flow velocity in the inhibitor-injected
mice compared with control mice. The RBC flow calculations are
based on the angle (inversely reflecting the flow velocity) of the
dark stripes representing the RBC motion and the distance between them (see Materials and Methods). The obtained line-scan
data (Fig. 2G) show that, in the lesioned hemispheres of the Control group, the RBC flow velocity in the capillaries remained significantly lower compared with the lesioned hemispheres of the
Inhibitor group for up to 14 d after dMCAO. Importantly, at
every time point after stroke (7, 14, and 21 d), the blood flow
velocity in the lesioned hemispheres of the Control group remained significantly decreased (30%, 54%, and 30% lower than
in the nonlesioned hemispheres, respectively). In the Inhibitor
group, the microvascular flow velocity in the lesioned hemisphere was similar to the velocity in the nonlesioned (intact)
hemisphere 7 d after stroke and decreased at 14 and 21 d (20%
and 16% lower than in the intact hemisphere, respectively). The
RBC flow in larger (⬎10 ␮m diameter) microvessels was not
significantly different within the groups and hemispheres at any
of the three time points analyzed (data not shown). To evaluate
microvascular density, capillaries from each planar scan were
counted in the hemispheres ipsilateral and contralateral to dMCAO injury. Capillary numbers per 0.05 mm 3 were calculated
and plotted in Fig. 2H. The capillary density in the peri-infarct
area of the anti-miR-155 injected animals was similar to the nonlesioned hemispheres at all three time points after stroke. Seven
days after dMCAO, the capillary density in the lesioned hemispheres of the Control group was significantly lower compared
with the intact hemispheres. No significant differences in the
microvessel density were seen within the groups at 14 and 21 d
after dMCAO (Fig. 2H ). Because miR-155-defficient mice have
been demonstrated to have a reduced BBB leakage/breakdown
(Lopez-Ramirez et al., 2014), we performed the analysis of vascular permeability using 2-photon microscopy scans. Quantification of the vascular permeability presented in Figure 2I shows
the values of relative fluorescence signal intensity in the interstitial space of the lesioned and nonlesioned hemispheres of the
Control and Inhibitor groups. The data demonstrate that, 7 d
after dMCAO, the microvascular leakage in the lesioned hemisphere of the inhibitor-injected mice was significantly lower
compared with the lesioned hemisphere of the Control group. In
contrast to the Inhibitor group, in the Control gropu, permeability in the lesioned hemispheres was significantly higher compared
with nonlesioned hemispheres. Fourteen days after dMCAO, vascular leakage in the lesioned hemispheres decreased in both
groups of animals and remained similar to the intact hemispheres
for up to 21 d after dMCAO (Fig. 2I ). In summary, the evaluation
of cerebral microvasculature demonstrates that anti-miR-155 injections initiated 48 h after dMCAO result in significant improve-

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12451

ment in the microvascular circulation, capillary density, and BBB
integrity 7 d after the experimental stroke. At the later stages (14
and 21 d after dMCAO), no significant differences in capillary density and integrity were observed between the two experimental
groups or between the lesioned and intact hemispheres. This could
be associated with reduced potency of miR-155 inhibition by this
time or activation of the natural postischemic vascular remodeling
process in all animals.
In vivo miR-155 inhibition supports the integrity of
endothelial tight junctions
Based on the vascular permeability data obtained by 2-photon
microscopy, we assessed the microvascular damage and ultrastructural alterations of the endothelial TJs in the Control and
Inhibitor groups using transmission EM. Seven days after
dMCAO, capillaries in the nonlesioned hemisphere of both Control and Inhibitor mouse groups had a normal appearance and
were surrounded by healthy looking, undamaged brain tissue
(Fig. 3 A, C). In the lesioned hemispheres of both experimental
groups, the capillaries were narrowed due to perivascular edema
represented by heavily swollen astrocyte end feet and large vacuoles (Fig. 3 D, G). Endothelial damage (vacuoles in the cytoplasm,
endothelial cell denudation) and disturbed and disintegrated
basal lamina were observed in Controls. TJ units in these capillaries were often disrupted and not clearly identifiable (Fig. 3E).
In contrast to the Control group, TJs in the majority of capillaries
(even in the narrowed or collapsed ones) of the Inhibitor samples
had an intact appearance (Fig. 3G,H ). In addition, the tissue from
the inhibitor-injected animals was less edematous and less vacuolated compared with the Control group (Fig. 3 F, I ). Neurons
had a normal appearance in both groups. Detailed analysis and
comparison of TJ integrity between the Inhibitor and Control
groups is demonstrated in Figure 3J. Analysis revealed that, in the
nonlesioned hemispheres of both experimental groups (combined together since there was no difference in TJ appearance),
85% of all imaged capillaries had closed and 12% had partially
opened TJs. In the lesioned hemispheres of the Control group,
only 18.5% of all capillaries had intact TJs; 44.6% had at least one
partially opened TJ unit, whereas 30.7% of them had opened/
disrupted TJs. In contrast, in the lesioned hemisphere of the Inhibitor group, only 8.9% capillaries had opened/disrupted and
16.5% had partially opened TJs; all TJs were intact/closed in 58%
of capillaries. Therefore, in the Inhibitor group, the percentage of
closed (intact) TJ units was significantly ( p ⬍ 0.05) higher,
whereas the fraction of disrupted TJs was significantly lower,
compared with the Control group. Approximately 16% of the
microvessels in the Inhibitor group and 6% in the Control group
were represented by very small capillaries of 2– 4 ␮m diameter,
which did not have well defined TJs (Fig. 3J, purple bars).
Twenty-one days after dMCAO, there were no apparent differences in the structural integrity of TJs between the Control and
Inhibitor groups. However, as high as 35% of all imaged microvessels in Controls (as opposed to 13.7% in the Inhibitor
group) were represented by collapsed microvessels. In summary,
EM data demonstrate that miR-155 inhibition prevents microvascular injury in the peri-infarct area of stroke for up to 21 d
after dMCAO. EM imaging supports our 2-photon microscopy
data, demonstrating the maximal differences in microvascular
integrity (between control and inhibitor-injected animals) 7 d
after dMCAO. EM analysis was able to demonstrate a higher
degree of vascular damage in the Control group 21 d after
dMCAO. This can be explained by the differences between the
approaches: 2-photon microscopy depicts the functional mi-

12452 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

Figure 2. 2PLSM evaluation of microvasculature. 2PLSM micrographs of cerebral vasculature in the peri-infarct area of the Control (A) and Inhibitor (B) groups visualized by intravenous injections
of 70 kDa Fluorescein-labeled dextran (maximal intensity projection from 10 planar scans acquired every 10 ␮m); 7 d after dMCAO. Scale bar, 100 ␮m. Illustration of the RBC flow in the individual
microvessels from Control (C) and Inhibitor (D) groups (boxed on A and B and shown at higher magnification). Line-scan data for blood flow velocities in the capillaries (C, D) demonstrate higher
velocity in the Inhibitor group (F, the RBCs reach longer distance in a shorter time, dt) compared with Controls (E). G–I, Analysis of the average RBC flow velocity (G), capillary density (H ), and
permeability (I ) in the lesioned and nonlesioned hemispheres of the Inhibitor and Control groups 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO. Localization of the cranial windows for the optical imaging relative to
the infarction (detected 24 h after dMCAO) and the legend for all graphs are shown in the box. G, Width, sharpness, and angle of the dark bands representing RBC motion, as well as the distance
between them, were evaluated to calculate the RBC flow velocity (mm/s) in 100 microvessels per hemisphere using Rincon 7.7 software. Error bars indicate SEM. n ⫽ 12 mice per group. H, Capillary
density was calculated from 3D projections of z-scan series (from the brain surface to 300 ␮m in depth) and plotted as the number of capillaries in 10 ⫺3 mm 3. Error bars indicate SD. n ⫽
6 –10 mice per group. I, Analysis of microvascular permeability was performed 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO. The representative micrographs depict the quantification of micrvascular
permeability in the peri-infarct area of the Control and Inhibitor animal groups 7 d after dMCAO. The blood vessel area (red squares on 2PLSM micrograph) and interstitial space (yellow
squares) were manually defined and fluorescence intensity in each area was measured using ImageJ software. The percentage fluorescence intensity in the perivascular area reflecting
the BBB leakage is plotted at 7, 14, and 21 d. Error bars indicate SD. n ⫽ 6 – 8 mice per group. Statistical analysis for all graphs: *p ⬍ 0.05, **p ⬍ 0.01, ***p ⬍ 0.001, two-way ANOVA
followed by Sidak’s multiple-comparisons test.

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12453

Figure 3. In vivo miR-155 inhibition supports endothelial TJ integrity. Shown are representative transmission EM images of capillaries and details of capillary TJs (arrows) from the nonlesioned
hemispheres (A, B) and lesioned hemispheres of Control (D, E) and Inhibitor (G, H ) animals 7 d after dMCAO. Asterisks indicate capillary lumen. Note the electron-dense dark intermediate areas of
the intact TJ units in A, B, G, and H and disrupted TJs in D and E. Moderately swollen astrocytes (with characteristic glycogen granules) and heavily swollen astrocyte processes forming a large white
perivascular space are marked with stars. Scale bars: A, C, D, F, G, I, 500 nm; B, E, H, 100 nm. J, Graph representing percentage (of all imaged microvessels) of capillaries with closed/intact (gray),
partially opened (red), or opened/disrupted (blue) TJs in the nonlesioned and lesioned hemispheres of dMCAO mice groups. The percentage of reactive ECs forming lumen and very small capillaries
with not yet defined TJs are shown in purple. n ⫽ 4 mice per group. Error bars indicate SEM.

crovessels, whereas EM also enables the imaging of both functional and collapsed nonfunctional microvasculature.
Downregulation of miR-155 results in increased expression of
TJ protein ZO1
The vasculature after dMCAO was also examined using confocal
fluorescence microscopy. Figure 4A is a detailed image of a cor-

onal brain section from the animal injected with FITCconjugated dextran and paraformaldehyde mixture 5 min before
death. It shows that, 7 d after dMCAO, there is a reduced number
of functional vasculature within ⬃600-␮m-wide area medial to
the infarct border (Fig. 4A), which is in agreement with previous
studies (Li et al., 2008; Murphy et al., 2009). Immunofluorescence staining showed a significant reduction of NeuN (neuronal

12454 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

Figure 4. miR-155 inhibition results in stabilization of ZO-1 protein. A, Micrograph showing functional microvasculature in the peri-infarct area 7 d after dMCAO. Mouse was injected with
fluorescent dextran/paraformaldehyde mixture, which allows a visualization of functional blood vessels on histological sections. Note the reduced vascular perfusion within the ⬃600-␮m-wide
area medial to the infarct (I, outlined with white dotted line). B, Coronal section from the same animal immunostained with anti-NeuN antibody (red). Note the reduced NeuN intensity in the infarct
area and dense nuclear staining (DAPI, blue) representing a glial scar. C and high magnification in D, Double immunostaining with anti-NeuN (red) and anti-CD-31 (green) demonstrates a spatial
distribution of neurons and blood vessels (arrows) in the peri-infarct area 7 d after dMCAO. Infarct (I) is outlined with a dotted line. E, Double immunofluorescence staining of the brain coronal
sections from the Inhibitor and Control animal groups 7 d after dMCAO. Micrographs demonstrate the localization and distribution of the TJ proteins ZO-1, Occludin-1, and Claudin-5 (red) in cerebral
microvessels (detected with anti-CD-31, green) in close vicinity to the infarct border. Imaging was performed using a Zeiss LSM510-META confocal microscope with tile-scan and z-stack image
acquisitions. Scale bars, A, B, 200 ␮m; C–E, 20 ␮m. F, WB analysis of ZO-1 expression in lysates prepared from the cortical tissue of the lesioned and nonlesioned hemispheres of Inhibitor and Control
groups 7 d after dMCAO. Graph represents WB quantification analysis; optical density of each band was normalized to ␤-actin as a loading control. Results are presented as a ratio between ZO-1
expression in the lesioned compared with the corresponding nonlesioned hemispheres. G, WB analysis of Akt phosphorylation levels in the samples collected from the lesioned hemispheres of
Inhibitor and Control mice (described in F ) using rabbit monoclonal Phospho-Akt antibodies (Ser473 and Thr308). Graph represents WB quantification analysis; relative density represents protein
expression normalized to GAPDH as a loading control. H, WB analysis of Akt and Rheb protein expression in the same samples (described in G). Relative density represents protein expression
normalized to ␤-actin as a loading control. I, WB analysis of the expression of the major TJ proteins Claudin-5 and Occludin-1, the aherens junction protein VE cadherin, and the TJ regulator protein
RhoA. The samples described for F were used for this analysis. Graph represents WB quantification analysis. Optical density of each band was normalized to ␤-actin as a loading control. Results are
presented as a ratio of protein expression in the lesioned and corresponding nonlesioned hemispheres. For all WBs, error bars indicate SD; n ⫽ 3 mice per group. *p ⬍ 0.05, Student’s t test. J,
Cytokine/chemokine gene expression changes after miR-155 inhibition 7 d after dMCAO. Total RNA was obtained from cortical tissue of Inhibitor and Control mouse brains (hemispheres ipsilateral
to the lesion) and subjected to mouse cytokine/chemokine PCR profiler array. The obtained raw data were analyzed using RT2 Profiler software. The graph demonstrates significant (ⱖ1.5-fold
change in expression, p ⬍ 0.05) upregulation of 3 and downregulation of 2 cytokines in Inhibitor mice compared with Controls. n ⫽ 3 animals per group.

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

marker) expression in the infarct core (Fig. 4B). Few microvessels
expressing blood vessel marker CD-31 (surrounded by NeuNpositive neurons) were seen in the peri-infarct area, and occasionally in the infarct core (Fig. 4C,D). To investigate the
molecular basis of changes in TJ integrity associated with miR155 inhibition, we performed immunofluorescence microscopy
and WB analysis of the brains from the Control and Inhibitor
groups collected 7 d after dMCAO. The expression patterns of the
TJ proteins Occludin-1 and Claudin-5 in the microvessels captured in close vicinity to the infarct border were not visually
different between the Inhibitor and Control animal groups. ZO-1
expression appeared to be more distinct in the Inhibitor group
and less prominent in the Control group (Fig. 4E). To perform an
accurate quantification, the expression levels of the major TJ proteins were analyzed by WB using the Inhibitor and Control samples collected 7 d after experimental ischemia. dMCAO resulted
in significant depletion of ZO-1 protein in the lesioned hemisphere of Control samples. In the lesioned hemisphere of Inhibitor samples, ZO-1 expression was significantly ( p ⫽ 0.002)
higher compared with Controls. At the same time, ZO-1 expression in these samples was not significantly different from the
nonlesioned hemisphere samples (Fig. 4F, ZO-1 is represented by
two closely migrating ⬎220 kDa bands). To explain the mechanism of ZO-1 regulation by miR-155, we checked for probable
activation of signaling molecules mediating TJ barrier functions.
The PI3K/Akt pathway plays an important role in the regulation
of TJ assembly and integrity (González-Mariscal et al., 2008). At
the same time, Akt signaling is activated by overexpressed miR155 and downregulated after miR-155 inhibition (Yamanaka et
al., 2009; Huang et al., 2012). In agreement with these previous
studies, Akt phosphorylation levels (both at Thr308 and Ser473)
were ⬎3-fold lower in the Inhibitor samples compared with Controls (Fig. 4G). Total Akt protein expression was also decreased in
the Inhibitor samples (Fig. 4H ). To establish a connection among
ZO-1 expression, Akt phosphorylation/expression levels, and
miR-155 downregulation, we analyzed the levels of the direct
miR-155 target protein Rheb (Wang et al., 2013). This small GTPase, with the highest expression in the brain and muscle, is implicated in the regulation of important cellular processes
including cell cycle and growth. Recent studies showed that Rheb
is essential for the development of the murine cardiovascular
system and blood circulation (Aspuria et al., 2004; Goorden et al.,
2011). As demonstrated in Figure 4H, Rheb expression was increased by ⬃33% in the Inhibitor group. Therefore, higher levels
of Rheb accompanied decreased Akt phosphorylation, which is in
agreement with other studies demonstrating that Rheb suppresses Akt phosphorylation at both the Ser 473 and Thr308 sites
(Cao et al., 2013). The expression of VE-cadherin, an adherence
junction protein and a possible upstream regulator of ZO-1, was
not different within the groups. The levels of RhoA protein, a
direct target of miR-155 and an important regulator of TJ functions, was not significantly different throughout the analyzed
samples (Fig. 4I ), which means that ZO-1 stabilization was not
mediated via the RhoA or VE-Cadherin signaling pathways.
Therefore, we speculate that increased expression of ZO-1 could
be mediated via a Rheb/Akt interaction: Rheb upregulated after
miR-155 inhibition suppresses Akt activity and subsequently stabilizes ZO-1. ZO-1, a regulatory scaffolding TJ protein, interacts
with other TJ proteins and mediates their association with the
cytoskeleton (Harhaj et al., 2004; Balda et al., 2009). Therefore,
we analyzed possible changes in the expression of other TJ proteins. Claudin-5 and Occludin-1 were also somewhat (but not
consistently) increased in the anti-miR-155-injected animals

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12455

(Fig. 4I ). dMCAO resulted in a significant decrease of Occludin-1
expression in the lesioned hemispheres of the both experimental
groups. In summary, our WB analysis revealed that, among all TJ
proteins, ZO-1 was consistently affected by miR-155 inhibition.
Stabilization of the major scaffolding and signaling protein ZO-1
could strengthen TJ barrier function in the inhibitor-injected
animals.
In vivo miR-155 inhibition results in alterations in the
cytokine/chemokine gene expression profile after dMCAO
Because miR-155 inhibition has been reported to reduce both
inflammation and BBB leakage/breakdown, we hypothesized
that the effect of anti-miR-155 injections on microvascular integrity could be also attributed to the reduced postischemic inflammation. The RNA samples were collected and analyzed 7 d after
dMCAO (Fig. 4J ). The expression of genes encoding proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory factors assessed with a specialized
cytokine/chemokine PCR profiler array revealed a significant
(ⱖ1.5-fold; p ⬍ 0.05) upregulation of 3 and downregulation of 2
cytokine genes. The consistently upregulated genes were as follows: Ctf1, encoding cardiotrophin, shown to inhibit caspases
and thus promote neuroprotection and repair in stroke (Sola et
al., 2008; Peng et al., 2010); Bmp4, encoding bone morphogenetic
protein, implicated in induction of tube formation and migration
of human microvascular endothelial cells (Rothhammer et al.,
2007); and the angiogenesis promoting cytokine gene Il23a (Langowski et al., 2006). It has been demonstrated that BMP signaling
is negatively regulated by miR-155 (Yin et al., 2010), which explains the upregulation of the Bmp4 gene after miR-155 inhibition. Among the downregulated genes are: proinflammatory
Ccl12, encoding monocyte chemotactic protein 5 (MCP-5),
which is stimulated by in vitro hypoxia and implicated in mediation of inflammatory response after stroke (Mojsilovic-Petrovic
et al., 2007), and proinflammatory Cxcl3 (Chemokine ligand 3).
Interestingly, these two chemokines are linked directly to vascular inflammation, particularly to monocyte transmigration to the
subendothelial space and monocyte adhesion to vascular endothelium, followed by development of atherosclerotic plaques
(Gargalovic et al., 2006).
In vivo miR-155 inhibition results in the reduction of brain
damage after dMCAO
Infarct size was evaluated using MRI at 24 h and 7, 14, and 21 d
after dMCAO (Fig. 5 A, B) to detect the extent of the brain damage within control animals (Fig. 5B, red) and inhibitor-injected
animals (Fig. 5B, blue). dMCAO-induced injury size (% infarct
volume) measured at 24 h after dMCAO allowed us to evaluate
the initial damage in each animal. The average initial damage in
both experimental groups was ⬃13.5%. At 7 d, the average relative infarct size in the Inhibitor group was 13.8% versus 17.5% in
the Control group. This is in agreement with our EM observations demonstrating less vacuolated and edematous tissue compared with control animals. At 14 d, the differences in percentage
infarct sizes between the two groups were minimal: 12.3% in
inhibitor-injected and 13.4% in control animals. The infarct sizes
were significantly different ( p ⬍ 0.05) at 21 d, when the relative
infarct volume was 9.5% in the Inhibitor group versus 14.43% in
the Control group (see multiline charts and representative MRI
images in Fig. 5). Therefore, MRI data demonstrate that antimiR-155 injections result in a 34% reduction of brain damage
21 d after dMCAO. In the same MRI sessions, tissue perfusion
was measured using the noninvasive ASL method for quantification of cerebral blood flow. Perfusion maps were generated and

12456 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

Figure 5. In vivo miR-155 inhibition results in reduction of infarct size after dMCAO: infarct volume measurements using MRI. A, T2-weighted MRI-based measurements of the infarct volume were
performed 24 h (initial evaluation) and 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO (in the same animal). Representative MRI images (three sections per mouse from the Control and Inhibitor groups) demonstrate
progression of the brain damage from vasogenic edema at 24 h after dMCAO to tissue resorption at 21 d. The remaining normal tissue in the lesioned hemisphere is outlined by a red dotted line. Note
the visible differences in infarct sizes between Control and Inhibitor animals. Scale bar, 2 mm. B, Volumes of normal gray matter in the lesioned and nonlesioned control hemispheres were calculated
and the infarction volume was expressed as a percentage of the volume of the gray matter in the control hemisphere. Multiline plot represents relative (%) infarct sizes by days comparing Control
(red) and Inhibitor (blue) groups. Dark points indicate the mean with SEM error bars and light points indicate responses of individual animals. For statistical analysis, group comparisons were
performed using mixed-model repeated-measures with Wald tests between groups, followed by Sidak’s familywise error rate correction for multiple comparisons within each hypothesis (*p ⬍
0.05). Error bars indicate SEM. n ⫽ 7 mice per group. C, Evaluation of tissue perfusion using the ASL method. Representative ASL perfusion maps generated in the same animal (from Control and
Inhibitor groups) at 24 h and subsequently at 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO. Scale bar, 2.5 mm. Box, Cortical areas of interest from the lesioned (L) and intact (I) hemispheres were selected from the
corresponding T-2 weighted MRI scans (top, outlined with green dotted line) and interpolated to perfusion maps (bottom); lesion is marked with yellow dotted line. D, Brain tissue perfusion (blood
flow, ml/100 g ⫻ min) at 24 h and 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO (in the hemisphere ipsilateral to the lesion) was expressed as a percentage of that in the intact hemisphere and plotted on the multiline
graph. The percentage perfusion by days comparing Control (red) and Inhibitor (blue) groups uses dark points to indicate the mean with SEM error bars (Figure legend continues.)

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

blood flow in the analogous areas of the lesioned and intact hemispheres was calculated (Fig. 5C,D). Continuous changes of blood
flow in the Control and Inhibitor groups were measured at 24 h
and 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO. Although no statistically significant differences in blood perfusion were detected between the
two experimental groups, the pattern of tissue perfusion changes
was similar to microvasculature alterations showing the maximum changes 7 d after dMCAO. The ASL measurements, however, represent a combined flow in all blood vessels and thus
could not fully reflect the changes in the capillary flow detected by
2-photon microscopy.
miR-155 inhibition prevents delayed neuronal damage
after dMCAO
The brain tissue damage was additionally assessed after the completion of in vivo two-photon microscopy and/or MRI imaging
(21 d after dMCAO). Figure 5E shows representative images of
serial coronal brain sections from the Control and Inhibitor
groups immunostained for the neuronal marker NeuN. The infarct size calculations (see Materials and Methods) revealed that
the relative infarction volume was significantly ( p ⫽ 0.008)
greater in the Control group (20.4%) compared with Inhibitor
group (14.3%). Despite the considerable deformation of the
brain tissue after fixation, freezing, and slicing procedures, the
results were still in agreement with the in vivo MRI measurements
showing ⬃30% reduction of the relative infarct volume in miR155 inhibitor-injected mice. Immunohistochemistry revealed a
visibly higher number of NeuN-positive neurons in the lesioned
hemispheres of the Inhibitor group (Fig. 5F ). Because NeuN immunoreactivity does not accurately reflect the degree of neuronal
damage, we used EM to assess the ultrastructure of neurons in the
peri-infarct area of stroke. As mentioned in section on the EM
analysis of blood vessels, no considerable neuronal damage was
observed in the samples collected 7 d after dMCAO. At 21 d,
however, visibly significant tissue damage and neuronal death
were seen in the peri-infarct area of the Control group (Fig. 6A–
C). In contrast, in the inhibitor-injected mice, the neurons and
surrounding brain tissue had a healthy or slightly damaged appearance (Fig. 6D–F ). Analysis revealed that, in the lesioned
hemisphere of the Inhibitor group, the average number of normal/slightly damaged neurons (78% of all imaged neurons) and
damaged neurons (22%) was similar to the nonlesioned hemisphere
(Fig. 6G). In the Control group, the percentage of significantly damaged neurons was as high as 68%; ⬎9% consisted of necrotic neurons (Fig. 6C,G). Therefore, the numbers of undamaged and
damaged neurons in the lesioned hemispheres were significantly
(p ⫽ 0.001 and p ⫽ 0.003, respectively) different between the Inhibitor and Control groups. Importantly, no neuronal necrosis was observed in the Inhibitor group. Interestingly, considerable numbers of
injured (65%) and dead/necrotic (4%) neurons were seen in the
nonlesioned hemisphere of the Control group. Based on the EM
analysis, we conclude that miR-155 inhibition prevents the delayed
4
(Figure legend continued.) and light points to indicate responses of individual animals. n ⫽ 7
mice per group. E, Representative histological images of the serial coronal brain sections immunostrained with the Cy-3-conjugated anti-NeuN antibody 21 d after dMCAO. The lesion volume
was evaluated by assessing the size differences between the remaining lesioned (outlined by
white dotted line) and nonlesioned contralateral hemispheres. At 21 d, tissue loss and the
lesioned hemisphere shrinkage were visibly greater in Controls compared with the Inhibitor
group. n ⫽ 6 –7 animals per group, 10 –15 brain sections per mouse. Error bars indicate SEM.
Scale bar, 2.5 mm. F, Representative images of the NeuN immunoreactivity in the lesioned
hemispheres of the Control and Inhibitor animal groups. Scale bars, 0.5 mm.

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12457

neuronal death after stroke. These data are in agreement with the
MRI measurements demonstrating a significant reduction of brain
tissue damage in the Inhibitor group 21 d after dMCAO.
Functional recovery assessment
The assessment of sensorimotor deficits and their subsequent recovery was performed in parallel with the in vivo imaging experiments
and compared between the control and anti-miR-injected dMCAO
mice, as well as in sham-operated and intact animals.
Bilateral asymmetry/adhesive removal test
Sensitivity to simultaneous forelimb stimulation was measured by
means of a test similar to contralateral neglect testing in human.
Among other impairment tests, the adhesive removal test was shown
to be the most effective in assessment of behavioral impairments for
3 weeks after dMCAO (Bouet et al., 2009; Freret et al., 2009). The
graphs in Figure 7 show the animals’ performance (times of contact,
Fig 7A, and removal, Fig 7B, of the adhesive tape with the contralesional paw) at different time points after surgery.
Adhesive contact time. Adhesive contact time was not statistically different between the Inhibitor and Control groups. However, in the last testing block (21–25 d after dMCAO), only the
mice from the Control group retained significantly longer contact time compared with the Intact and Sham groups (Fig. 7A).
Adhesive removal time. As expected, in the first testing block
(7–11 d after dMCAO), the time to remove the adhesive tape was
significantly longer in the Sham, Inhibitor, and Control groups
compared with the Intact group. In the second block (14 –18 d
after dMCAO), significant differences became apparent between
the Inhibitor and Control groups. In addition, the removal time
was significantly greater in Controls compared with both the
Intact and Sham groups. In the final testing block (21–25 d after
dMCAO), the Intact, Sham, and Inhibitor groups demonstrated
almost full recovery in adhesive removal function, whereas the
Controls had significantly impaired performance compared with
all other groups (Fig. 7B). A multiple regression was fit to assess
the relationship between the adhesive removal time
[log10(Time)] with infarct size between groups at weekly intervals. A positive relationship was detected at 14 and 21 d (onesided slope p values ⫽ 0.034 and 0.021, respectively, at an
uncorrected 0.05 significance level), which means that the reduced infarct size in the Inhibitor group correlated with the improvement of the sensorimotor deficits.
Gait analysis with CatWalk test
Gait changes are considered to be reliable indicators of stroke
severity by providing information on limb coordination and
compensatory movements due to stroke-induced deficits in sensorimotor function (Wang et al., 2008). The experimental groups
were tested 7, 14, and 21 d after dMCAO. The automated comparative paw and interlimb coordination statistics identified
several parameters recorded for the left and the right (contralesional) paws, which reflected considerable differences between
two experimental groups 21 d after dMCAO. Significant differences between the Inhibitor and Control groups were detected in
so-called “phase dispersion” (time between the placement of two
paws within a step cycle) and “print position” (distance between
the front and hindpaws within a step cycle) parameters (Fig.
7C,D). The increased values of the phase dispersion parameter
after ischemic stroke have been reported previously (Wang et al.,
2008; Balkaya et al., 2013). Importantly, the calculated values for
phase dispersion (for the contralesional right paw) in the Inhibitor group were similar to the Intact group but significantly dif-

12458 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

Figure 6. miR-155 inhibition prevents delayed neuronal damage after dMCAO. Representative transmission EM images of the brain tissue and neurons from the lesioned hemispheres of Control
(A–C) and Inhibitor (E, F) groups 21 d after dMCAO. Note the overall appearance of the damaged and vacuolated brain tissue, multiple dead neurons, and collapsed capillary in the Control group (A)
and healthy looking tissue and neurons and normal capillaries in the Inhibitor group (D). Arrows, Normal looking neuron; arrowheads, dead/necrotic neuron; star, damaged neuron. V, Vacuoles; BV,
blood vessels. B, Control group. Shown is a high-magnification image of damaged disintegrating neuron with multiple intracellular vacuoles, irregular-shaped nucleus and nucleoli, mitochondrial
swelling and vacuolization, and condensed chromatin. C, Control group. Necrotic neuron. E, F, Inhibitor group. Shown are high-magnification images of normal looking (E) and slightly damaged (F)
neurons. Scale bars: A, D, 10 ␮m, direct magnification 800⫻; B, C, E, F, 2 ␮m, direct magnification 2500⫻. G, Graph representing the percentage (of all imaged neurons per hemisphere) of normal
looking/healthy (gray), damaged (red), and necrotic (blue) neurons. n ⫽ 3 animals per group. Error bars indicate SEM.

ferent from the Control group (Fig. 7C). Significant differences
between the Inhibitor and Control groups seen in the print position for the left paw (Fig. 7D) could reflect a distinctive compensation for the abnormal contralesional limb movements. This is
agreement with other studies reporting abnormal paw placement
in ischemic animals, which intensified and affected both the left
and right paws (Wang et al., 2008). In addition, significant differences between the Inhibitor and Control groups were detected
in the “dual stance phase,” representing the duration of contact
for both paws with the walking surface (Fig. 7E, Table 1). Both
initial and terminal dual stance durations of the contralesional
right paw were similar between the Inhibitor and Intact groups,
yet significantly different from the Controls (Fig. 7E). As a com-

ponent of walking velocity, this parameter is relevant for stroke
recovery; duration of dual stance parameter is significantly increased in the rodent hemorrhagic stroke model (Liu et al., 2013).
The functional recovery assessment data indicate that the
inhibitor-injected animals regained their sensorimotor deficits
faster than controls.
Weight gain assessment
Weight gain is considered as one of the characteristics of poststroke recovery (Cheng et al., 2014; Park et al., 2014). Continuous
weight monitoring of dMCAO animals revealed a characteristic
weight drop during first 2 d after surgery, followed by the weight
gain for subsequent 21 d. Importantly, the Inhibitor group gained

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12459

Figure 7. Functional recovery assessment. A, B, Bilateral asymmetry/adhesive removal test. Two parameters were monitored daily for each paw: adhesive tape contact time (A) and adhesive
removal time (B). Performances of the 3 final days of each week were averaged as a block. Parameters for the contralesional (affected by the unilateral brain lesion) paw are plotted on the graph.
C–E, Gait/locomotion analysis using the CatWalk test. Graphs demonstrate phase dispersion (C), print position (D), and the initial and terminal dual stance (E) parameters. Animals were tested once
a week for 21 d. RF, Right front; RH, right hind; LF, left front; LH, left hind. Red indicates “anchor” paws. F, Animal weight gain after dMCAO. The body weight of each animal was monitored daily
starting at day 0 (before dMCAO surgery) for 21 d after dMCAO. Data are shown as a percentage, demonstrating the weight of each animal per day relative to its weight at day 0 (the weight recorded
before dMCAO surgery). n ⫽ 11–12 mice per experimental group. Error bars indicate SD. *p ⬍ 0.05, **p ⬍ 0.01, ***p ⬍ 0.001, one-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple-comparisons test.

the weight faster and reached the weight of the Intact group by
21 d after dMCAO. The average relative weight (normalized to
the weight recorded on day 0 before surgery) of control animals at
21 d was significantly lower compared with both the Inhibitor
and the Intact groups (Fig. 7F ). Therefore, behavioral assessment

and weight gain data show a good correlation between functional
improvement and decreased infarct size in the anti-miR-155injected animal group.
In summary, based on our results, we conclude that downregulation of miR-155 strengthens the barrier function of capil-

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

12460 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464

Table 1. Description of the gait/locomotion analysis using CatWalk test parameters
Parameter

Definition

Dual stance (s)
Initial dual stance (s)

Duration of ground contact for both paws simultaneously
The first time period in a step cycle in which a paw makes contact with the
walking surface at the same time as the contralateral paw
The second time period in a step cycle in which the paw makes contact
with the walking surface at the same time as the contralateral paw
Distance between the position of the hind paw and the position of the
previously placed front paw, on the same side of the body, and in the
same step
Temporal relationship between placements of two paws within a step
cycle; phase dispersion depends on the initial contact of one paw
(target paw) to the stride cycle of another paw (anchor paw)

Terminal dual stance (s)
Print positions (cm)

Phase dispersion (%)

Paw
RF
RH
RF
RH
Right paws
Left paws
RF¡LH
LF¡RH

Mean ⫾ SD
inhibitor

Mean ⫾ SD
control

0.018 ⫾ 0.015
0.026 ⫾ 0.014
0.015 ⫾ 0.012
0.030 ⫾ 0.032
0.383 ⫾ 0.088
0.388 ⫾ 0.128

0.028 ⫾ 0.024
0.047 ⫾ 0.041
0.026 ⫾ 0.028
0.034 ⫾ 0.040
0.446 ⫾ 0.172
0.468 ⫾ 0.204

⫺0.224 ⫾ 4.440
1.437 ⫾ 16.326

8.693 ⫾ 25.132
4.658 ⫾ 22.297

p value summary
*
**
*

*
*

Data represent the gait parameters recorded for the right (contralesional) paw in the Inhibitor and Control groups 21 d after dMCAO.
RF, Right front; RH, right hind; LF, left front; LH, left hind.
*p ⬍ 0.05, **p ⬍ 0.01, one-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple-comparisons test.

Figure 8. Possible molecular mechanisms of miR-155 inhibition-mediated support of poststroke recovery. Downregulation of miR-155 strengthens the barrier function of microvascular TJs,
resulting in stabilization of BBB integrity, reduction of brain edema, and restoration of blood flow in the peri-infarct area of stroke. These effects promote neuroprotection and prevent delayed
neuronal death. Preservation of the peri-infarct area is reflected in improved functional recovery in Inhibitor animals. Possible molecular mechanisms mediating these processes could be associated
with the increased (red) or decreased (blue) expression of molecules directly regulated by miR-155.

lary TJs, resulting in decreased vasogenic edema by the first week
after the experimental stroke induction. This initial effect stabilizes cerebral vasculature and restores the blood flow in the periinfarct area of stroke. Both decreased edema and restored
circulation have a neuroprotective outcome, preventing delayed
neuronal death and brain tissue necrosis 21 d after dMCAO; in
turn, preservation of the peri-infarct area in the inhibitorinjected animals is reflected in the improved functional recovery.

Discussion
It has been shown that postischemic vascular remodeling and
poststroke neuroregeneration (including activation of endogenous stem cells) reach maximum activity at 7–14 d and continue
for ⬎21 d after experimental cerebral ischemia (Beck et al., 2000;
Ding et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2009). Based on these studies, we

determined the time points for the intervention and evaluation of
both early postacute and long-lasting changes in the cerebral microvasculature, brain damage, and overall animal recovery. Based
on our knowledge of the anti-inflammatory, anti-tumorigenic,
and anti-atherosclerotic effects of miR-155 inhibition (Faraoni et
al., 2009; O’Connell et al., 2010), we predicted that the shortterm, moderate systemic downregulation of miR-155 achieved in
our experiments could have an overall positive result and would
not induce secondary nonspecific off-target effects or negative
side effects such as impairment of immune function. Predicted
beneficial effects on poststroke recovery were clearly verified
by our evaluation of cerebral vasculature, infarct size, neuronal
damage, and functional recovery. We propose that vascular support achieved by miR-155 inhibition at the early subacute stage of

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke

the experimental stroke played a critical role in prevention of
delayed neuronal loss in the peri-infarct area.
Increased microvascular blood flow velocity, higher (similar
to the nonlesioned hemisphere) density of the functional capillaries, and decreased vascular leakage (and thus more efficient
blood supply to the brain tissue) detected in the inhibitorinjected animals could be mainly attributed to miR-155
inhibition-induced preservation of TJ and BBB integrity. Based
on our EM studies showing the increased number of very small
probably newly formed vasculature, we can only speculate that
miR-155 inhibition could also promote the angiogenesis and/or
vasculogenesis processes. Therefore, a separate, detailed investigation will be performed to obtain the definitive answer to this
question.
Effect of miR-155 on TJ integrity has been mainly associated
with its direct targets: the TJ protein Claudin-1 and a regulator of
TJ organization, RhoA. However, expression of Claudin-1 (both
the mRNA and the protein) is extremely low and has no functional importance in mouse cerebral vasculature (Ohtsuki et al.,
2008; Pfeiffer et al., 2011). Neither PCR nor WB analysis performed in our studies showed any effect of miR-155 inhibition on
Claudin-1 and Rho mRNA and protein expressions. Based on our
data, preservation of TJs in Inhibitor animals could be mediated
by miR-155 inhibition-induced stabilization of ZO-1, a regulatory scaffolding TJ protein critical for the TJ assembly and signal
transduction in the ECs (Harhaj, Antonetti, 2004; Balda, Matter,
2009). A negative regulation of ZO-1 expression by miR-155 has
been demonstrated previously (Tian et al., 2013); however, its
exact mechanism is unclear. Based on our analysis, we speculate
that ZO-1 stability is mediated via a decrease of Akt activity and
induced by miR-155 downregulation, which was also demonstrated by others (Yamanaka et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2012). Our
results indicate that Akt phosphorylation could be induced by the
upregulation of a direct miR-155 target protein, Rheb, which can
supress Akt phosphorylation via an S6K-insulin receptor substrate protein–Akt feedback loop (Di et al., 2012; Cao et al., 2013).
Therefore, miR-155 inhibition-induced stabilization of ZO-1
could be mediated via Rheb/Akt interaction. Interestingly, miR155 is also a repressor of miR-143, which in turn is a negative
regulator of Akt activity (Jordan et al., 2011; Jiang et al., 2012).
Although reduced Akt phosphorylation in the Inhibitor samples
could be explained by Rheb upregulation or inter-miRNA interactions, the decrease in Akt protein expression remains elusive.
Identification of new miR-155 target proteins and miRNAs in the
future could clarify this effect.
In addition to Rheb, several other direct miR-155 targets upregulated in the inhibitor-injected mouse brain could significantly affect TJ integrity. Specifically, SMAD5 is implicated in the
regulation of TJs: its inhibition results in disassembly of the apical
junctional complex (Allaire et al., 2011). eNOS and NO were
shown to support microvascular integrity and prevent microvascular dysfunction caused by an increased leukocyte/endothelilal
adhesion (Kubes et al., 1992; Predescu et al., 2005). Literature
reports and our own in vivo investigation suggest that, in addition
to the specific effect on endothelial TJs, miR-155 inhibition after
stroke could broadly influence vascular function and brain tissue
remodeling. Possible mechanisms and consequences of this influence are summarized in Figure 8. Our studies revealed that a
number of important signaling molecules were upregulated and
downregulated in the lesioned hemisphere of miR-155 inhibitorinjected animals. These molecules are implicated in the regulation of angiogenesis, vascular stabilization, and remodeling, as

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12461

well as vasodilation, neurovascular inflammation, and neuroprotection; therefore, they could significantly contribute to the observed beneficial neurovascular effect of miR-155 inhibition (Fig.
8). Elevated expression of SMAD5 protein, as well as upregulation of the Bmp4 gene, may be associated with activation of the
BMP pathway, which is implicated in reduction of inflammation
and vasculture stabilization (Marchuk et al., 2003; Pardali et al.,
2010). Increased expression of Rictor, a major component of the
mTORC2 complex, could activate mTOR signaling, which is implicated in supporting angiogenesis (through activation of NO
signaling) and neuroprotection after stroke (Karar et al., 2011;
Chong et al., 2013). Interestingly, our previous in vitro experiments showed that inhibition of miR-155 in the endothelial cells
also resulted in alterations of mTOR and TGF␤ signaling (Roitbak et al., 2011). NOS is associated with the improvement of
blood flow and decreased rates of neuronal injury (Srivastava et
al., 2012). Neuroprotective and overall proregenerative effect of
miR-155 inhibition may also be expected, given its positive influence on BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor) expression
(Varendi et al., 2014). Because miR-155 is mainly restricted to
hematopoietic cells and cells involved in vascular remodeling, we
believe that the changes in gene and protein expression detected
in our study reflect the effect of miR-155 inhibition on cerebral
vasculature. The cytokine/chemokine alterations detected in the
Inhibitor group demonstrate that inhibition of miR-155 could
regulate poststroke inflammation processes. A detailed study on
the effect of miR-155 inhibition on both early and chronic poststroke inflammation will be the subject of our future studies.
In summary, our investigation revealed that in vivo regulation
of miR-155 positively influences overall postischemic recovery.
This approach could be explored further as a potential treatment
for stroke.

References
Allaire JM, Darsigny M, Marcoux SS, Roy SA, Schmouth JF, Umans L, Zwijsen A, Boudreau F, Perreault N (2011) Loss of Smad5 leads to the disassembly of the apical junctional complex and increased susceptibility to
experimental colitis. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 300:G586 –
G597. CrossRef Medline
Aspuria PJ, Tamanoi F (2004) The Rheb family of GTP-binding proteins.
Cell Signal 16:1105–1112. CrossRef Medline
Balda MS, Matter K (2009) Tight junctions and the regulation of gene expression. Biochim Biophys Acta 1788:761–767. CrossRef Medline
Balkaya M, Kröber J, Gertz K, Peruzzaro S, Endres M (2013) Characterization of long-term functional outcome in a murine model of mild brain
ischemia. J Neurosci Methods 213:179 –187. CrossRef Medline
Beck H, Plate KH (2009) Angiogenesis after cerebral ischemia. Acta Neuropathol 117:481– 496. CrossRef Medline
Beck H, Acker T, Wiessner C, Allegrini PR, Plate KH (2000) Expression
of angiopoietin-1, angiopoietin-2, and tie receptors after middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat. Am J Pathol 157:1473–1483. CrossRef
Medline
Bouet V, Boulouard M, Toutain J, Divoux D, Bernaudin M, Schumann-Bard
P, Freret T (2009) The adhesive removal test: a sensitive method to assess sensorimotor deficits in mice. Nat Protoc 4:1560 –1564. CrossRef
Medline
Bragin DE, Bush RC, Müller WS, Nemoto EM (2011) High intracranial
pressure effects on cerebral cortical microvascular flow in rats. J Neurotrauma 28:775–785. CrossRef Medline
Bragin DE, Bush RC, Nemoto EM (2013) Effect of cerebral perfusion pressure on cerebral cortical microvascular shunting at high intracranial pressure in rats. Stroke 44:177–181. CrossRef Medline
Brouns R, De Deyn PP (2009) The complexity of neurobiological processes
in acute ischemic stroke. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 111:483– 495. CrossRef
Medline
Cao Y, Tao L, Shen S, Xiao J, Wu H, Li B, Wu X, Luo W, Xiao Q, Hu X, Liu H,
Nie J, Lu S, Yuan B, Han Z, Xiao B, Yang Z, Li X (2013) Cardiac ablation

12462 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464
of Rheb1 induces impaired heart growth, endoplasmic reticulumassociated apoptosis and heart failure in infant mice. Int J Mol Sci 14:
24380 –24398. CrossRef Medline
Carmichael ST (2003) Gene expression changes after focal stroke, traumatic
brain and spinal cord injuries. Curr Opin Neurol 16:699 –704. CrossRef
Medline
Carmichael ST (2005) Rodent models of focal stroke: size, mechanism, and
purpose. NeuroRx 2:396 – 409. CrossRef Medline
Castejón OJ (2012) Ultrastructural pathology of endothelial tight junctions
in human brain oedema. Folia Neuropathol 50:118 –129. Medline
Chen J, Venkat P, Zacharek A, Chopp M (2014) Neurorestorative therapy
for stroke. Front Hum Neurosci 8:382. Medline
Cheng MY, Wang EH, Woodson WJ, Wang S, Sun G, Lee AG, Arac A, Fenno
LE, Deisseroth K, Steinberg GK (2014) Optogenetic neuronal stimulation promotes functional recovery after stroke. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
111:12913–12918. CrossRef Medline
Chong ZZ, Yao Q, Li HH (2013) The rationale of targeting mammalian
target of rapamycin for ischemic stroke. Cell Signal 25:1598 –1607.
CrossRef Medline
Costa A, Afonso J, Osório C, Gomes AL, Caiado F, Valente J, Aguiar SI, Pinto
F, Ramirez M, Dias S (2013) miR-363–5p regulates endothelial cell
properties and their communication with hematopoietic precursor cells.
J Hematol Oncol 6:87. CrossRef Medline
del Zoppo GJ, Mabuchi T (2003) Cerebral microvessel responses to focal
ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 23:879 – 894. Medline
Di R, Wu X, Chang Z, Zhao X, Feng Q, Lu S, Luan Q, Hemmings BA, Li X,
Yang Z (2012) S6K inhibition renders cardiac protection against myocardial infarction through PDK1 phosphorylation of Akt. Biochem J 441:
199 –207. CrossRef Medline
Ding G, Jiang Q, Li L, Zhang L, Zhang ZG, Ledbetter KA, Panda S, Davarani
SP, Athiraman H, Li Q, Ewing JR, Chopp M (2008) Magnetic resonance
imaging investigation of axonal remodeling and angiogenesis after embolic stroke in sildenafil-treated rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 28:1440 –
1448. CrossRef Medline
Egawa G, Nakamizo S, Natsuaki Y, Doi H, Miyachi Y, Kabashima K (2013)
Intravital analysis of vascular permeability in mice using two-photon microscopy. Sci Rep 3:1932. Medline
Fabian MR, Sonenberg N, Filipowicz W (2010) Regulation of mRNA translation and stability by microRNAs. Annu Rev Biochem 79:351–379.
CrossRef Medline
Faraoni I, Antonetti FR, Cardone J, Bonmassar E (2009) miR-155 gene: a
typical multifunctional microRNA. Biochim Biophys Acta 1792:497–505.
CrossRef Medline
Freret T, Bouet V, Leconte C, Roussel S, Chazalviel L, Divoux D, SchumannBard P, Boulouard M (2009) Behavioral deficits after distal focal cerebral ischemia in mice: Usefulness of adhesive removal test. Behav
Neurosci 123:224 –230. CrossRef Medline
Gargalovic PS, Gharavi NM, Clark MJ, Pagnon J, Yang WP, He A, Truong A,
Baruch-Oren T, Berliner JA, Kirchgessner TG, Lusis AJ (2006) The unfolded protein response is an important regulator of inflammatory genes
in endothelial cells. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:2490 –2496.
CrossRef Medline
González-Mariscal L, Tapia R, Chamorro D (2008) Crosstalk of tight junction components with signaling pathways. Biochim Biophys Acta 1778:
729 –756. CrossRef Medline
Goorden SM, Hoogeveen-Westerveld M, Cheng C, van Woerden GM, Mozaffari M, Post L, Duckers HJ, Nellist M, Elgersma Y (2011) Rheb Is
essential for murine development. Mol Cell Biol 31:1672–1678. CrossRef
Medline
Harhaj NS, Antonetti DA (2004) Regulation of tight junctions and loss of
barrier function in pathophysiology. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 36:1206 –
1237. CrossRef Medline
Hauck EF, Apostel S, Hoffmann JF, Heimann A, Kempski O (2004) Capillary flow and diameter changes during reperfusion after global cerebral
ischemia studied by intravital video microscopy. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 24:383–391. CrossRef Medline
Huang X, Le QT, Giaccia AJ (2010) MiR-210: micromanager of the hypoxia
pathway. Trends Mol Med 16:230 –237. CrossRef Medline
Huang X, Shen Y, Liu M, Bi C, Jiang C, Iqbal J, McKeithan TW, Chan WC,
Ding SJ, Fu K (2012) Quantitative proteomics reveals that miR-155 regulates the PI3K-AKT pathway in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Am J
Pathol 181:26 –33. CrossRef Medline

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke
Hudetz AG, Fehér G, Weigle CG, Knuese DE, Kampine JP (1995) Video
microscopy of cerebrocortical capillary flow: response to hypotension
and intracranial hypertension. Am J Physiol 268:H2202–H2210.
Medline
Jiang S, Zhang LF, Zhang HW, Hu S, Lu MH, Liang S, Li B, Li Y, Li D, Wang
ED, Liu MF (2012) A novel miR-155/miR-143 cascade controls glycolysis by regulating hexokinase 2 in breast cancer cells. EMBO J 31:1985–
1998. CrossRef Medline
Jones PB, Shin HK, Boas DA, Hyman BT, Moskowitz MA, Ayata C, Dunn AK
(2008) Simultaneous multispectral reflectance imaging and laser speckle
flowmetry of cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism in focal cerebral
ischemia. J Biomed Opt 13:044007. CrossRef Medline
Jordan SD, Krüger M, Willmes DM, Redemann N, Wunderlich FT, Brönneke
HS, Merkwirth C, Kashkar H, Olkkonen VM, Böttger T, Braun T, Seibler
J, Brüning JC (2011) Obesity-induced overexpression of miRNA-143
inhibits insulin-stimulated AKT activation and impairs glucose metabolism. Nat Cell Biol 13:434 – 446. CrossRef Medline
Karar J, Maity A (2011) PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway in angiogenesis. Front
Mol Neurosci 4:51. Medline
Kato M, Slack FJ (2008) microRNAs: small molecules with big roles, C.
elegans to human cancer. Biol Cell 100:71– 81. CrossRef Medline
Kim SG (1995) Quantification of relative cerebral blood flow change by
flow-sensitive alternating inversion recovery (FAIR) technique: application to functional mapping. Magn Reson Med 34:293–301. CrossRef
Medline
Kleinfeld D, Mitra PP, Helmchen F, Denk W (1998) Fluctuations and
stimulus-induced changes in blood flow observed in individual capillaries
in layers 2 through 4 of rat neocortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95:15741–
15746. CrossRef Medline
Kubes P, Granger DN (1992) Nitric oxide modulates microvascular permeability. Am J Physiol 262:H611–H615. Medline
Kuraoka M, Furuta T, Matsuwaki T, Omatsu T, Ishii Y, Kyuwa S, Yoshikawa
Y (2009) Direct experimental occlusion of the distal middle cerebral
artery induces high reproducibility of brain ischemia in mice. Exp Anim
58:19 –29. CrossRef Medline
Kurowska-Stolarska M, Alivernini S, Ballantine LE, Asquith DL, Millar NL,
Gilchrist DS, Reilly J, Ierna M, Fraser AR, Stolarski B, McSharry C, Hueber AJ, Baxter D, Hunter J, Gay S, Liew FY, McInnes IB (2011)
MicroRNA-155 as a proinflammatory regulator in clinical and experimental arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108:11193–11198. CrossRef
Medline
Laitinen L (1987) Griffonia simplicifolia lectins bind specifically to endothelial cells and some epithelial cells in mouse tissues. Histochem J 19:
225–234. CrossRef Medline
Landgraf P, Rusu M, Sheridan R, Sewer A, Iovino N, Aravin A, Pfeffer S, Rice
A, Kamphorst AO, Landthaler M, Lin C, Socci ND, Hermida L, Fulci V,
Chiaretti S, Foà R, Schliwka J, Fuchs U, Novosel A, Müller RU, et al.
(2007) A mammalian microRNA expression atlas based on small RNA
library sequencing. Cell 129:1401–1414. CrossRef Medline
Langowski JL, Zhang X, Wu L, Mattson JD, Chen T, Smith K, Basham B,
McClanahan T, Kastelein RA, Oft M (2006) IL-23 promotes tumour
incidence and growth. Nature 442:461– 465. CrossRef Medline
Li P, Murphy TH (2008) Two-photon imaging during prolonged middle
cerebral artery occlusion in mice reveals recovery of dendritic structure
after reperfusion. J Neurosci 28:11970 –11979. CrossRef Medline
Linnstaedt SD, Gottwein E, Skalsky RL, Luftig MA, Cullen BR (2010) Virally
induced cellular microRNA miR-155 plays a key role in B-cell immortalization by Epstein-Barr virus. J Virol 84:11670 –11678. CrossRef Medline
Lippman JJ, Lordkipanidze T, Buell ME, Yoon SO, Dunaevsky A (2008)
Morphogenesis and regulation of Bergmann glial processes during Purkinje cell dendritic spine ensheathment and synaptogenesis. Glia 56:
1463–1477. CrossRef Medline
Liu DZ, Tian Y, Ander BP, Xu H, Stamova BS, Zhan X, Turner RJ, Jickling G,
Sharp FR (2010) Brain and blood microRNA expression profiling of
ischemic stroke, intracerebral hemorrhage, and kainate seizures. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 30:92–101. CrossRef Medline
Liu XS, Zhang ZG, Zhang RL, Gregg S, Morris DC, Wang Y, Chopp M (2007)
Stroke induces gene profile changes associated with neurogenesis and
angiogenesis in adult subventricular zone progenitor cells. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 27:564 –574. CrossRef Medline
Liu Y, Ao LJ, Lu G, Leong E, Liu Q, Wang XH, Zhu XL, Sun TF, Fei Z, Jiu T,
Hu X, Poon WS (2013) Quantitative gait analysis of long-term locomo-

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke
tion deficits in classical unilateral striatal intracerebral hemorrhage rat
model. Behav Brain Res 257:166 –177. CrossRef Medline
Lopez-Ramirez MA, Wu D, Pryce G, Simpson JE, Reijerkerk A, King-Robson
J, Kay O, de Vries HE, Hirst MC, Sharrack B, Baker D, Male DK, Michael
GJ, Romero IA (2014) MicroRNA-155 negatively affects blood-brain
barrier function during neuroinflammation. FASEB J 28:2551–2565.
CrossRef Medline
López-Valdés HE, Clarkson AN, Ao Y, Charles AC, Carmichael ST, Sofroniew
MV, Brennan KC (2014) Memantine enhances recovery from stroke.
Stroke 45:2093–2100. CrossRef Medline
Lubjuhn J, Gastens A, von Wilpert G, Bargiotas P, Herrmann O, Murikinati S,
Rabie T, Marti HH, Amende I, Hampton TG, Schwaninger M (2009)
Functional testing in a mouse stroke model induced by occlusion of the
distal middle cerebral artery. J Neurosci Methods 184:95–103. CrossRef
Medline
Marchuk DA, Srinivasan S, Squire TL, Zawistowski JS (2003) Vascular morphogenesis: tales of two syndromes. Hum Mol Genet 12:R97–R112.
CrossRef Medline
Mojsilovic-Petrovic J, Callaghan D, Cui H, Dean C, Stanimirovic DB, Zhang
W (2007) Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is involved in the regulation of hypoxia-stimulated expression of monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2) and MCP-5 (Ccl12) in astrocytes. J Neuroinflammation 4:12. CrossRef Medline
Moon JM, Xu L, Giffard RG (2013) Inhibition of microRNA-181 reduces
forebrain ischemia-induced neuronal loss. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
33:1976 –1982. CrossRef Medline
Motti ED, Imhof HG, Yaşargil MG (1986) The terminal vascular bed in the
superficial cortex of the rat. An SEM study of corrosion casts. J Neurosurg
65:834 – 846. CrossRef Medline
Murphy TH, Corbett D (2009) Plasticity during stroke recovery: from synapse to behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 10:861– 872. CrossRef Medline
Murugaiyan G, Beynon V, Mittal A, Joller N, Weiner HL (2011) Silencing
microRNA-155 ameliorates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Immunol 187:2213–2221. CrossRef Medline
Navaratna D, Guo S, Arai K, Lo EH (2009) Mechanisms and targets for
angiogenic therapy after stroke. Cell Adh Migr 3:216 –223. CrossRef
Medline
O’Connell RM, Kahn D, Gibson WS, Round JL, Scholz RL, Chaudhuri AA,
Kahn ME, Rao DS, Baltimore D (2010) MicroRNA-155 promotes autoimmune inflammation by enhancing inflammatory T cell development.
Immunity 33:607– 619. CrossRef Medline
Ohtsuki S, Yamaguchi H, Katsukura Y, Asashima T, Terasaki T (2008)
mRNA expression levels of tight junction protein genes in mouse brain
capillary endothelial cells highly purified by magnetic cell sorting. J Neurochem 104:147–154. Medline
Pardali E, Goumans MJ, ten Dijke P (2010) Signaling by members of the
TGF-beta family in vascular morphogenesis and disease. Trends Cell Biol
20:556 –567. CrossRef Medline
Park SY, Marasini S, Kim GH, Ku T, Choi C, Park MY, Kim EH, Lee YD,
Suh-Kim H, Kim SS (2014) A method for generating a mouse model of
stroke: evaluation of parameters for blood flow, behavior, and survival
[corrected]. Exp Neurobiol 23:104 –114. CrossRef Medline
Pecot CV, Rupaimoole R, Yang D, Akbani R, Ivan C, Lu C, Wu S, Han HD,
Shah MY, Rodriguez-Aguayo C, Bottsford-Miller J, Liu Y, Kim SB, Unruh
A, Gonzalez-Villasana V, Huang L, Zand B, Moreno-Smith M, Mangala
LS, Taylor M, et al. (2013) Tumour angiogenesis regulation by the miR200 family. Nat Commun 4:2427. Medline
Pena-Philippides JC, Yang Y, Bragina O, Hagberg S, Nemoto E, Roitbak T
(2014) Effect of pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) on infarct size and
inflammation after cerebral ischemia in mice. Transl Stroke Res 5:491–
500. CrossRef Medline
Peng H, Sola A, Moore J, Wen T (2010) Caspase inhibition by
cardiotrophin-1 prevents neuronal death in vivo and in vitro. J Neurosci
Res 88:1041–1051. Medline
Pfeiffer F, Schäfer J, Lyck R, Makrides V, Brunner S, Schaeren-Wiemers N,
Deutsch U, Engelhardt B (2011) Claudin-1 induced sealing of bloodbrain barrier tight junctions ameliorates chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Acta Neuropathol 122:601– 614. CrossRef
Medline
Porter GA, Palade GE, Milici AJ (1990) Differential binding of the lectins
Griffonia simplicifolia I and Lycopersicon esculentum to microvascular

J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464 • 12463
endothelium: organ-specific localization and partial glycoprotein characterization. Eur J Cell Biol 51:85–95. Medline
Predescu D, Predescu S, Shimizu J, Miyawaki-Shimizu K, Malik AB (2005)
Constitutive eNOS-derived nitric oxide is a determinant of endothelial
junctional integrity. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 289:L371–L381.
CrossRef Medline
Rai D, Kim SW, McKeller MR, Dahia PL, Aguiar RC (2010) Targeting of
SMAD5 links microRNA-155 to the TGF-beta pathway and lymphomagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107:3111–3116. CrossRef Medline
Roitbak T, Bragina O, Padilla JL, Pickett GG (2011) The role of microRNAs
in neural stem cell-supported endothelial morphogenesis. Vasc Cell 3:25.
CrossRef Medline
Rothhammer T, Bataille F, Spruss T, Eissner G, Bosserhoff AK (2007) Functional implication of BMP4 expression on angiogenesis in malignant melanoma. Oncogene 26:4158 – 4170. CrossRef Medline
Schiszler I, Tomita M, Fukuuchi Y, Tanahashi N, Inoue K (2000) New optical method for analyzing cortical blood flow heterogeneity in small animals: validation of the method. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 279:
H1291–H1298. Medline
Seylaz J, Charbonné R, Nanri K, Von Euw D, Borredon J, Kacem K, Meric P,
Pinard E (1999) Dynamic in vivo measurement of erythrocyte velocity
and flow in capillaries and of microvessel diameter in the rat brain by
confocal laser microscopy. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 19:863– 870.
Medline
Shi MA, Shi GP (2010) Intracellular delivery strategies for microRNAs and
potential therapies for human cardiovascular diseases. Sci Signal 3:pe40.
Medline
Sola A, Peng H, Rogido M, Wen TC (2008) Animal models of neonatal
stroke and response to erythropoietin and cardiotrophin-1. Int J Dev
Neurosci 26:27–35. CrossRef Medline
Srivastava K, Bath PM, Bayraktutan U (2012) Current therapeutic strategies
to mitigate the eNOS dysfunction in ischaemic stroke. Cell Mol Neurobiol
32:319 –336. CrossRef Medline
Suárez Y, Fernández-Hernando C, Pober JS, Sessa WC (2007) Dicer dependent microRNAs regulate gene expression and functions in human endothelial cells. Circ Res 100:1164 –1173. CrossRef Medline
Sun HX, Zeng DY, Li RT, Pang RP, Yang H, Hu YL, Zhang Q, Jiang Y, Huang
LY, Tang YB, Yan GJ, Zhou JG (2012) Essential role of microRNA-155
in regulating endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation by targeting endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Hypertension 60:1407–1414. CrossRef
Medline
Swanson RA, Morton MT, Tsao-Wu G, Savalos RA, Davidson C, Sharp FR
(1990) A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 10:290 –293. CrossRef Medline
Takeshita F, Patrawala L, Osaki M, Takahashi RU, Yamamoto Y, Kosaka N,
Kawamata M, Kelnar K, Bader AG, Brown D, Ochiya T (2010) Systemic
delivery of synthetic microRNA-16 inhibits the growth of metastatic prostate tumors via downregulation of multiple cell-cycle genes. Mol Ther
18:181–187. CrossRef Medline
Tian R, Wang RL, Xie H, Jin W, Yu KL (2013) Overexpressed miRNA-155
dysregulates intestinal epithelial apical junctional complex in severe acute
pancreatitis. World J Gastroenterol 19:8282– 8291. CrossRef Medline
Ueno Y, Chopp M, Zhang L, Buller B, Liu Z, Lehman NL, Liu XS, Zhang Y,
Roberts C, Zhang ZG (2012) Axonal outgrowth and dendritic plasticity
in the cortical peri-infarct area after experimental stroke. Stroke 43:2221–
2228. CrossRef Medline
van Solingen C, Araldi E, Chamorro-Jorganes A, Fernández-Hernando C,
Suárez Y (2014) Improved repair of dermal wounds in mice lacking
microRNA-155. J Cell Mol Med 18:1104 –1112. CrossRef Medline
Varendi K, Kumar A, Härma MA, Andressoo JO (2014) miR-1, miR-10b,
miR-155, and miR-191 are novel regulators of BDNF. Cell Mol Life Sci
71:4443– 4456. CrossRef Medline
Wan G, Xie W, Liu Z, Xu W, Lao Y, Huang N, Cui K, Liao M, He J, Jiang Y,
Yang BB, Xu H, Xu N, Zhang Y (2014) Hypoxia-induced MIR155 is a
potent autophagy inducer by targeting multiple players in the MTOR
pathway. Autophagy 10:70 –79. CrossRef Medline
Wang J, Yang K, Zhou L, Minhaowu, Wu Y, Zhu M, Lai X, Chen T, Feng L, Li
M, Huang C, Zhong Q, Huang X (2013) MicroRNA-155 promotes autophagy to eliminate intracellular mycobacteria by targeting Rheb. PLoS
Pathog 9:e1003697. CrossRef Medline
Wang Y, Bontempi B, Hong SM, Mehta K, Weinstein PR, Abrams GM, Liu J

12464 • J. Neurosci., September 9, 2015 • 35(36):12446 –12464
(2008) A comprehensive analysis of gait impairment after experimental
stroke and the therapeutic effect of environmental enrichment in rats.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 28:1936 –1950. CrossRef Medline
Weber M, Kim S, Patterson N, Rooney K, Searles CD (2014) MiRNA-155
targets myosin light chain kinase and modulates actin cytoskeleton organization in endothelial cells. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 306:H1192–
H1203. CrossRef Medline
Wiggins JF, Ruffino L, Kelnar K, Omotola M, Patrawala L, Brown D, Bader
AG (2010) Development of a lung cancer therapeutic based on the tumor suppressor microRNA-34. Cancer Res 70:5923–5930. CrossRef
Medline
Xiong Y, Mahmood A, Chopp M (2010) Angiogenesis, neurogenesis and
brain recovery of function following injury. Curr Opin Investig Drugs
11:298 –308. Medline
Yamanaka Y, Tagawa H, Takahashi N, Watanabe A, Guo YM, Iwamoto K,
Yamashita J, Saitoh H, Kameoka Y, Shimizu N, Ichinohasama R, Sawada
K (2009) Aberrant overexpression of microRNAs activate AKT signal-

Caballero-Garrido et al. • miR-155 Inhibition Supports Recovery after Stroke
ing via down-regulation of tumor suppressors in natural killer-cell lymphoma/leukemia. Blood 114:3265–3275. CrossRef Medline
Yin Q, Wang X, Fewell C, Cameron J, Zhu H, Baddoo M, Lin Z, Flemington
EK (2010) MicroRNA miR-155 inhibits bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) signaling and BMP-mediated Epstein-Barr virus reactivation.
J Virol 84:6318 – 6327. CrossRef Medline
Zhang M, Zhou X, Wang B, Yung BC, Lee LJ, Ghoshal K, Lee RJ (2013)
Lactosylated gramicidin-based lipid nanoparticles (Lac-GLN) for targeted delivery of anti-miR-155 to hepatocellular carcinoma. J Control
Release 168:251–261. CrossRef Medline
Zhang ZG, Chopp M (2009) Neurorestorative therapies for stroke: underlying mechanisms and translation to the clinic. Lancet Neurol 8:491–500.
CrossRef Medline
Zhu N, Zhang D, Chen S, Liu X, Lin L, Huang X, Guo Z, Liu J, Wang Y, Yuan
W, Qin Y (2011) Endothelial enriched microRNAs regulate angiotensin
II-induced endothelial inflammation and migration. Atherosclerosis 215:
286 –293. CrossRef Medline

