Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39
DOI 10.1186/s12974-015-0264-1

RESEARCH

JOURNAL OF
NEUROINFLAMMATION

Open Access

MCP-induced protein 1 mediates the
minocycline-induced neuroprotection against
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in vitro and
in vivo
Zhuqing Jin1, Jian Liang2*, Jing Wang2 and Pappachan E Kolattukudy2

Abstract
Background: Minocycline, a broad-spectrum tetracycline antibiotic, has shown anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective
effects in ischemic brain injury. The present study seeks to determine whether monocyte chemotactic protein-induced
protein 1 (MCPIP1), a recently identified modulator of inflammatory reactions, is involved in the cerebral neuroprotection
conferred by minocycline treatment in the animal model of focal cerebral ischemia and to elucidate the mechanisms of
minocycline-induced ischemic brain tolerance.
Methods: Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) for 2 h in male C57BL/6
mice and MCPIP1 knockout mice followed by 24- or 48-h reperfusion. Twelve hours before ischemia or 2 h after MCAO,
mice were injected intraperitoneally with 90 mg/kg of minocycline hydrochloride. Thereafter, the animals were injected
twice a day, at a dose of 90 mg/kg after ischemia until sacrificed. Transcription and expression of MCPIP1 gene was
monitored by quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), Western blot, and immunohistochemistry. The neurobehavioral
scores, infarction volumes, and proinflammatory cytokines in brain and NF-κB signaling were evaluated after
ischemia/reperfusion.
Results: MCPIP1 protein and mRNA levels significantly increased in mouse brain undergoing minocycline
pretreatment. Minocycline treatment significantly attenuated the infarct volume, neurological deficits, and
upregulation of proinflammatory cytokines in the brain of wild type mice after MCAO. MCPIP1-deficient mice failed to
evoke minocycline-treatment-induced tolerance compared with that of the control MCPIP1-deficient group without
minocycline treatment. Similarly, in vitro data showed that minocycline significantly induced the expression of MCPIP1
in primary neuron-glial cells, cortical neurons, and reduced oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD)-induced cell death.
The absence of MCPIP1 blocked minocycline-induced protection on neuron-glial cells and cortical neurons treated
with OGD.
Conclusions: Our in vitro and in vivo studies demonstrate that MCPIP1 is an important mediator of minocyclineinduced protection from brain ischemia.
Keywords: Ischemic stroke, Minocycline, Monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1 (MCPIP1), Middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), Proinflammatory cytokines

* Correspondence: jian.liang@ucf.edu
2
Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Central Florida College
of Medicine, 4000 Central Florida Boulevard, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2015 Jin et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

Introduction
Significant advances have been made to lessen the immense public health problem of stroke. Endeavors in prevention have brought down stroke incidence and mortality,
and the establishment of exceptional intensive care units
has ameliorated the functional consequence of stroke victims [1,2]. However, limited approaches have been made in
developing therapies to decrease the detrimental effects of
cerebral ischemia. It has been demonstrated that the brain
has a marvelous capacity for self-preservation, elucidated
by the protective responses induced by ischemia and
preconditioning [2]. Understanding the mechanisms underlying these protective actions will help to minimize ischemic brain injury.
Minocycline, a tetracycline antibiotic, manifests antiinflammatory, anti-apoptotic, and neuroprotective effects independent of its broad-spectrum antimicrobial
activity [3-7]. Its superior penetration to the brain tissue,
good clinical safety, and prolonged therapeutic window
makes it an ideal candidate for application in the treatment
of stroke [8]. Although the observed neuroprotection of
minocycline in ischemic stroke reflects some properties
that mimic selected features of endogenous neuroprotection, it is still unclear whether minocycline acts solely by
engaging endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms [2].
Monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1
(MCPIP1) was discovered as an inducible protein expressed
in human peripheral blood monocytes treated with monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1) [9]. Our previous reports demonstrated that MCPIP1 was a negative regulator
of macrophage activation and that MCPIP1 inhibited the
production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as TNFα,
IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1, by inhibiting the activity of JNK
and NF-κB proinflammatory signal pathways [10,11]. Our
further studies indicated that MCPIP1 was also inducibly
expressed in macrophages, endothelial cells, and microglia
with LPS stimulation [12-14], and MCPIP1 participates in
LPS preconditioning/electroacupuncture-pretreatment-induced ischemic brain tolerance [14,15]. The present study
examined whether MCPIP1 is involved in minocyclinetreatment-induced neuroprotection against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in neuronal cultures and in vivo
using MCPIP1-deficient mice.

Page 2 of 12

protein in MCPIP−/− mice was confirmed by immunoblotting. In all experiments, 8- to 9-week-old mice were
used. All experimental procedures were approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of University of Central Florida. We performed all the experiments
by using littermate mice. Minocycline treatment was performed following a modification of the method reported
by Yrjanheikki and colleagues [3]. Twelve hours before
ischemia or 2 h after stroke, mice were injected intraperitoneally with 90 mg/kg of minocycline hydrochloride
(Sigma, USA). Thereafter, the animals were injected twice
a day, at a dose of 90 mg/kg, after ischemia until sacrificed.
Control groups were treated with the same volume of saline starting 12 h before and after stroke.
Mice focal brain ischemia reperfusion model

For focal brain ischemia, mouse transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) was produced by filament
occlusion of the right MCA as previously described [14].
In brief, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (induction
with 3%; maintenance with 1.2%) in oxygen-enriched air by
facemask, and rectal temperature was controlled at 37°C ±
0.5°C throughout the experiment with heating lamps.
Unilateral MCAO was performed by inserting a 7-0 nylon
monofilament into the internal carotid artery via an external carotid artery stump and then positioning the filament
tip for occlusion at a distance of 8 to 9 mm beyond the
internal carotid/pterygopalatine artery bifurcation. MCA
was occluded for 120 min followed by reperfusion.
Brain infarction measurement

The brains were stained with 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride (TTC) ( Sigma, USA ) to determine infarct volume [14]. After 2 h of MCAO and 48 h of reperfusion,
mice were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane and brains
were removed and sectioned coronally at a thickness of
2 mm and incubated in 2% TTC at 37°C for 20 min. Brain
slices were then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C overnight and scanned into a computer and quantified using
the Image J software. Infarct volume was expressed as a
percentage of the contralateral hemisphere. Eight male
mice were used for each group.

Methods
Animals and minocycline treatment

Neurological function assessment

MCPIP1 knockout mice were established as previously
described [11]. Briefly, MCPIP1−/− mice were generated
by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells
from C57/BL6 background mice. Exons 3, 4, 5, and most
part of 6 of mouse MCPIP1 were replaced with a LacZneomycin cassette in embryonic stem cells established
from C57/BL6 mice and established MCPIP1−/− mice in
pure C57/BL6 background. The absence of MCPIP1

The functional outcome of the animals was assessed at
48 h after ischemic/reperfusion. A modified Bederson score
[15] was determined according to the following scoring
system: 0, no deficit; 1, forelimb flexion; 2, as for 1, plus decreased resistance to lateral push; 3, unidirectional circling;
4, longitudinal spinning or seizure activity; and 5, no movement. Forty-eight hours after surgery, the foot fault test
was performed. Ten male mice were used in each group.

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

Brain edema measurement

The mice were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane and
brains were removed at 48 h after MCAO. The brains
were weighed to obtain the wet weight and were then
dried at 105°C for 24 h before measuring dry weight.
Brain moisture content (%) was calculated as follows:
100 × (wet weight − dry weight)/wet weight. There
were ten mice in each group.
Cell culture and transfections

Primary culture of mouse cortical neurons was prepared
using 18-day-old (E18) embryos from C57 BL/6 J wild type
and MCPIP1−/− mouse by the method reported [16] with
some modifications. Briefly, the mouse brain cortex was
dissected and minced and digested in 0.25% trypsin in
HEPES-buffered Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS)
without calcium or magnesium at 37°C for 10 min. The tissue was washed and dissociated mechanically in HBSS buffer by using a Pasteur pipette. The cell suspension was laid
on Hanks’ balanced salt solution containing 4% BSA and
centrifuged at 1,000 rpm for 5 min. The pellet was resuspended in Neurobasal-A medium with B-27 supplement,
0.25 mmol/L Glutamax-1, 40 U/mL penicillin, 40 μg/mL
streptomycin (Neurobasal-A/B-27), and 10% dialyzed horse
serum. Cells were plated at in poly-L-lysine-coated 24-well
plates at 6 × 105 cells per well. Cultures were maintained at
37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Half
of the medium was replaced with Neurobasal-A/B-27,
10% fetal bovine serum, and 5% horse serum twice a week.
For the oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD), we replaced
the growth medium with glucose-free culture medium
(2 mL per well) and put the plates into an incubator under
95% N2 and 5% CO2 at 37°C for 120 min. Then, cells were
returned to the normal feeding medium and incubated
under normal conditions at 37°C for our studies. Control
cell cultures not deprived of oxygen and glucose were incubated under normal conditions. Minocycline (10 μM)
was added to the culture 12 h prior to OGD treatment.
Referring to the methods in the report [16], transfections
of neurons at day 5 in vitro (DIV5) with MCPIP1 siRNA
(4390771, Life Technologies) and negative control siRNA
(4390843, Life Technologies) were performed with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Twenty-four hours later, the cells
were treated with or without minocycline (10 μM) for
12 h prior OGD treatment.

Page 3 of 12

yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) [17] and
trypan blue inclusion [18]. MTT (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)
was added (final concentration, 0.5 mg/mL) to each well.
After 3 h of additional incubation, 100 μL of a solution
of 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 0.01 N HCl
was added to dissolve the crystals for 16 h. Absorbance
values at the test wavelength of 570 nm and the reference wavelength of 630 nm were determined with an
automatic microplate reader. Cell survival was quantitated after trypan blue staining by cell counting. Trypan
blue (Sigma, USA) (5%) was added to culture wells, and
stained (dead) and unstained (live) cells were counted in
five high-power (×200) fields per culture. The extent of
cell death was expressed as the number of trypan-bluepositive cells as a percent of the total number of cells
counted. At least 200 cells were counted per culture.
Quantitative real-time PCR

Quantitative real-time PCR was performed as previously
described [11]. Briefly, total RNA was isolated using RNA
STAT-60 reagent (Tel-Test, Inc., USA) after removing the
genomic DNA using DNase I (Ambion, USA), and 2.0 μg
of total RNA from microglia or mouse brain tissue was
reverse-transcribed to cDNA using a commercially available kit (Applied Biosystems, USA). Quantitative real-time
PCR was performed with iCycler Thermal Cycler (BioRad, USA) using 2X SYBR Green master mixes (Bio-Rad,
USA). Forty cycles were conducted as follows: 95°C for
30 s, 60°C for 30 s, proceeded by 10 min at 95°C for polymerase activation. Quantification was performed by the
delta cycle time method, with mouse or rat β-actin used
for normalization. The mouse specific primers (IDT, USA)
are as follows: MCPIP1: F: 5′-CCCCCTGACGACCCTT
TAG, R: 5′-GGCAGTGGTTTCTTACGAAGGA; TNFα:
F: 5′-CTGAGGTCAATCTGCCCAAGTAC, R: 5′-CTTC
ACAGAGCAATGACTCCAAAG; IL-1β: F: 5′-GCCCAT
CCTCTGTGACTCAT, R: 5′-AGGCCACAGGTATTTT
GTCG; IL-6: F: 5′-TCGTGGAAATGAGAAAAGAGTTG,
R: 5′-AGTGCATCATCGTTGTTCATACA; MCP-1: F:
5′-CCATCTCTGACCTGCTCTTCCT, R: -AGACCCAC
TCATTTGCAGCAT; β-actin: F: 5′-AAATCGTGCGT
GACATCAAAGA, R: 5′-GGCCATCTCCTGCTCGAA.
The rat specific primers are as follows: TNFα: F: 5′TCAGCCGATTTGCCATTTC -3′, R: 5′-AGGGCTCTT
GATGGCAGAGA-3′; β-actin: F: 5′-GCCTCACTGTC
CACCTTCCA-3′, R: 5′-GGGCCGGACTCATCGTAC
T-3′. Eight male mice were used in each group.

MTT and trypan blue exclusion assay to determine cell
viability

Immunoblot

Primary neuron-glial cells were seeded in 24-well plate.
Cells were treated with OGD in the presence or absence
of minocycline (10 μM). Twenty-four hours after OGD,
examination of cell damage was quantitatively assessed
by measuring the reduction of 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-

Immunoblot was performed as previously described [11].
Proteins from mouse brain tissue were extracted and protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford
method (Bio-Rad, USA) with bovine serum albumin as
the standard. Proteins (50 μg) were separated by SDS-

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

PAGE and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes in a
transfer buffer containing 0.1% SDS. The membranes were
treated with 5% nonfat dry milk in 0.05% Tween 20 in
Tris-buffered saline (TTBS) for 2 h and incubated with
the primary antibodies against MCPIP1 (Santa Cruz,
USA), phosphor-p-65 (Cell Signaling, USA), p-65 (Cell
Signaling, USA) at a 1:1,000 dilution in the blocking
buffer, 4°C, gently shaking, overnight. After being washed
with TTBS three times for 10 min each, the membranes
were incubated with a 1:2,000 dilution of secondary
antibody (Santa Cruz, USA) in TTBS for 1 h. Following
three 10-min washes with TTBS, membranes were incubated with SuperSignal West Pico Chemiluminescent
Substrate (Pierce, USA) and exposed to x-ray film. The
intensity of bands was quantified by AlphaImage 2200
(AlphaInnotech, USA). The ratios between interested
protein bands and the loading control (β-actin, total
p-65) were calculated, and the data are expressed as the
normalized folds with respect to sham. Six male mice
were used in each group.
Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry was performed as previously
described [15]. At 24 h after minocycline treatment, mice
were transcardially perfused under anesthesia with icecold phosphate-buffered saline and then with 4% paraformaldehyde. Brains were removed and fixed overnight in
4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C. The brains were sectioned
coronally at 30-μm thickness in ice-cold phosphatebuffered saline using a vibrating microtome (Leica Microsystems). The sections were placed in an anti-freeze
solution and stored at −20°C for later use. They were
washed, the nonspecific binding sites on sections were
blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin, and incubated
overnight with primary antibody against glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP), primary antibody against CD11b

Page 4 of 12

(BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA),
primary antibody against neuron-specific enolase (NSE;
Invitrogen, USA), primary antibody against MCPIP1 (Santa
Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas, USA), AlexaFluor®-488conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen, USA), and
AlexaFluor®-594-conjugated secondary antibody (Invitrogen,
USA) and scanned under a fluorescence microscope (Leica
TCS SP5) at × 400 magnification. Three fields per section
were captured and analyzed. Six male mice were used in
each group.
Statistical analysis

The data are presented as mean ± SD. Multiple comparisons were evaluated by one-way ANOVA followed by
the Tukey or Dunnett test. Two-group comparisons
were analyzed by the two-tailed Student t test. For all
analyses, a value of P < 0.05 was considered significant.

Results
MCPIP1 induction in mouse brain by minocycline

In ischemic stroke, minocycline treatment has been demonstrated to have a significant protective effect against
brain damage, but the underlying mechanism remains
poorly understood. First, we examined whether minocycline treatment induces MCPIP1 in mouse brain. The
MCPIP1 mRNA level in mouse cortex brain was significantly induced by minocycline treatment compared to
controls. Significant increase of MCPIP1 transcript level
was detected at 6 h and reached 11.5 ± 1.9-fold at 12 h
after minocycline treatment (P < 0.001) and began to decline by 24 hr (Figure 1A). Consistently, the MCPIP1 protein level in mouse brain was significantly elevated by
minocycline treatment than in the controls: 6.1 ± 0.93-fold
increase at 24 h after minocycline treatment and remained
high till 48 hr (P < 0.05; Figure 1B). To determine the
cellular localization of MCPIP1 expression, sections from

Figure 1 Minocycline-treatment-induced MCPIP1 in the brain. (A) MCPIP1 mRNA expression in mouse brain by minocycline treatment as
measured by qRT-PCR. Values represent mean ± SD, *P < 0.05, #P < 0.01, §P < 0.001 versus control. (B) MCPIP1 protein levels in mouse brain by
minocycline treatment as measured by Western blot. Results are representative of three independent experiments. *P < 0.05 versus control. Values
represent mean ± SD. MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1; qRT-PCR, quantitative real-time PCR.

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

mice brain at 24 h after minocycline treatment were subjected to immunohistochemistry with antibody against
MCPIP1. MCPIP1 expression was elevated by minocycline
treatment and the immunoreactivity co-localized with
NSE, a neuron specific marker, implying that the elevated
level of MCPIP1 protein induced by minocycline was

Page 5 of 12

located mainly in neurons (Figure 2C). Examination of the
co-localization of MCPIP1 with CD11b, the leukocytespecific receptor and regarded as a marker for macrophages/microglia, showed a few MCPIP1/CD11b-positive
cells (Figure 2F). Examination of the co-localization study
of MCPIP1 with GFAP, a marker for activated astrocytes,

Figure 2 MCPIP1 is expressed in neurons and microglia. Co-localization of MCPIP1 expression (A, D, G) of NSE (B), CD11b (E), and GFAP
(H) at 24 h after minocycline treatment. Yellow fluorescence indicates co-localization of MCPIP1/NSE (C) and MCPIP1/CD11b (F). MCPIP1/GFAP
(I) showed no yellow-fluorescent structures. n = 5 mice per group. GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein; MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic proteininduced protein 1; NSE, neuron-specific enolase.

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

showed that MCPIP1 expression was not located in the
astrocytes (Figure 2I). These observations indicate that
MCPIP1 protein is upregulated mainly in neurons and
microglia in the mice brain after minocycline treatment.
Loss of minocycline-treatment-induced tolerance to
ischemic stroke by MCPIP1 deficiency

We examined the effects of minocycline treatment on ischemic brain infarction. MCPIP1-deficient and wild type
mice were pretreated with minocycline as described in
the Methods section, and these mice were subjected to
MCAO 12 h after minocycline treatment. The brain

Page 6 of 12

infarct size was assessed with TTC staining 48 h after
MCAO, and the results showed that the infarct size of
minocycline-pretreated wild type mice was significantly
reduced compared to that of the control (39.4% ± 5.3%
versus 19.3% ± 4.1%, respectively, Figure 3A). MCPIP1deficient mice failed to evoke minocycline-treatmentinduced tolerance compared with that of the control
MCPIP1 knockout group without minocycline treatment
(54.3% ± 6.5% versus 47.6% ± 6.9%, respectively, Figure 3A).
There was no significant difference in brain infarct size
between minocycline-pretreated and control in MCPIP1
knockout mice. The neurological functions of mice were

Figure 3 Reduction in infarct size and improvement of neurological function by minocycline treatment in the wild type, but not in
MCPIP1-deficient mice. The brain infarct size was assessed 48 h after MCAO. (A) Infarct images obtained by TTC staining at 48 h after MCAO.
The normal tissue was stained deep red and the infarct was stained milky. (B) Brain infarcts were quantified as percentage area of ischemic
hemisphere. The infarct size of minocycline-pretreated wild type mice was significantly reduced compared to that of the control. There was no
significant difference in brain infarct size between the minocycline-pretreated and control in MCPIP1-deficient mice. (C) Brain water content as a
measure of brain edema of the ischemic hemisphere. The brain edema was significantly reduced at 48 h after MCAO in minocycline-pretreated
wild type mice compared to that of the control group. In the MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no significant difference in brain water content
between minocycline-pretreated and control group without minocycline treatment. (D) Neurological function assessment was performed 24 h
after MCAO. The neurological scores of minocycline-pretreated wild type mice were significantly improved compared to that of the control. In
MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no significant difference in neurological deficits between minocycline-pretreated and control group. Values
represent mean ± SD, *P < 0.05, n = 10 mice per group. MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic protein-induced
protein 1; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride.

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

determined, and the results showed that the neurological
scores of minocycline-pretreated wild type mice were
significantly improved compared to that of the control.
In MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no significant difference in neurological deficits between the minocyclinepretreated and control group without minocycline
treatment (Figure 3B). Edema is one of the earliest
pathological changes after ischemic neuronal damage.
The results showed that the brain edema was significantly reduced at 48 h after MCAO in minocyclinepretreated wild type mice compared to that of the control group. In the MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no
significant difference in brain water content between the
minocycline-pretreated and control group without minocycline treatment (Figure 3C). We also examined the effects of minocycline treatment post-stroke on ischemic
brain infarction and neurological functions. MCPIP1deficient and wild type mice were treated with minocycline (50 mg/kg per day) at 2 h after MCAO. The results
showed that the infarct size of minocycline-treated wild
type mice was significantly reduced compared to that of
the control (40.3% ± 6.1% versus 23.3% ± 4.7%, P < 0.05,
Figure 4A). MCPIP1-deficient mice failed to evoke
minocycline-treatment-induced neuroprotection compared with that of the control MCPIP1 knockout group
without minocycline treatment (55.1% ± 4.9% versus
52.8% ± 5.3%, P > 0.05, Figure 4A). There was no significant
difference in brain infarct size between the minocyclinetreated and control in MCPIP1 knockout mice. The neurological functions of mice were determined, and the results
showed that the neurological scores of minocycline-treated
wild type mice were significantly improved compared to
that of the control. In MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was

Page 7 of 12

no significant difference in neurological deficits between
the minocycline-treated and control group without minocycline treatment (Figure 4B). These results indicated that
MCPIP1 may mediate minocycline-induced neuroprotection afforded by minocycline administration after stroke or
before stroke.
Proinflammatory cytokine expression

We examined the expression of proinflammatory cytokine transcripts in the ischemic brain of the wild type
and MCPIP1 knockout mice with or without minocycline treatment after MCAO. The results showed that
the transcript levels of TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1
were significantly elevated in shams in MCPIP1 knockout mice than that of wild type. The transcript levels of
TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1 were significantly reduced at 24 h after MCAO in minocycline-pretreated
wild type mice compared to that of the control group. In
the MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no significant difference in the proinflammatory cytokine expression between
the minocycline-pretreated and control group without
minocycline treatment (Figure 5). Consistent with the
results of Figure 1, the MCPIP1 mRNA level in mouse
brain was significantly induced by minocycline treatment
compared to the controls in wild type mice. Significant
increase of the MCPIP1 transcript level was detected at
24 h after minocycline treatment after ischemic stroke
(Figure 5).
Minocycline protection from OGD-induced neuronal
damage via induction of MCPIP1 in neurons

Given the observed effects of minocycline on wild type
and MCPIP1−/− mice subjected to MCAO, we investigated

Figure 4 Reduction in infarct size and improvement of neurological function by 2-h post-treatment of minocycline on stroke in
the wild type, but not in MCPIP1-deficient mice. (A) The results showed that the infarct size of minocycline-treated wild type mice was
significantly reduced compared to that of the control (40.3% ± 6.1% versus 23.3% ± 4.7%, respectively; values represent mean ± SD, *P < 0.05,
n = 10 mice per group). MCPIP1-deficient mice failed to evoke minocycline treatment-induced neuroprotection compared with that of control
MCPIP1 knockout group without minocycline treatment (55.1% ± 4.9% versus 52.8% ± 5.3%). There was no significant difference in brain infarct
size between minocycline-treated and control in MCPIP1 knockout mice. (B) The neurological functions of mice were determined, and the
results showed that the neurological scores of minocycline-treated wild type mice were significantly improved compared to that of the control.
In MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no significant difference in neurological deficits between minocycline-treated and control group without
minocycline treatment. MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1.

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

Page 8 of 12

Figure 5 Reduction in inflammatory cytokine expression in ischemic brain by minocycline treatment in the wild type, but not in
MCPIP1-deficient mice. The results showed that the expression levels of TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1 were significantly elevated in shams in
MCPIP1-deficient mice than that of wild type and that the expression levels of TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1 were significantly reduced at 24 h
after MCAO in minocycline-pretreated wild type mice compared to that of the control. In the MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was no significant
difference in proinflammatory cytokine expression between minocycline-pretreated and control group without minocycline treatment. The
MCPIP1 mRNA level in mouse brain was significantly induced by minocycline treatment compared to controls in wild type mice. Significant
increase of MCPIP1 transcript level was detected at 24 h after minocycline treatment after ischemic stroke (P < 0.01). Values represent mean ± SD,
n = 6 mice per group. MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1; MCP-1, monocyte chemotactic protein 1.

the roles of minocycline on OGD-induced neuronal
damage in primary neuron-glia cells from wild type and
MCPIP1−/− mice. Cell viability assays revealed that the
treatment of OGD on the mixed neuron-glia cells resulted in cell death, and pretreatment with minocycline
(10 μM) increased the resistance to OGD-induced neuronal damage (Figure 6A, B) and reduced the expression
of TNFα and IL-1β induced by OGD in neuron-glia cells
(Figure 6C, D). More significantly, cell viability analysis
revealed that depletion of MCPIP1 in neuron-glia cells
from MCPIP1−/− mice reduced the protective effects of
minocycline on the cells subjected to OGD. In addition,
MCPIP1 depletion in neuron-glia cells also increased
the expression of TNFα and IL-1β induced by OGD in
the cells pretreated by minocycline compared with that
of the control group from the wild type. We also investigated the roles of minocycline on OGD-induced neuronal

damage in primary cortical neurons from wild type mice
with or without knockdown of MCPIP1. Minocycline
(10 μM) significantly induced the expression of MCPIP1
in cortical neurons (Figure 7A). Cell viability assays revealed that the treatment of OGD on cortical neurons
resulted in cell death, and the pretreatment with minocycline can increase the resistance to OGD-induced
neuronal damage (Figure 7B) and reduced the expression of TNFα induced by OGD in cortical neurons
(Figure 7C). More interestingly, cell viability analysis
revealed that the depletion of MCPIP1 by siMCPIP1 reduced the protective effects of minocycline on cortical
neurons subjected to OGD (Figure 7B). In addition,
MCPIP1 depletion significantly increased the expression
of TNFα induced by OGD in cortical neurons pretreated by minocycline compared with that of the control group of siControl (Figure 7C).

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

Page 9 of 12

Figure 6 Minocycline neuroprotection to OGD-induced neuronal damage via MCPIP1 in neuron-glia cells from MCPIP1−/− mice.
(A, B) Cell viability assays by MTT and cell death rate by trypan blue inclusion revealed that treatment of OGD on the mixed neuron-glia cells
resulted in cell death and pretreatment with minocycline can increase the resistance to OGD-induced neuronal damage. Conversely, there was no
significant difference on OGD-induced neuronal damage in neuron-glia cells from MCPIP1−/− mice with the treatment of minocycline compared with
that of the control group without minocycline treatment. (C, D) Pretreatment of minocycline decreased OGD-induced expression of TNFα and IL-1β in
the mixed neuron-glia cells. There was no significant reduction of OGD-induced TNFα and IL-1β expression in mixed neuron-glia cells from MCPIP1−/−
mice with the treatment of minocycline compared with that of the control group without minocycline treatment. MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic
protein-induced protein 1; MTT, 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation.

Activation of NF-κB-signaling pathway

Since activation of the NF-κB-signaling pathway is involved in the production of proinflammatory cytokines,
we tested whether minocycline treatment affects NF-κB
activation. The results showed that phosphorylation of
p-65 was significantly reduced at 24 h after MCAO in
the minocycline-pretreated wild type mice compared to
that of the control. In MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was
no significant difference in p-65 phosphorylation level
between the minocycline-pretreated and control group
without minocycline treatment (Figure 8).

Discussion
Many studies have shown that doxycycline and minocycline play anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects
in ischemic brain injury. This action is completely independent and distinct from their antimicrobial action

[3,8,19-22]. It has been well known that ischemic stroke
includes secondary inflammation that plays a significant
part in the devastating consequences of ischemic insult
[23-27]. Although numerous studies have shown that minocycline can provide significant neuroprotection against
ischemic brain injury and inhibit inflammatory responses
such as microglial activation and proinflammatory cytokine generation [3,27-29], the molecular mechanisms that
contribute to the alleviation of brain inflammation after
ischemia by minocycline are not well understood. The
present study is the first to reveal the role of MCPIP1 in
minocycline-treatment-induced cerebral ischemic protection. MCPIP1 was first identified as a protein induced in
human peripheral blood monocyte by the chemokine
MCP-1 [9]. MCPIP1 has been demonstrated to have the
ability to suppress inflammation [10,11,30]. MCPIP1 negatively affects inflammatory gene expression and NF-κB

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

Page 10 of 12

Figure 7 Minocycline neuroprotection to OGD-induced neuronal damage via MCPIP1 in primary cortical neurons from wild type mice.
(A) A representative Western blot shows the induced expression of MCPIP1 by minocycline and the knockdown of MCPIP1 by siMCPIP1 in
primary cortical neurons from C57BL/6 wild type mice. OGD induced MCPIP1 mildly, and minocycline induced MCPIP1 to a much higher level.
siMCPIP1 knocked down MCPIP1 very efficiently. (B) MTT cell viability analysis shows that pretreatment with minocycline increased the resistance
to OGD-induced neuronal damage and that knockdown of MCPIP1 by siMCPIP1 reduced the protective effects of minocycline on primary cortical
neurons subjected to OGD. (C) Knockdown of MCPIP1 significantly increased the expression of TNFα induced by OGD in primary cortical neurons
pretreated with minocycline compared with that of control group of siControl. MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1; MTT,
3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation; siControl, negative control silencing RNA;
siMCPIP1, MCPIP1 silencing RNA.

activation in response to LPS [10,11]. In our previous
studies, MCPIP1 was also found to be inducibly expressed
in macrophages, macroglia, and endothelial cells with LPS
stimulation [12-14]. It was also shown that MCPIP1 participates in LPS and electroacupuncture preconditioninginduced ischemic brain tolerance [14]. The recent study
[31] showed that MCPIP1 can be translationally controlled
by some other proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-17.
All of these investigations indicated that MCPIP1 may act
as an inducible endogenous negative feedback regulator of
inflammation and could play a highly beneficial role in
human inflammation-related diseases including stroke.
In the present study, we found that MCPIP1 was significantly induced in mouse brain by minocycline treatment, which suggested that MCPIP1 may be involved in
minocycline-induced neuroprotection after ischemic stroke.
In addition, we observed that brain infarct volumes,
brain edema, and neurological functions after stroke
were significantly alleviated by minocycline treatment in
wild type mice, whereas in MCPIP1-deficient mice,
minocycline treatment failed to improve these outcomes

of ischemia, which indicated that MCPIP1 may participate
in minocycline-induced neuroprotection in ischemic stroke.
Many studies have demonstrated that minocycline is an
ideal therapeutic agent for stroke. Our results show that
administration of minocycline before or after stroke
afforded protection against stroke damage. Of course, the
post-treatment paradigm of minocycline indicates more
clinical significance in its potential therapeutic application
for stroke in the future. The novelty of the present study
is that MCPIP1 mediates minocycline-induced neuroprotection against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury
whether the drug is ministered before or after stroke. In
both cases, minocycline induced MCPIP1 in the brain
and afforded protection against ischemic brain damage.
It has been well established that proinflammatory gene
expression leads to stroke damage [25,32]. During brain
ischemia, proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α,
IL-1β, IL-6, and chemokines such as CINC and MCP-1
are produced by a variety of activated cell types, including endothelial cells, microglia, astrocytes, and neurons
[32]. Blocking the production of these proinflammatory

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

Figure 8 Inhibition of NF-κB activation in the ischemic brain
by minocycline treatment in the wild type, but not in MCPIP1deficient mice. A representative Western blot shows protein levels
of p-65 phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of p-65 was significantly
reduced at 24 h after MCAO in minocycline-pretreated wild type mice
compared to that of the control. In MCPIP1-deficient mice, there was
no significant difference in p-65 phosphorylation level between the
minocycline-pretreated and control group without minocycline
treatment. Densitometric analysis was used to quantify phospho-p-65
protein levels versus total p-65 in three independent Western blots,
and the data are expressed as the normalized folds with respect to
sham. Values represent mean ± SD. MCAO, middle cerebral artery
occlusion; MCPIP1, monocyte chemotactic protein-induced protein 1.

cytokines would be an important strategy to protect
against ischemia brain injury. In this study, we observed
that TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1 expressions were
significantly reduced at 24 h after MCAO by minocycline treatment. In MCPIP1-deficient mice, minocycline
treatment failed to suppress the production of such
cytokine. Furthermore, we found that expression of
MCPIP1 protein was upregulated by minocycline treatment mainly in neurons and microglia, which are the
main source of proinflammatory cytokines during ischemia. These results implied that MCPIP1 induction by
minocycline may play a beneficial role by inhibiting the
generation of proinflammatory cytokines in neurons
and microglia during brain ischemia. Activation of NFκB-signaling pathways leads to inflammatory cytokine
production [11]. In our previous study, we found that
MCPIP1 can also act as a deubiquitinase to negatively
regulate NF-κB signaling by targeting TNF receptorassociated factors (TRAFs) [11,33]. In the present study,
we found that phosphorylation of p-65 was significantly
reduced at 24 h after MCAO in minocycline-treated wild
type mice compared to that of the control. In MCPIP1deficient mice, there was no significant difference on p-65
phosphorylation level between the minocycline-treated

Page 11 of 12

and control group without minocycline treatment. Our
study suggested that enhanced activation of NF-κBsignaling pathway in MCPIP1-deficient mice leads to
increased proinflammatory cytokine production after
brain ischemia with minocycline treatment and that
MCPIP1 is involved in minocycline-treatment-induced
inhibition of the NF-κB-signaling pathway after ischemic stroke. In the present study, minocycline treatment
showed significant neuroprotection in mice subjected to
focal brain ischemia by MCAO, which is consistent with
other reports. However, we found there was significant
loss of minocycline-treatment-induced ischemic brain
tolerance in MCPIP1-deficient mice after ischemic stroke,
which indicated that MCPIP1 may mediate the beneficial
role in minocycline-treatment-induced neuroprotection
after focal brain ischemia.
It is possible that the absence of MCPIP1 in the mice
creates systemic inflammation that minocycline treatment cannot overcome. However, our in vitro studies in
mixed neuron-glia cells and primary cortical neurons indicated that minocycline-pretreatment-induced neuroprotection is, at least partly, via MCPIP1, as absence of
MCPIP1 in mixed neuron-glia cells and knockdown of
MCPIP1 in primary cortical neurons with OGD treatment resulted in a loss of minocycline-induced protection, which could largely exclude the potential affects of
systemic consequence resulting from in vivo studies of
general knockout mice. Considering the other experimental results in this study, including that MCPIP1 can be significantly induced by minocycline treatment in the brain,
and that MCPIP1 has been identified as an important inducible anti-inflammatory regulator in stroke pathophysiology [11], it would appear more likely that MCPIP1
actually participates in the minocycline-treatment-induced
neuroprotection. Mice with brain-specific MCPIP1 deficiency might provide a suitable model to explore the
role of MCPIP1 in ischemic-stroke-induced brain damage without the complication caused by the general
knockout of MCPIP1. Based on our in vivo and in vitro
studies, we may conclude that MCPIP1 induction is
involved in minocycline-induced neuroprotection from
ischemic brain injury.
All these findings indicate that the endogenous inducible MCPIP1 protein may serve as an important common shared mediator which performs negative feedback
to reduce the inflammatory responses caused by a wide
range of hazardous stresses.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
JL designed the experiments, performed all experiments, analyzed the data,
generated the figures, and wrote the manuscript. ZJ did all experiments. JW did
parts of the animal surgery and performed the experiments. PEK provided

Jin et al. Journal of Neuroinflammation (2015) 12:39

advice in the design of the study and in interpreting of the data and revising
the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by James & Ester King Biomedical Research Grant
08KN-03 (to JL), National Institutes of Health grant HL69458 (to PEK) and
Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China Grant LY14H270013
(to ZJ).
Author details
1
School of Basic Medicine, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou
310053, Zhejiang, China. 2Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, University
of Central Florida College of Medicine, 4000 Central Florida Boulevard,
Orlando, FL 32816, USA.
Received: 31 August 2014 Accepted: 10 February 2015

References
1. Hachinski V, Donnan GA, Gorelick PB, Hacke W, Cramer SC, Kaste M, et al.
Stroke: working toward a prioritized world agenda. Stroke. 2010;41:1084–99.
2. Iadecola C, Anrather J. Stroke research at a crossroad: asking the brain for
directions. Nat Neurosci. 2011;14:1363–8.
3. Yrjanheikki J, Tikka T, Keinanen R, Goldsteins G, Chan PH, Koistinaho J. A
tetracycline derivative, minocycline, reduces inflammation and protects
against focal cerebral ischemia with a wide therapeutic window. Proc Natl
Acad Sci. 1999;96:13496–500.
4. Arvin KL, Han BH, Du Y, Lin SZ, Paul SM, Holtzman DM. Minocycline
markedly protects the neonatal brain against hypoxic-ischemic injury. Ann
Neurol. 2002;52:54–61.
5. Friedlander RM. Apoptosis and caspases in neurodegenerative diseases.
N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1365–75.
6. Henninger N, Fisher M. Normobaric hyperoxia—a promising approach to
expand the time window for acute stroke treatment. Cerebrovasc Dis.
2006;21:134–6.
7. Hayakawa K, Mishima K, Nozako M, Hazekawa M, Mishima S, Fujioka M, et al.
Delayed treatment with minocycline ameliorates neurologic impairment
through activated microglia expressing a high-mobility group
box1-inhibiting mechanism. Stroke. 2008;39:951–8.
8. Fagan SC, Cronic LE, Hess DC. Minocycline development for acute ischemic
stroke. Transl Stroke Res. 2011;2:202–8.
9. Zhou L, Azfer A, Niu J, Graham S, Choudhury M, Adamski FM, et al.
Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 induces a novel transcription factor
that causes cardiac myocyte apoptosis and ventricular dysfunction. Circ Res.
2006;98:1177–85.
10. Liang J, Wang J, Azfer A, Song W, Tromp G, Kolattukudy PE, et al. A novel
CCCH-zinc finger protein family regulates proinflammatory activation of
macrophages. J Biol Chem. 2008;283:6337–46.
11. Liang J, Saad Y, Lei T, Wang J, Qi D, Yang Q, et al. MCP-induced protein 1
deubiquitinates TRAF proteins and negatively regulates JNK and NF-kappaB
signaling. J Exp Med. 2010;207:2959–73.
12. Liang J, Song W, Tromp G, Kolattukudy PE, Fu M. Genome-wide survey and
expression profiling of CCCH-zinc finger family reveals a functional module
in macrophage activation. PLoS One. 2008;3:e2880.
13. Qi Y, Liang J, She ZG, Cai Y, Wang J, Lei T, et al. MCP-induced protein 1
suppresses TNFalpha-induced VCAM-1 expression in human endothelial
cells. FEBS Lett. 2010;584:3065–72.
14. Liang J, Wang J, Saad Y, Warble L, Becerra E, Kolattukudy PE. Participation of
MCP-induced protein 1 in lipopolysaccharide preconditioning-induced
ischemic stroke tolerance by regulating the expression of proinflammatory
cytokines. J Neuroinflammation. 2011;8:182.
15. Jin Z, Liang J, Wang J, Kolattukudy PE. Delayed brain ischemia tolerance
induced by electroacupuncture pretreatment is mediated via MCP-induced
protein 1. J Neuroinflammation. 2013;10:63.
16. Araki E, Forster C, Dubinsky JM, Ross ME, Iadecola C. Cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitor ns-398 protects neuronal cultures from lipopolysaccharide-induced
neurotoxicity. Stroke. 2001;32(10):2370–5.
17. Qiao Y, Ouyang YB, Giffard RG. Overexpression of HDJ-2 protects astrocytes
from ischemia-like injury and reduces redistribution of ubiquitin staining
in vitro. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2003;23(10):1113–6.

Page 12 of 12

18. Kudo M, Aono M, Lee Y, Massey G, Pearlstein RD, Warner DS. Absence of
direct antioxidant effects from volatile anesthetics in primary mixed
neuronal-glial cultures. Anesthesiology. 2001;94(2):303–212.
19. Yrjänheikki J, Keinänen R, Pellikka M, Hökfelt T, Koistinaho J. Tetracyclines
inhibit microglial activation and are neuroprotective in global brain
ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95(26):15769–74.
20. Zemke D, Majid A. The potential of minocycline for neuroprotection in
human neurologic disease. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2004;27(6):293–8.
21. Machado LS, Kozak A, Ergul A, Hess DC, Borlongan CV, Fagan SC. Delayed
minocycline inhibits ischemia-activated matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9
after experimental stroke. BMC Neurosci. 2006;7:56.
22. Liu Z, Fan Y, Won SJ, Neumann M, Hu D, Zhou L, et al. Chronic treatment
with minocycline preserves adult new neurons and reduces functional
impairment after focal cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 2007;38(1):146–52.
23. Beech JS, Reckless J, Mosedale DE, Grainger DJ, Williams SC, Menon DK.
Neuroprotection in ischemia-reperfusion injury: an antiinflammatory
approach using a novel broad-spectrum chemokine inhibitor. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab. 2001;21:683–9.
24. Minami M, Katayama T, Satoh M. Brain cytokines and chemokines: roles in
ischemic injury and pain. J Pharmacol Sci. 2006;100:461–70.
25. Doyle KP, Simon RP, Stenzel-Poore MP. Mechanisms of ischemic brain
damage. Neuropharmacology. 2008;55(3):310–8.
26. Liesz A, Suri-Payer E, Veltkamp C, Doerr H, Sommer C, Rivest S, et al.
Regulatory T cells are key cerebroprotective immunomodulators in acute
experimental stroke. Nat Med. 2009;15:192–9.
27. Haines BA, Mehta SL, Pratt SM, Warden CH, Li PA. Deletion of mitochondrial
uncoupling protein-2 increases ischemic brain damage after transient focal
ischemia by altering gene expression patterns and enhancing inflammatory
cytokines. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2010;30:1825–33.
28. Yenari MA, Xu L, Tang XN, Qiao Y, Giffard RG. Microglia potentiate damage
to blood-brain barrier constituents: improvement by minocycline in vivo
and in vitro. Stroke. 2006;37(4):1087–93.
29. Wang Q, Tang XN, Yenari MA. The inflammatory response in stroke. J
Neuroimmunol. 2007;184(1–2):53–68.
30. Matsushita K, Takeuchi O, Standley DM, Kumagai Y, Kawagoe T, Miyake T,
et al. Zc3h12a is an RNase essential for controlling immune responses by
regulating mRNA decay. Nature. 2009;458:1185–90.
31. Dhamija S, Winzen R, Doerrie A, Behrens G, Kuehne N, Schauerte C, et al.
Interleukin-17 (IL-17) and IL-1 activate translation of overlapping sets of
mRNAs, including that of the negative regulator of inflammation, MCPIP1.
J Biol Chem. 2013;288(26):19250–9.
32. Huang J, Upadhyay U, Tamargo RJ. Inflammation in stroke and focal
cerebral ischemia. Surg Neurol. 2006;66:232–45.
33. Niu J, Wang K, Graham S, Azfer A, Kolattukudy PE. MCP-1-induced protein
attenuates endotoxin-induced myocardial dysfunction by suppressing
cardiac NF-кB activation via inhibition of IкB kinase activation. J Mol Cell
Cardiol. 2011;51:177–86.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

