Neuroscience Letters 607 (2015) 102–107

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neuroscience Letters
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/neulet

Research paper

A new middle cerebral artery occlusion model for intra-arterial drug
infusion in rats
Wen-hao Sun a,b , Hui-sheng Chen b,∗
a
b

Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China
Department of Neurology, General Hospital of Shenyang Military Region, Shenyang, China

h i g h l i g h t s
•
•
•
•
•

We developed a device to block MCA and deliver drugs intra-arterially in rats.
The effectiveness of the device in inducing stroke rivaled that of suture method.
Compared to existing methods, the device enhanced the efﬁciency of drug delivery.
Using this device, drugs could be delivered with or without reperfusion.
A second surgery and the complex catheterization were avoided by using this device.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 5 February 2015
Received in revised form 30 June 2015
Accepted 16 September 2015
Available online 21 September 2015
Keywords:
Animal model
Stroke
Middle cerebral artery occlusion
Drug delivery

a b s t r a c t
With the wide application of intra-arterial therapy for cerebrovascular disorders, preclinical intra-arterial
drug-delivery studies based on middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) models have become urgent. In
the present study, a novel stroke model was developed for intra-arterial drug delivery: MCAO and drug
delivery were accomplished using a microcatheter device. MCAO was induced in Sprague-Dawley rats
using the microcatheter device (cMCAO group, n = 10) or a nylon suture (sMCAO group, n = 10). After 24h occlusion, neurological deﬁcit and infarct volume were compared between the groups. Drug-delivery
models used in stroke studies were compared with the present model to verify the drug-delivery ability of
the microcatheter device. MCAO was induced using the microcatheter device in 21 Sprague-Dawley rats.
At 4 h after occlusion, 2% Evans blue dye was infused using different methods, and 1 h later, the dye was
extracted from each hemisphere and spectrophotometrically quantiﬁed. All cMCAO group rats showed
neurological deﬁcits; none developed subarachnoid hemorrhage or died before sacriﬁce. Neurological
deﬁcits and infarct volumes were similar in the cMCAO and sMCAO groups. Signiﬁcantly more dye leakage
occurred in the ischemic hemispheres of the rats that received the dye via the microcatheter device.
Compared to other intra-arterial drug-delivery models used in stroke studies, the present model was
easily established, had a high success rate, caused minimal surgical injury, and enabled highly efﬁcient
drug delivery. Thus, the present model is an efﬁcient tool for investigating the effect of intra-arterial drug
delivery on ischemic cerebral tissue.
© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
The rodent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model
[8,17] created using a nylon ﬁlament inserted into the internal
carotid artery (ICA) is widely used to investigate the mechanisms
underlying ischemic stroke. Compared with systemic adminis-

∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Neurology, General Hospital of
Shenyang Military Region, 83 Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110840, China.
E-mail address: chszh@aliyun.com (H.-s. Chen).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2015.09.020
0304-3940/© 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

tration, intra-arterial drug injection results in high local drug
concentration and reduces systemic adverse effects [3]. Recently,
preclinical studies have investigated intra-arterial drug delivery in
MCAO models [1,4,6,13].
The existing MCAO models for intra-arterial drug infusion have
inherent drawbacks. The model described by Ding et al. [6] resulted
in unstable establishment due to the use of modiﬁed polyethylene
(PE)-50 catheters. Moreover, in this model, the drug is delivered
only after the catheter or suture has been withdrawn, resulting in
reperfusion. Thus, this model is mainly limited to reperfusion studies, and is not suitable for investigating neuroprotection in case of

W.-h. Sun, H.-s. Chen / Neuroscience Letters 607 (2015) 102–107

103

permanent MCAO. In the models described by Song et al. [13] and
Van Winkle et al. [15], drug delivery was independent of reperfusion: MCAO was induced using a nylon suture, while the drug was
delivered via a catheter lodged in the common carotid artery (CCA).
However, this complex surgery was time consuming and resulted in
additional injuries. Also, the intra-arterial drug inevitably entered
the pterygopalatine artery, rendering the estimation of the amount
of drug entering the ischemic hemisphere difﬁcult.
In the present study, an attempt was made to develop a novel
stroke model for intra-arterial drug delivery: MCAO and drug delivery were accomplished using the same microcatheter, and drugs
could be delivered directly into the ischemic hemisphere via the
ICA before, during, after reperfusion or without reperfusion.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Microcatheter device design
One end of a 50-mm-long PE-0402 microcatheter [inner diameter (ID): 0.20 mm × outer diameter (OD: 0.38 mm; Anilab Software
& Instruments Co., Ltd., Ningbo, China] was blocked using a 1-mmlong plug (nylon ﬁlament; OD: 0.181 mm) that was just coated with
epoxide glue. Next, 2 mm from this end, a longitudinal incision
(1-mm long) was carefully made in the wall of the microcatheter
(Fig. 1A). The other end of the microcatheter was introduced into
a PE-50 catheter (0.58 mm ID × 0.96 mm OD; Anilab Software &
Instruments Co., Ltd.), so that 5 mm of its tip extended beyond the
PE-50 catheter (Fig. 1B). The junction between the two catheters
was ﬁxed with epoxide glue. The PE-50 catheter worked as an
adapter tube between the microcatheter and a 2-mL syringe.
Finally, a guidewire (nylon ﬁlament; OD: 0.181 mm) was inserted
into the microcatheter to increase the strength of the microcatheter
and make it easy to get to the root of the anterior cerebral artery
(ACA). Moreover, guidewire can also prevent the formation of clot
in the microcatheter. A schematic drawing and photographs of the
catheter device are shown in Fig. 1.
2.2. Animal preparation
This study was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of the General Hospital of Shenyang Military Region, and was
in accordance with the principles outlined in the National Institutes of Health Guide. A total of 41 adult male Sprague-Dawley rats
(280–320 g; Department of Laboratory Animals, General Hospital
of Shenyang Military Region, Shenyang, China) were used in this
study.

Fig. 1. Photographs (A, B, and C) and a schematic drawing (D) of the new microcatheter device.
(A) One end of the microcatheter was blocked with a plug, and 2 mm away from this
end, a longitudinal incision (opening) was made in the wall of the microcatheter.
(B) The other end of the microcatheter was introduced into the adapter tube. The
junction between the microcatheter and the tube was ﬁxed with epoxide glue. A
guidewire was inserted into the microcatheter.
(C and D) The microcatheter device consisted of the microcatheter, adapter tube,
and guidewire.

2.3. MCAO
Twenty male Sprague-Dawley rats were used to compare the
effectiveness of nylon sutures and the microcatheter device in
inducing stroke after 24 h of MCAO. Sprague-Dawley rats were
fasted overnight, and then, anesthesia was induced and maintained
with 1–3% halothane in 70% N2 O and 30% O2 administered via
a face mask. A transcranial laser Doppler ﬂowmetry (moorVMSLDF2; Moor Instruments, Axminister, UK) was used to measure
cerebral blood ﬂow in the core MCA territory. A right femoral artery
catheter was inserted to monitor mean arterial pressure, heart rate,
and measure arterial gas levels and pH. In the microcatheter device
MCAO group (cMCAO, n = 10), permanent MCAO was induced using
the microcatheter device. In the nylon suture MCAO group (sMCAO,
n = 10), permanent MCAO was induced using a commercially available nylon suture (OD: 0.28 mm; tip diameter: 0.38 mm; Beijing
Cinontech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China).
The surgical procedures for MCAO using the microcatheter
device and the nylon suture were identical to the MCAO protocol

described by Longa et al. [8]. In brief, the left CCA, ICA, and external carotid artery (ECA) were exposed through a midline incision. A
microvascular clip was placed across both the CCA and the ICA adjacent to the origin of ECA. Next, the ECA was transected to create a
stump whereby the microcatheter device or nylon suture was introduced. The microvascular clip was removed, and the microcatheter
device or nylon suture was gently advanced from the ECA to the ICA
lumen. After the device or suture was advanced ∼17 mm beyond
the carotid artery bifurcation, a sharp decrease in cerebral perfusion was observed using the transcranial laser Doppler, indicating
that the tip of the microcatheter or suture had reached the narrow
proximal ACA, thereby blocking the MCA at its origin (Fig. 2).
2.4. Neurological examination
In a blinded manner, neurological deﬁcits in the sMCAO group
(n = 10) and the cMCAO group (n = 10) were examined after 24 h of
MCAO. The deﬁcits were scored on a modiﬁed scoring system based

104

W.-h. Sun, H.-s. Chen / Neuroscience Letters 607 (2015) 102–107

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of MCA occlusion and intra-arterial drug infusion using
the microcatheter device. The microcatheter device was lodged in the narrow proximal ACA, blocking the MCA at its origin. When delivered through the microcatheter,
drugs will spread with the residual blood ﬂow to the ischemic hemisphere.
Anterior cerebral artery (ACA), middle cerebral artery (MCA), common carotid artery
(CCA), internal carotid artery (ICA), external carotid artery (ECA), pterygopalatine
artery (PPA), and posterior communicating artery (PcomA).

on that developed by Longa et al. [8], as follows: 0, no deﬁcits; 1,
difﬁculty in fully extending the contralateral forelimb; 2, unable
to extend the contralateral forelimb; 3, mild circling to the contralateral side; 4, severe circling; and 5, falling to the contralateral
side.
2.5. Measurement of infarct size
Rats in the sMCAO group (n = 10) and cMCAO group (n = 10)
were killed 24 h after MCAO. Coronal brain frozen sections were
cut with a brain matrix at a thickness of 2 mm. The brain sections
were then incubated in 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride at 37 ◦ C
for 20 min and ﬁxed by immersion in 10% buffered formalin for
24 h. The infarct region in the MCA territory was deﬁned as the
area with reduced staining. The infarct area in each section was
measured using Image J by an investigator who was blinded to the
study. To compensate for brain edema effects, an indirect method
for calculating infarct volume was used [14].
2.6. Evans blue dye infusion
To verify drug-delivery ability, follow-up experiments were
performed to compare the present microcatheter device with drugdelivery models used in previous stroke studies. Drug-delivery
ability was determined by measuring the amount of Evans blue
(EB) extravasation from the brain. MCAO was induced using the
microcatheter device in 21 male Sprague-Dawley rats. At 2 h after
MCAO, neurological deﬁcits were scored, and then, the rats were
anesthetized. Next, 4% EB was injected through an infusion pump to
control the rate of infusion at 0.05 mL/min for 20 min. The injections
were performed in the following three manners.

Fig. 3. Neurologic deﬁcit score and infarct volume (%) after 24 h of MCAO were
compared between nylon suture MCAO (sMCAO) group (n = 10) and microcatheter
device MCAO (cMCAO) group (n = 10). The results showed no difference in neurologic
deﬁcit score and infarct volume between two groups.

Ltd.), which was secured in the lumen of the CCA during MCAO,
with the opening of the catheter about 5 mm away from the CCA
bifurcation. The procedures for PE-10 catheter placement and
local EB dye infusion have been described in detail in previous
studies [4,15].
(3) ICA infusion with the microcatheter device group (microcatheter group, n = 7): At 2 h after MCAO, the guidewire was
withdrawn from the microcatheter. Immediately thereafter, a
2-mL syringe full of EB was connected to the adapter tube,
and then, EB was infused through the microcatheter directly
into the ischemic brain via the ICA. After infusion, the syringe
was unplugged, and the guidewire was inserted into the microcatheter to prevent blood from leaking out.

2.7. Quantiﬁcation of EB
At 6 h after MCAO, the EB dye had circulated for 4 h. The rats (IV
group, PE-10 group, and microcatheter group) were anesthetized,
followed by transcardiac perfusion with 0.9% saline. The two hemispheres of the brain were dissected and homogenized. The EB dye
was extracted from the tissues by incubating the samples in 3 mL
formamide at 60 ◦ C for 2 h. The solutions were then centrifuged
for 20 min at 12,000 × g. The absorption of each supernatant was
measured at 620 nm using a spectrophotometer (BioSpectrometer Basic; Eppendorf AG, Hamburg, Germany). The content of EB in
each sample was expressed in micrograms per gram of brain tissue,
using a standardized curve.

2.8. Statistical analysis
(1) Intravenous injection group (IV group, n = 7): EB was injected
through the femoral vein.
(2) CCA infusion with PE-10 catheter group (PE-10 catheter group,
n = 7): EB was delivered to the CCA via the PE-10 catheter
(0.30 mm ID × 0.55 mm OD; Anilab Software & Instruments Co.,

All data were presented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistically signiﬁcant differences between groups were determined
using analysis of variance, and P < 0.05 was accepted as statistically
signiﬁcant.

W.-h. Sun, H.-s. Chen / Neuroscience Letters 607 (2015) 102–107

105

Fig. 4. Representative photographs of brain sections illustrating increased Evans blue extravasation in (A) IV group compared to that in (B) the PE-10 group and (C) the
microcatheter group. (D) Measurements of Evans blue dye leakage in the test groups. Signiﬁcantly more dye was delivered to the ischemic brain in the microcatheter group
than in the PE-10 catheter group and IV group. (Error bars denote SDs. * p < 0.05, †p < 0.001 compared with the microcatheter group).

3. Results
3.1. Rate of success of the model
MCAO was induced in 31 rats using the microcatheter device (21
rats were killed at 6 h after MCAO, and 10 rats were killed at 24 h).

All the animals showed neurological deﬁcits. No rat died within 6
or 24 h after MCAO. The base of the brain as well as the skull was
carefully inspected, and no animal appeared to have had a subarachnoid hemorrhage. A comparison of physiological parameters
after surgery revealed no signiﬁcant difference between sMCAO
and cMCAO groups (Supplementary Material 1).

106

W.-h. Sun, H.-s. Chen / Neuroscience Letters 607 (2015) 102–107

3.2. Neurological results and infarct volume
Neurological examinations were performed at 24 h after MCAO.
All animals in the cMCAO and sMCAO groups exhibited severe
neurological deﬁcits, with no signiﬁcant differences between the
groups. The neurological score in the cMCAO group (n = 10) was
3.7 ± 0.8 versus 3.9 ± 0.7 in the sMCAO group (n = 10).
The infarct volume in the cMCAO group (n = 10) was 39.5 ± 8.4%.
The infarct volume in the sMCAO group (n = 10) was 38.0 ± 7.9%.
The difference between the two groups was not signiﬁcant. The
neurological deﬁcit and infarct volume in each rat are shown in
Fig. 3.
3.3. Amount of dye leaked into each hemisphere
Increased leakage of EB dye in the brain was observed in
the microcatheter group as compared to the amount of leakage
observed in the IV and PE-10 catheter groups (Fig. 4A–C). The
amount of dye leakage in the rats that received the dye via the
microcatheter device was 35.9 ± 7.7 ␮g/g in the ipsilateral hemisphere and 7.70 ± 4.6 ␮g/g in the contralateral hemisphere. The
amount of dye leakage in the ipsilateral hemisphere was signiﬁcantly higher in the microcatheter group than in the PE-10 catheter
group (17.7 ± 4.4 ␮g/g, P < 0.05) and the IV group (9.8 ± 4.1 ␮g/g,
P < 0.001). Signiﬁcantly more dye was delivered to the ischemic
brain in the microcatheter group than in the PE-10 catheter and
IV groups (Fig. 4D). In the contralateral hemisphere, no signiﬁcant
difference in the amount of dye leakage was observed among the
microcatheter groups, PE-10 catheter group (7.5 ± 3.2 ␮g/g), and IV
group (5.3 ± 3.1 ␮g/g).
4. Discussion
In the present study, it was demonstrated that the novel microcatheter device could induce MCAO with a high rate of success and
low mortality. The neurological deﬁcits and infarct volumes in the
cMCAO group were comparable to those in the sMCAO group. The
effectiveness of the microcatheter device in inducing stroke rivaled
that of the widely recognized nylon suture method.
4.1. Advantages of the microcatheter device for inducing MCAO
Ding et al. [6] induced MCAO using a modiﬁed PE-50 catheter
(0.1 mm ID × 0.2 mm OD). However, it was difﬁcult to stretch the
PE-50 catheter to obtain a consistent OD of 0.2 mm, and this
resulted in relatively unstable establishment of the stroke model.
To avoid this issue, a commercial microcatheter was used with a
consistent OD to ensure the stability of the new stroke model.
The models established by Dang et al. [4] and Song et al. [13]
involved two steps: (1) Focal ischemia was induced using a conventional intraluminal suture. (2) Later, a modiﬁed catheter was
passed into the lumen of the ICA after the nylon suture was withdrawn and lodged in the MCA at its origin to deliver drugs. This
complex surgery is time consuming and requires skilled technical
staff and special care. The microcatheter device blocked the rat MCA
and simultaneously delivered substances into the ischemic area.
Thus, a second operation and the complex catheterization, which
resulted in additional injuries, were not required in the present
model.
4.2. Characteristics of the microcatheter device for intra-arterial
drug delivery
In the models developed by Song et al. [13] and Van Winkle
et al. [15], drugs were delivered via a PE-10 catheter lodged in the
CCA. Part of the dye inevitably spreads through the blood stream

of the CCA to the pterygopalatine artery (extracranial branch of
the ICA), resulting in a decrease in the amount of drug entering
the ischemic hemisphere. Unlike these models, the present model
used a microcatheter device to enhance the uptake of drug into the
ischemic cerebral hemisphere. The main advantage lay in the opening position: the microcatheter device opened 2 mm away from its
tip. During the MCAO, the opening was located in the lumen of the
intracranial portion of the ICA. All EB dye delivered through the
microcatheter directly entered the ischemic hemisphere with the
residual blood ﬂow [16] (Fig. 2). The microcatheter device enhanced
the efﬁciency of drug delivery, and thus, decreased the total dose of
drug needed. This is important when testing substances that have
many adverse effects, low absorption, or are in short supply.
In the study by Ding et al. [6], the drug was infused intraarterially only after the modiﬁed catheter was withdrawn. In the
model described by Dang et al. [4], the catheter was passed into
the lumen of the ICA for delivering drugs after the nylon suture
was withdrawn. In both models, the drug was delivered after
reperfusion. In other words, these models can only be used for
studies on reperfusion injury, because recanalization must precede
intra-arterial drug delivery in these models. This restricts the wide
application of the above-mentioned models. In the present model,
drugs could be infused at any given time for any given duration, and
reperfusion could be established by retraction of the microcatheter
device 1–2 mm before, during, or after drug infusion. Furthermore,
the present model can be used to study permanent MCAO by not
withdrawing the microcatheter, as described in this article. In the
MCAO model, an area of mild ischemia was demonstrated on the
periphery of the MCA territory [9]. Closer to the center of the MCA
territory, more severe ischemia with a mean reduction of ﬂow to
15–25% was observed [5,16]. That is, there is still residual blood ﬂow
in the MCA territory. In this study, intra-arterial infusion increases
the concentration of EB in the residual blood ﬂow and enhances
local EB level.
Clinically, arterial recanalization from systemic thrombolysis or
endovascular procedures is the most important method for the
rescue of the ischemic brain tissue. Advanced neuroimaging techniques allow a detailed assessment of the cerebral circulation in
patients with acute stroke, and imaging of the brain and vessels has
shown that collateral ﬂow can sustain brain tissue for hours after
the occlusion of major arteries to the brain [12]. Recent studies have
shown that the collateral circulation also plays a key role in rescuing
ischemic brain tissue [2,7,11,12]. As known, the recanalization of
the occluded blood vessel is not available for most of the patients
with acute ischemic stroke due to the narrow time window, the
worry of bleeding, and the contraindication [10]. For them, collateral circulation would play an important role in their prognosis. It is
wondered whether intra-arterial drug infusion has any beneﬁt for
the augmentation or maintenance of collateral ﬂow, whether neuroprotective agents play stronger protective effect when delivered
intra-arterially in patients with stroke in whom complete recanalization is not achieved, and whether intra-arterial drug infusion
prolongs the time window of onset of reperfusion if drugs are
delivered intra-arterially before reperfusion. A model suitable for
investigating the mechanism of acute ischemic stroke with permanently occluded blood vessel and collateral circulation is urgently
required. The present model simulates the situation in most clinical
cases and meets the need for a permanent MCAO model that can
be utilized in studies of intra-arterial neuroprotection.
In conclusion, the present model is a simple but efﬁcient tool for
investigating the neuroprotective effect of intra-arterial drug delivery on ischemic cerebral tissue. It is suitable not only for studying
the effect of intra-arterial drug delivery on reperfusion injury in
ischemic stroke but also for assessing intra-arterial neuroprotection in case of missing reperfusion therapy.

W.-h. Sun, H.-s. Chen / Neuroscience Letters 607 (2015) 102–107

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by grants from the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (30772089, 81271240), the Science
and Technology Project Plan of Liao Ning Province (2012225010,
2013225089), and the Key Project of National 12th Five-Year
Research Program of China (2012ZX0903016-002).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2015.09.
020.
References
[1] A.V. Alexandrov, Current and future recanalization strategies for acute
ischemic stroke, J. Intern. Med. 267 (2010) 209–219.
[2] O.Y. Bang, J.L. Saver, S.J. Kim, G.M. Kim, C.S. Chung, B. Ovbiagele, K.H. Lee, D.S.
Liebeskind, Collateral ﬂow predicts response to endovascular therapy for
acute ischemic stroke, Stroke 42 (2011) 693–699.
[3] J. Chen, V. Fredrickson, Y. Ding, H. Cheng, N. Wang, F. Ling, X. Ji, Enhanced
neuroprotection by local intra-arterial infusion of human albumin solution
and local hypothermia, Stroke 44 (2013) 260–262.
[4] S. Dang, X. Liu, P. Fu, W. Gong, F. Yan, P. Han, Y. Ding, X. Ji, Y. Luo,
Neuroprotection by local intra-arterial infusion of erythropoietin after focal
cerebral ischemia in rats, Neurol. Res. 33 (2011) 520–528.
[5] Y. Ding, J. Li, J.A. Rafols, J.W. Phillis, F.G. Diaz, Prereperfusion saline infusion
into ischemic territory reduces inﬂammatory injury after transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion in rats, Stroke 33 (2002) 2492–2498.
[6] Y. Ding, C.N. Young, J. Li, X. Luan, J.P. McAllister 2nd, J.D. Clark, F.G. Diaz,
Reduced inﬂammatory mediator expression by pre-reperfusion infusion into
ischemic territory in rats: a real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis,
Neurosci. Lett. 353 (2003) 173–176.

107

[7] D.S. Liebeskind, Reperfusion for acute ischemic stroke: arterial
revascularization and collateral therapeutics, Curr. Opin. Neurol. 23 (2010)
36–45.
[8] E.Z. Longa, P.R. Weinstein, S. Carlson, R. Cummins, Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats, Stroke 20 (1989) 84–91.
[9] T.B. Muller, O. Haraldseth, G. Unsgard, Characterization of the
microcirculation during ischemia and reperfusion in the penumbra of a rat
model of temporary middle cerebral artery occlusion: a laser Doppler
ﬂowmetry study, Int. J. Microcirc. Clin. Exp. 14 (1994) 289–295.
[10] A.I. Qureshi, M.F. Suri, A. Nasar, W. He, J.F. Kirmani, A.A. Divani, C.J.
Prestigiacomo, R.B. Low, Thrombolysis for ischemic stroke in the United
States: data from National Hospital Discharge Survey 1999–2001,
Neurosurgery 57 (2005) 647–654 (discussion 647–654).
[11] M. Ribo, A. Flores, M. Rubiera, J. Pagola, J. Sargento-Freitas, D. Rodriguez-Luna,
P. Coscojuela, O. Maisterra, S. Pineiro, F.J. Romero, J. Alvarez-Sabin, C.A.
Molina, Extending the time window for endovascular procedures according to
collateral pial circulation, Stroke 42 (2011) 3465–3469.
[12] A. Shuaib, K. Butcher, A.A. Mohammad, M. Saqqur, D.S. Liebeskind, Collateral
blood vessels in acute ischaemic stroke: a potential therapeutic target, Lancet
Neurol. 10 (2011) 909–921.
[13] W. Song, Y.M. Wu, Z. Ji, Y.B. Ji, S.N. Wang, S.Y. Pan, Intra-carotid cold
magnesium sulfate infusion induces selective cerebral hypothermia and
neuroprotection in rats with transient middle cerebral artery occlusion,
Neurol. Sci. 34 (2013) 479–486.
[14] R.A. Swanson, M.T. Morton, G. Tsao-Wu, R.A. Savalos, C. Davidson, F.R. Sharp,
A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume, J. Cereb. Blood
Flow Metab. 10 (1990) 290–293.
[15] J.A. Van Winkle, B. Chen, I.F. Lei, B. Pereira, P.S. Rajput, P.D. Lyden, Concurrent
middle cerebral artery occlusion and intra-arterial drug infusion via
ipsilateral common carotid artery catheter in the rat, J. Neurosci. Methods 213
(2013) 63–69.
[16] W.H. Zhao, X.M. Ji, F. Ling, Y.C. Ding, C.H. Xing, H. Wu, M. Guo, Y. Xuan, B.
Guan, L.L. Jiang, Local mild hypothermia induced by intra-arterial cold saline
infusion prolongs the time window of onset of reperfusion injury after
transient focal ischemia in rats, Neurol. Res. 31 (2009) 43–51.
[17] X.L. Zuo, P. Wu, A.M. Ji, Nylon ﬁlament coated with parafﬁn for intraluminal
permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats, Neurosci. Lett. 519 (2012)
42–46.

