brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

www.elsevier.com/locate/brainres

Research Report

Protective effect of treatment with low-dose gliclazide
in a model of middle cerebral artery occlusion
and reperfusion in rats
Fang Tana,1, Hua Lia,1, Mingyi Mab, Yerong Yua,n
a

Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37, Guoxue Road,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China
b
Department of Medical Cell Biology and Medical Genetics, Luzhou Medical College, No. 1, 1st Section of Xianglin Road,
Longmatan District, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, China

art i cle i nfo

ab st rac t

Article history:

The aim of this study was to explore the expression of sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1), the

Accepted 25 February 2014

regulatory subunit of the NCCa-ATP channel, and to investigate the protective effects of

Available online 3 March 2014

gliclazide following middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)/reperfusion in male Wistar
rats. Adult rats underwent 2 h of the left MCAO using the intraluminal thread technique

Keywords:
Middle cerebral artery occlusion
Reperfusion

before reperfusion. The core areas of the infarct at different reperfusion time points were
examined for the mRNA level and protein expression of SUR1 using reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blotting respectively. Gliclazide was

Sulfonylurea receptor

administered intravenously into the right jugular vein for 12 h simultaneously with the

NCCa-ATP channel

reperfusion. The number of apoptotic cells was determined using the TUNEL assay. The

Gliclazide

neurological functional deﬁcits were evaluated using Bederson's test, and the cerebral

Neuroprotection

infarction volume was visualized with TTC staining. We found up-regulation of SUR1
mRNA and protein levels in ischemic infarct tissues after reperfusion following MCAO, and
SUR1 mRNA and protein were maximally upregulated 8–12 h after a 2-hour ischemia. The
treatment with low-dose of gliclazide reduced the total number of TUNEL-positive cells,
the neurological functional deﬁcits and the brain infarct volume. These results suggest that
the SUR1-regulated NCCa-ATP channel may be associated with MCAO/reperfusion injury and
the infarct-reducing effects of intravenous treatment with gliclazide may be due, in part, to

Abbreviations: AP,
[ATP]i,

alkaline phosphatase; MCAO,

sensitive nonspeciﬁc cationchanne1; PBS,

reaction; SUR,

sulfonylurea receptor; SUs,

middle cerebral artery occlusion; NCCa-ATP channel,
Phosphate-buffered saline; RT-PCR,

Sulfonylureas; T2DM,

Ca2þ-activated;

reverse transcription-polymerase chain

type 2 diabetes mellitus; TTC,

2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride;

TUNEL, Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick-end labeling
n
Corresponding author. Fax: þ86 28 85423459.
E-mail addresses: tanfang721@126.com (F. Tan), lihua2166@163.com (H. Li), luyimamingyi@163.com (M. Ma),
yerongyu@scu.edu.cn (Y. Yu).
1
These authors contributed equally to this study and share ﬁrst authorship.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2014.02.044
0006-8993 & 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

84

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

the blocked upregulation of SUR1 expression, the decreased infarct size and the reduced
apoptosis in the ischemia–reperfusion brain.
& 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1.

Introduction

It is well known that patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) are at an increased risk for ischemic stroke. The
outcome of the ischemic stroke in T2DM subjects has
improved in recent years. However, the number of fatalities
is still signiﬁcantly higher in patients with T2DM compared
with non-diabetic patients. This indicates that more intensive treatment is needed for diabetic subjects. Simard and
colleagues have identiﬁed a nonselective cation channel
(Simard et al., 2006; Simard et al., 2007a, 2007b), the
NCCa-ATP channel, in ischemic astrocytes that is regulated
by sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1). The NCCa-ATP channel is
opened by depleting ATP and, when opened, causes cytotoxic
edema, oncotic cell death, and cerebral edema. It was shown
that a postevent block of the channel with low-dose glibenclamide caused only a slight reduction in serum glucose
levels but was highly effective in reducing cerebral edema
and infarct volume (Simard et al., 2009). Sulfonylureas (SUs)
are commonly used oral hypoglycemic agents to treat T2DM.
If SUs have a beneﬁcial effect beyond the blood glucose
control, they will further improve the outcome of type 2
diabetic patients with ischemic stroke. The present study was
designed to test the hypothesis that the expression of
NCCa-ATP channel regulated by SUR1 in the neurovasculature
increases after ischemic-reperfusion injury. Furthermore, we
investigated the time course of the injury and examined
whether blocking SUR1 with gliclazide has favorable effects
on infarct volumes and apoptosis in infarct region following
ischemic stroke, and if so, whether the delayed protein
expression predicts a prolonged therapeutic window. This
study was performed using rodent models of ischemic stroke.
The mRNA and protein levels of SUR1 were examined at
different time points of reperfusion following ischemia in the
neurovasculature. Next, the effect of a variety of low-dose
(infusion rate: 0.1 μg/h, 1 μg/h and 10 μg/h) gliclazide was
evaluated in a transient focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
stroke model by assessing the infarct volumes and infarct
region apoptosis 14 h after onset of ischemia, 12 h after onset
of reperfusion.

2.

Results

2.1.

SUR1 mRNA expression

The RT-PCR results showed that the ischemic brain damage
resulted in the up-regulation of SUR1 mRNA at different time
points of reperfusion following ischemia. Compared with the
sham-operated group, the expression of SUR1 mRNA was
increased 1.3170.31-fold at 3 h, 1.6370.06-fold at 6 h,
1.7570.15-fold at 8 h, and 1.4270.13-fold at 12 h after

reperfusion. Thus, the maximal expression of SUR1 occurs
only at 8 h after reperfusion and returned to baseline at 24 h
after reperfusion with a sharp decline (Fig. 1).

2.2.

SUR1 protein expression

Western blotting showed that at the 3, 6, 8, 12, and 24 h of
reperfusion after ischemia, the expression of SUR1 protein in
the core area of ischemic cerebral cortex was signiﬁcantly
increased. Compared with the sham-operated group, the
expression of SUR1 protein increased 2.6870.30-fold after
3 h of reperfusion and peaked after 8 h of reperfusion (an
increase of 3.1270.62-fold) (Fig. 2).

2.3.

Double immunoﬂuorescence analysis

Frozen sections were sliced from the ischemic core area of
cerebral cortex after reperfusion for 8 h and 12 h following
ischemia. Immunoﬂuorescence double staining (factor VIIIrelated antigen and SUR1 antigen) of these sections showed
that after 8 h of reperfusion, the expression of SUR1 slightly
increased in the brain microvascular endothelial cells,
whereas there was a greater increase in SUR1 expression
after 12 h of reperfusion (not shown).

2.4.

Gliclazide treatment reduced cell apoptosis

A few apoptotic cells scattered throughout the cortex were
observed in the sham-operated group (1.7670.35%). Apoptotic cells were signiﬁcantly increased in the cortex of rats
subjected to the MCAO/reperfusion injury. The rate of apoptosis in the gliclazide treatment group was low compared to
the vehicle group (0.1 μg/h group: 23.5074.13%, 1 μg/h group:
24.1678.77%, 10 μg/h group: 10.6671.56% vs. vehicle group:
40.2578.34%; n ¼6 per group, Po0.05). And the apoptotic rate
in the 10 μg/h group was decreased more than those in group
0.1 μg/h and group 1 μg/h. Therefore, we selected the 10 μg/h
as the optimal infusion rate of gliclazide. Furthermore, we
found that blocking SUR1 with a constant infusion of lowdose gliclazide caused only a slight reduction of serum
glucose levels, with no sign of hypoglycemia in the MCAO
rats (sham-operated group: before vehicle treatment: 6.677
1.13 mmol/L, after vehicle treatment: 5.3470.57 mmol/L; gliclazide treatment group: before treatment: 7.3170.94 mmol/L, after
treatment: 4.8670.29 mmol/L; n¼ 6 per group, P40.05) (Fig. 3).

2.5.

Neurobehavioral deﬁcit score

There was no neurobehavioral dysfunction symptom in the
rats of the sham-operated group that had a Bederson's score
of 0. After cerebral ischemic-reperfusion injury, all animals

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

85

Fig. 1 – Quantiﬁcation of RT-PCR for SUR1 in the core of the infarct region after different reperfusion times (3, 6, 8, 12, 24 h)
following MCAO. Typical bands obtained by analysis of RT-PCR for each group. The mRNA levels are presented as mean7SD.
n
Po0.05 vs. sham group, n¼ 3.

Fig. 2 – Changes of SUR1 protein expression were observed using immunoblotting after different reperfusion times (3, 6, 8, 12,
24 h) following MCAO. nPo0.05 vs. sham group, n ¼ 3.

86

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

Fig. 3 – Morphological evaluation and TUNEL assay (magniﬁcation 320  ). The effects of gliclazide on cell apoptosis in the
cerebral ischemic area. (A) Almost no cells were positive for TUNEL in the sham group. (B–E) The brains of ischemia/
reperfusion rats treated with vehicle or a variety of low-dose (0.1 μg/h, 1 μg/h and 10 μg/h dose) gliclazide exhibited an
apoptotic pattern of brain cells characterized by TUNEL staining. (F) Apoptotic cells displayed as TUNEL-positive (arrow).
(G) Quantitative representation of TUNEL-positive cells in the ischemic brain treated with a variety of low-dose (0.1 μg/h, 1 μg/h
and 10 μg/h dose) gliclazide or vehicle. A considerably lower number of TUNEL-positive cells were observed in the brain tissue
treated with 10 μg/h gliclazide compared to those treated with the vehicle or 0.1 μg/h and 1 μg/h gliclazide. TUNEL-positive
cells were counted using ImageJ analysis software. The results represent the mean7SD, n ¼ 6 per group. nPo0.05 compared to
the vehicle-treated group, ♯Po0.05 compared to the 0.1 μg/h and 1 μg/h gliclazide-treated group.

showed neurological defects. The Bederson's scores in the
treatment group (gliclazide infusion rate at 10 μg/h) were
signiﬁcantly lower than that of the normal saline control
group (1.5770.53 points vs. 2.6370.74 points; n¼ 8 per group,
Po0.05).

2.6.

Gliclazide reduced the size of cerebral infarction

By 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) stain, no ischemia infarction was shown in the brain slices of the shamoperated group, whereas the infarction lesion was present in
all experimental rats after cerebral ischemic-reperfusion
injury. In the vehicle-treated group, the cerebral infarction
was found in most of the cerebral cortex. Gliclazide infused at
a rate of 10 μg/h could considerably reduce the cerebral
infarction size compared with the vehicle-treated controls
(Fig. 4A–C). When the relative percent of the cerebral infarction was compared between the groups, the 10 μg/h
gliclazide-treated group (39.68711.30%) exhibited a signiﬁcant reduction of the cerebral infarction size compared to
that of the vehicle-treated group (60.48715.74%) (n ¼8 per
group, Po0.05) (Fig. 4D).

3.

Discussion

Ischemic stroke can cause serious harm to humans. As the
population age increases, the proportion of the disease will

continue to increase. Type 2 diabetes mellitus is a wellknown independent risk factor for the ischemic stroke.
Moreover, diabetes is the cerebrovascular risk factor which
is associated with greater in-hospital mortality in patients
with ischemic stroke. When an ischemic stroke occurs, the
blood supply to the brain is interrupted, and the brain cells
are deprived of the glucose and oxygen they need to function.
Ischemic stroke is complex with multiple etiologies and
variable clinical manifestations. The rat is a cost-effective
animal model. And because of genetic consistencies, similar
cerebral vessel structures and functions, it has been commonly used to establish a model of focal cerebral ischemia
using MCAO (Longa et al., 1989; Yang et al., 2008). In our
studies, we have used a focal cerebral ischemia animal model
involving transient MCAO followed by reperfusion because
this model closely reproduces clinical ischemic brain damage.
The rats in this study exhibited neurological deﬁcits, and
macroscopic observation of the brain demonstrated stroke
model was successful.
Cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury is a common clinical
pathophysiological process seriously affecting the quality of
life, but the speciﬁc mechanism remains unclear. The two
main types of neuronal death after focal cerebral ischemia
are necrosis and apoptosis. Currently, it has been shown that
many neurons in the penumbra die due to apoptosis, whereas
most neurons in the core die of necrosis. The neuronal injury
in the ischemic penumbra is reversible and may be salvaged
by early effective treatments (Hossmann, 2006). Focal cerebral

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

87

Fig. 4 – Representative photographs of cerebral infarction volume shown using TTC stain. The 2 mm thick coronal brain slices
following reaction with a 2% TTC show viable brain tissue in red and infarcted brain tissue in white. (A) The normal brain
tissue appeared uniformly red in the sham-operated group. (B) The infarct region was shown in white in the vehicle group.
(C) The treatment group of gliclazide infusion at a rate of 10 μg/h (intravenously). Illustrations demonstrate the attenuation
of the infarct area by treatment with gliclazide. (D) The infarct size was quantiﬁed by TTC staining. Values are presented as
the mean7SD, n ¼ 8. n Po0.05 compared to the vehicle-treated group.

ischemia and post-ischemic-reperfusion causes cerebral
edema, which worsens the prognosis. Cerebral edema is a
complex pathophysiological process that causes brain swelling,
complicates ischemic stroke, worsens neurological dysfunction, and can lead to brain herniation and death. A number of
different mechanisms have been implicated in cell death in the
cerebral ischemia, including excitotoxicity, oxidative stress,
apoptosis, and oncotic (necrotic) cell death, which ﬁnally
initiates cerebral ischemic injury. Many distinct signal transduction pathways involved in these mechanisms (Won et al.,
2002). However, each of these mechanisms requires cation
inﬂux into neural cells. The sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1)regulated NCCa-ATP channel is a 30 pS channel that conducts
monovalent but not divalent cations (Simard et al., 2008). This
channel is not constitutively expressed but is newly upregulated in neurons, astrocytes, and capillary endothelial cells
after central nervous system ischemia or injury. Channel
opening, which is triggered by ATP depletion, has been
observed in oncotic cell swelling and oncotic cell death
(Simard et al., 2006; Chen et al., 2003; Chen and Simard,
2001). In this study, we found that ischemia/reperfusion injury
in the brain resulted in the up-regulation of SUR1 mRNA
and protein expression at different time points after ischemia/reperfusion. Peak expression was reached 8 h after reperfusion. Our results showed that the sulfonylurea receptor 1
(SUR1)-regulated NCCa-ATP channel expression induced by

ischemia–reperfusion injury were consistent with the model
that the channel is opened by depletion of ATP and, when
opened, causes cytotoxic edema and oncotic cell death (Simard
et al., 2006). It is well known that cation channel opening is
accompanied by ionic edema and oncotic cell death. Therefore,
we suspected that the ischemia–reperfusion injury induced
upregulation of the NCCa-ATP channels is closely related to
cerebral edema.
Apart from neural cell death, other critically important
pathophysiological processes that contribute to adverse outcomes in ischemic stroke include the formation of ionic
edema, vasogenic edema and hemorrhagic conversion, all
of which involve capillary endothelial cells (Simard et al.,
2007a, 2007b). Focal cerebral ischemia and post-ischemic
reperfusion cause cerebral capillary dysfunction, resulting
in edema formation and hemorrhagic conversion. Previous
studies have found that blocking the NCCa-ATP channel by
glibenclamide and other SUR1 inhibitors immediately after
an insult results in signiﬁcant improvements in rodent
models of ischemic stroke and spinal cord injury (Simard
et al., 2006, 2007a, 2007b). In this study, we investigated
whether SUR1 in brain microvascular endothelial cells of
the ischemic core area in cerebral cortex had any changes
in the MCAO/reperfusion model of stroke in rats. The results
showed that after 8-hour of reperfusion, the expression of
SUR1 slightly increased in ischemic brain tissues, whereas

88

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

after 12-hour of reperfusion, the expression was signiﬁcantly
increased. These data suggested that protein expression of
SUR1-regulated NCCa-ATP channel could be observed in the
brain microvascular endothelial cells, indicating that vascular
mechanisms involved in the pathophysiological processes of
ischemic/reperfusion injury. Therefore, based on the above
results, the delayed protein expression predicts a prolonged
therapeutic window. A speciﬁc block of SUR1 with constant
infusion of low-dose gliclazide was employed for the treatment of the MCAO/reperfusion animals to further explore the
functions of the NCCa-ATP channel and its protective effects in
cerebral infarction.
Recently, many studies have investigated the therapeutic
protection against ischemic damage by constant infusion of
low-dose sulfonylureas, with efﬁcacy demonstrated through
SUR1-regulated NCCa-ATP channel. And it has been shown
that sulfonylureas may have a beneﬁcial effect on cerebral
edema (Simard et al., 2006, 2009). However, to date, no
literature has examined the appropriate intervention time
and optimal concentration of the gliclazide treatment. In this
study, we investigated whether the infusion of low-dose
gliclazide for 12 h had any protective effects in the MCAO/
reperfusion model of stroke in rats. The results showed that
the gliclazide treatment could improve the apoptosis in the
cerebral cortex area caused by ischemia and that gliclazide
infusion at a rate of 10 μg/h was more effective than that of
0.1 μg/h and 1 μg/h in decreasing apoptosis. Furthermore, we
found that blocking SUR1 with constant infusion of low-dose
gliclazide caused only a slight reduction of serum glucose
levels, with no sign of hypoglycemia. Therefore, we selected
the 10 μg/h as the optimal rate of gliclazide infusion. Our
ﬁndings are consistent with previous reports that sulfonylureas attenuated the size of the infarct volume stained by TTC
in a rat focal cerebral ischemia model, suggesting that
gliclazide may protect the brain from the ischemic damage
by stroke. The present study demonstrated that gliclazide
infusion at rate of 10 μg/h attenuated the progression of
cerebral ischemic damage and suggested that this neuroprotective effect of gliclazide might be related to a block of SUR1
in vivo. Similar to the KATP channel in pancreatic β cells, the
NCCa-ATP channel is regulated by SUR1 and can be blocked by
sulfonylureas, such as gliclazide. When we blocked the
NCCa-ATP channel with a constant infusion of low-dose
gliclazide, it caused closing of a large number of nonselective cation channels and effectively reduced the cation
inﬂux into the ischemic brain microvascular endothelial cells
and astrocytes, thus reducing brain cell swelling, reducing
cerebral infarct volume and improving neurological function.
Low doses of gliclazide caused only a slight reduction of
serum glucose levels, suggesting that it was safe to get a
neuroprotection with a low dose of gliclazide.
Effective therapies for acute stroke are scarce, and numerous neuroprotective strategies have been ineffective in
human trials (Ovbiagele et al., 2007). Sulfonylurea derivatives
constitute the pharmacological class of oral hypoglycemic
agents most frequently used in the treatment of T2DM.
Gliclazide is a member of a new generation of sulfonylureas
that speciﬁcally block KATP channels of pancreatic β cells with
high selectivity, but SUR1 does not affect the cardiac myocytes or vascular smooth muscle cells with very low afﬁnity,

unlike SUR2A and SUR2B. The protective effects of gliclazide
against MCAO/reperfusion injury need to be examined in
further large-scale prospective human studies and might
provide new therapeutic strategies for the occurrence of
ischemic stroke in type 2 diabetic patients.

4.

Experimental procedure

4.1.

Experimental animals and protocols

4.1.1.

Model of transient focal ischemia/reperfusion

All experimental procedures were approved by the Animal
Experimentation Ethics Committee (West China Hospital,
Sichuan University) and were in accordance with the Guide
for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National
Institutes of Health. Male Wistar rats (the Animal Resources
Centre, Sichuan University, China) weighing 275–350 g were
used in this study. The animals were anesthetized with 3%
sodium pentobarbital (i.p., 50 mg/kg body weight), and the
rectal temperature was recorded and maintained at 37 1C
with a heating lamp. Transient focal cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion was induced by occlusion of the left MCAO by
intra-arterial suture as described previously (Longa et al.,
1989), and the suture was withdrawn after 2 h to allow for the
reperfusion. Brieﬂy, the left common carotid artery and the
left external carotid artery were exposed and ligated through
blunt dissection following a ventral midline neck incision.
A 2–0 ﬁshing line, with its tip rounded by dipping in nail
polish, was inserted through the incision of the ECA approximately 2 mm above the carotid bifurcation and then advanced
through the internal carotid arteries for a distance of approximately 18 mm until mild resistance was felt. Two hours after
the MCAO, the ischemic injury was terminated by removing
the ﬁshing line, which was followed by different time periods
of reperfusion.

4.1.2. SUR1 mRNA and protein expression at different time
points after ischemic-reperfusion injury
Seventy-two animals were randomly assigned to six groups
(n ¼12 per group), including a 2-hour MCAO group, four
reperfusion groups (3, 6, 8, 12, and 24 h of reperfusion) and
a sham-operated control group. The rats of the shamoperated control group survived for 24 h, which corresponded
to the ischemia/reperfusion experimental groups, and all
procedures were identical except for the lack of suture
insertion into the external carotid artery. At the end of each
time point, the animals were deeply anesthetized with an
intraperitoneal injection of an overdose of pentobarbital, and
the ischemia–reperfusion core cerebral cortex area was
rapidly removed from the brain as described previously
(Ashwal et al., 1998) and frozen at  80 1C for protein and
RNA extraction.

4.1.3. The effects of gliclazide on infarct volumes and infarcts
region apoptosis after ischemia–reperfusion injury
We fasted male Wistar rats overnight, anesthetized them
with 3% sodium pentobarbital and maintained their body
temperature at approximately 37 1C. Silastic tubing was
inserted into the right jugular vein, and the catheter was

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

tunneled under the skin and exteriorized in the nuchal area.
The procedure for transient focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion was the same as that described above. Stock solutions of
gliclazide were prepared in dimethylsulfoxide (32 mg/mL).
After MCAO, the animals received a reperfusion and simultaneous infusions with solutions of gliclazide at a rate of
0.1 μg/h, 1 μg/h or 10 μg/h (six animals for each group) for
12 h using a Harvard 11 Plus syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus, USA). The ischemia/reperfusion core cerebral cortex area
was rapidly removed from the brain, and the apoptotic rate of
the infarct region was evaluated using TUNEL staining to
determine the optimal gliclazide-infusing dose. Then another
16 animals were divided equally into two groups, the SU
group got a reperfusion and was infused with gliclazide at a
rate of 10 μg/h for 12 h after the 2-hour MCAO and the control
group infused similarly with vehicle (normal saline plus
dimethylsulfoxide). The animals were sacriﬁced by an overdose of pentobarbital at the end of infusion, and the intact
brains were rapidly removed for TTC staining. Additional
measurements of serum glucose levels were obtained at
baseline and at the end of infusion by tail bleeding.

4.2.

Neurological evaluation

Neurological evaluation was performed when the animals
were allowed to awaken from the anesthesia after the
induction of ischemia and scored on a 6-point scale as
described previously (Longa et al., 1989; Bederson et al.,
1986) (0 ¼no neurological deﬁcit, 1¼ failure to extend right
forepaw fully, 2 ¼circling to the right, 3¼ falling to the right,
4¼ no spontaneous walking with depressed level of consciousness and 5¼ death.) In the suture model, animals were
excluded for the following criteria: score lower than 1 point,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, and death.

89

homogenized with 1 ml of ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer (BioTeke, Beijing, China) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Complete Mini, Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim,
Germany). Aliquots of total tissue homogenate were frozen and kept at 80 1C. The protein concentration in the
extracts was determined using the BCA Protein Assay Kit
(BioTeke, Beijing, China). Equal amounts of protein were
loaded in each lane with 5  sample loading buffer. The
samples were boiled at 100 1C for 5 min before gel loading.
The samples were electrophoresed in a 10% SDSpolyacrylamide gel and transferred to polyvinylidene
diﬂuoride membranes using an electrophoretic transfer
system. The membranes were then blocked in TBS buffer
containing 10% skim milk for 1 h with gentle shaking
followed by an incubation overnight at 4 1C with the
primary antibodies in TBS containing 10% skim milk and
0.1% Tween 20. The following primary antibodies and
dilutions were used: SUR1 (1:200, Santa Cruz, USA
SC-5789) and β-actin (1:200, Zhongshan Biotek Co., China).
After washing, the membranes were incubated with
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated donkey anti-goat
(Santa Cruz, USA. SC-2020) or rabbit anti-goat (Zhongshan
Biotek Co., China. ZF-0317) IgG secondary antibody diluted
1:5000 for 1 h at room temperature and washed again. The
blots were developed with an enhanced chemiluminescence kit. The relative densities of SUR1 protein bands
were analyzed using NIH image software.

4.5.

Double immunoﬂuorescence analysis

Total RNA was extracted from brain cortical samples using the
RNApure high-purity total RNA rapid extraction kit (BioTeke,
Beijing, China). Reverse transcription was carried out with
random hexanucleotides (TaKaRa Biotechnology Co., Ltd.,
Dalian). We performed real-time PCR using a TaqMan-based
protocol with a Bio-rad bicycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories Ltd. Shanghai). The primer sequences were as follows: H1 histone,
5'CGGACCACCCCAAGTATTCA 3' (forward); 5'GCCGGCGCGGTTCTTCT 3' (reverse); TaqMan probe sequences: 5'CATGATCGTGGCTGCCATCCAGGCA 3'. For Abcc8, the primers were
as follows: 5'GAGTCGGACTTCTCGCCCT 3' (forward); 5'CCTTGACAGTGGACCGAACC 3' (reverse); TaqMan probe sequences:
5'TTCCACATCCTGGTCACACCGCTGT 3'.We performed ampliﬁcation of triplicate samples using a TaqMan ampliﬁcation kit
(TaKaRa Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Dalian) and quantiﬁcation using
a standard curve method. Data were expressed in arbitrary units
using the 2  ΔCt method and relative to SUR1 by the 2  ΔΔCt
method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001).

The animals were sacriﬁced at hours 8 and 12 after the
ischemia–reperfusion, and the cerebral cortex area was
rapidly removed and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen before
being stored at  80 1C until sectioned. Five μm thin sections
were cut with a cryostat, mounted on standard glass-slides
and then air-dried for 30 min. The slides were then wrapped
in aluminum foil and placed in the freezer for storage at
80 1C until further processing. Prior to staining, the frozen
glass-slides were thawed for 30 min and ﬁxed in cold acetone
at room temperature for 5 min. Then the sections were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution,
blocked with 10% BSA for 20 min at room temperature,
incubated overnight at 4 1C with polyclonal rabbit antihuman factorVIII-related antigen antibodies (1:50; Sigma,
USA) and polyclonal goat anti-rat SUR1 antibodies (1:50; Santa
Cruz, USA), and washed with PBS thoroughly. Next, the slides
were incubated with FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG
(1:50 Zhongshan Biotek Co., China) and rhodamineconjugated donkey anti-goat IgG (1:50; Santa Cruz, USA), at
room temperature for 1 h in the dark. After a ﬁnal wash in the
dark, the coverslip was placed on glass-slides with ProLong
Gold anti-fade reagent containing DAPI. Fluorescent signals
were analyzed with Leica DM IRE2 microscopy and DPmanager software (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The antibody was
replaced by PBS as a negative control.

4.4.

4.6.

4.3.

RT-PCR analysis

Western blotting analysis

The cerebral cortex area was rapidly removed from the
brain and frozen at 80 1C. The cerebral cortex was

TUNEL staining

The cerebral cortex area was rapidly removed from the brain
and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4) at 4 1C

90

brain research 1560 (2014) 83–90

overnight and then embedded in parafﬁn. Parafﬁn-embedded
specimens were sectioned at 5 μm. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nickend labeling (TUNEL) staining was performed using an
in situ cell death detection kit, alkaline phosphatase (AP)
(Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Brieﬂy, after deparafﬁnization and
rehydration, the brain tissue sections were treated with
20 μg/mL proteinase K at 37 1C for 20 min and incubated with
an endogenous peroxidase quenching solution for 5 min. The
tissue sections were then washed with PBS and incubated
with 50 μl of the TUNEL in a humidiﬁed chamber for 1 h at
37 1C; next, they were washed and incubated with converter
AP (anti-ﬂuorescein antibody conjugated with the reporter
enzyme alkaline phosphatase) for 30 min at room temperature. The reaction was developed with Fast Red tablets in
naphthol phosphate substrate. The TUNEL-positive (apoptotic) cells and total cells were counted in 8 microscopic ﬁelds
of each brain section at 200  1.6  magniﬁcation. The extent
of apoptosis was calculated and expressed as a ratio of
TUNEL-positive cells versus total cells. As a negative control,
labeling was conducted with label solution without terminal
transferase.

4.7.

TTC assessment of infarct size

To analyze the infarct volume, the rats were euthanized with
sodium pentobarbital at the end of the drug infusion (or at
12 h after the ischemia/reperfusion), and their intact brains
were quickly removed and sectioned into 2 mm thick slices
starting at the frontal pole. The slices were then immersed in
the vital dye (2%) 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC;
Sigma Aldrich Corp., USA) in a Petri dish and incubated at
37 1C for 30 min, and the slices were turned over after 15-min
staining to obtain consistent dyeing of the anterior and
posterior faces and then transferred into a 4% formaldehyde
solution for ﬁxation. The images of the brain sections were
captured using a digital camera and examined using Adobe
Photoshop software. To minimize the artifacts produced by
the post-ischemic edema in the hemispheric infarct volume,
the infarct volume was calculated using a technique as
described previously (Gerriets et al., 2003). Brieﬂy, the infarct
volume was calculated by summing the infarct areas of all
sections and multiplying by the slice thickness; the infarct
area in the ipsilateral hemisphere was indirectly measured
by subtracting the non-infarcted area in the ipsilateral
hemisphere from the total intact area of the contralateral
hemisphere. Therefore, the relative infarct volume percentage
was estimated by calculating the cerebral ischemic volume
percentage compared to the contralateral hemispheric volume
(total infarct volume/contralateral hemispheric volume  100).
The brain slices for each experimental group were analyzed for
the infarct volume using ImageJ analysis software (public
domain software developed at NIH and available on the
Internet at http://www.rsb.info.nih.gov/nih-image/).

4.8.

Statistical analysis

Data were analyzed with SPSS for Windows Version 16.0
(SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). All results are presented as the

means7SD. The statistical evaluations of the data were
performed using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
and t-test. Signiﬁcance was set at Po0.05.

Conﬂict of interest
There are no conﬂicts of interest.

r e f e r e n c e s

Ashwal, S., Tone, B., Tian, H.R., Cole, D.J., Pearce, W.J., 1998. Core
and penumbral nitric oxide synthase activity during cerebral
ischemia and reperfusion. Stroke 29, 1037–1047.
Bederson, J.B., Pitts, L.H., Tsuji, M., Nishimura, M., Davis, R.,
Bartkowski, H., 1986. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion:
evaluation of the model and development of a neurologic
examination. Stroke 17, 472–476.
Chen, M., Simard, J.M., 2001. Cell swelling and a nonselective cation
channel regulated by internal Ca2þ and ATP in native reactive
astrocytes from adult rat brain. J. Neurosci. 21, 6512–6521.
Chen, M., Dong, Y., Simard, J.M., 2003. Functional coupling
between sulfonylurea receptor type 1 and a nonselective
cation channel in reactive astrocytes from adult rat brain. J.
Neurosci. 23, 8568–8577.
Gerriets, T., Li, F., Silva, M.D., Meng, X., Brevard, M., Sotak, C.H.,
Fisher, M., 2003. The macrosphere model: evaluation of a new
stroke model for permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion
in rats. J. Neurosci. Methods 122, 201–211.
Hossmann, K.-A., 2006. Pathophysiology and therapy of
experimental stroke. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 26, 1055–1081.
Livak, K.J., Schmittgen, T.D., 2001. Analysis of relative gene
expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the
2  ΔΔCT method. Methods 25, 402–408.
Longa, E.Z., Weinstein, P.R., Carlson, S., Cummins, R., 1989.
Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without
craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20, 84–91.
Ovbiagele, B., Saver, J., 2007. Intensive statin therapy after stroke
or transient ischemic attack: a SPARCLing success? Stroke 38,
1110–1112.
Simard, J.M., Chen, M., Tarasov, K.V., Bhatta, S., Ivanova, S.,
Melnitchenko, L., Tsymbalyuk, N., West, G.A., Gerzanich, V., 2006.
Newly expressed SUR1-regulated NCCa-ATP channel mediates
cerebral edema after ischemic stroke. Nat. Med. 12, 433–440.
Simard, J.M., Kent, T.A., Chen, M., Tarasov, K.V., Gerzanich, V.,
2007a. Brain oedema in focal ischaemia: molecular
pathophysiology and theoretical implications. Lancet Neurol.
6, 258–268.
Simard, J.M., Tsymbalyuk, O., Ivanov, A., Ivanova, S., Bhatta, S.,
Geng, Z., Woo, S.K., Gerzanich, V., 2007b. Endothelial
sulfonylurea receptor 1-regulated NCCa-ATP channels mediate
progressive hemorrhagic necrosis following spinal cord injury.
J. Clin. Invest. 117, 2105–2113.
Simard, J.M., Woo, S.K., Bhatta, S., Gerzanich, V., 2008. Drugs
acting on SUR1 to treat CNS ischemia and trauma. Curr. Opin.
Pharmacol. 8, 42–49.
Simard, J.M., Yurovsky, V., Tsymbalyuk, N., Melnichenko, L.,
Ivanova, S., Gerzanich, V., 2009. Protective effect of delayed
treatment with low-dose glibenclamide in three models of
ischemic stroke. Stroke 40, 604–609.
Won, S.J., Kim, D.Y., Gwag, B.J., 2002. Cellular and molecular pathways
of ischemic neuronal death. J. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 35, 67–86.
Yang, Q., Zheng, F., Wu, J., 2008. Effects of mild hypothermia on
the expression of microtubule-associated protein 2 in neurons
of the hippocampal dentate gyrus in a rat model of cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion. Neural Regeneration Research 3,
1352–1355.

