ANTIOXIDANTS & REDOX SIGNALING
Volume 21, Number 1, 2014
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/ars.2013.5381

ORIGINAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATION

Nitrosative Stress Induces Peroxiredoxin 1 Ubiquitination
During Ischemic Insult via E6AP Activation
in Endothelial Cells Both In Vitro and In Vivo
Rong-Rong Tao,1,* Huan Wang,1,* Ling-Juan Hong,1 Ji-Yun Huang,1 Ying-Mei Lu,2 Mei-Hua Liao,1
Wei-Feng Ye,1,3 Nan-Nan Lu,1 Dan-Yan Zhu,1 Qian Huang,4 Kohji Fukunaga,5 Yi-Jia Lou,1
Ikuo Shoji,6 Christopher Stuart Wilcox,7 En-Yin Lai,4,7 and Feng Han1

Abstract

Aims: Although there is accumulating evidence that increased formation of reactive nitrogen species in cerebral
vasculature contributes to the progression of ischemic damage, but the underlying molecular mechanisms
remain elusive. Peroxiredoxin 1 (Prx1) can initiate the antioxidant response by scavenging free radicals.
Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that Prx1 regulates the susceptibility to nitrosative stress damage during
cerebral ischemia in vitro and in vivo. Results: Proteomic analysis in endothelial cells revealed that Prx1 was
upregulated after stress-related oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD). Although peroxynitrite upregulated Prx1
rapidly, this was followed by its polyubiquitination within 6 h after OGD mediated by the E3 ubiquitin ligase
E6-associated protein (E6AP). OGD colocalized E6AP with nitrotyrosine in endothelial cells. To assess
translational relevance in vivo, mice were studied after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). This was
accompanied by Prx1 ubiquitination and degradation by the activation of E6AP. Furthermore, brain delivery of
a lentiviral vector encoding Prx1 in mice inhibited blood–brain barrier leakage and neuronal damage significantly following MCAO. Innovation and Conclusions: Nitrosative stress during ischemic insult activates
E6AP E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates Prx1 and subsequently worsens cerebral damage. Thus, targeting
the Prx1 antioxidant defense pathway may represent a novel treatment strategy for neurovascular protection in
stroke. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 21, 1–16.

adverse effects of ischemia-induced endothelial dysfunction
and neurovascular damage, it is necessary to define the factors responsible for ischemia-induced blood–brain barrier
(BBB) damage.
Under conditions of intense oxidative stress, such as ischemia or hypoxia injury, increased generation of nitric oxide
(NO) and superoxide (O2 - ) results in the formation of
peroxynitrite (ONOO - ) (50). This is a short-lived highly
reactive oxidant that attacks and inactivates many proteins.
Specifically, ONOO - irreversibly inactivates prostacyclin

Introduction

B

rain microvascular endothelial cells provide a
barrier between the bloodstream and brain that is critical
in brain development, maturation, and homeostasis (9, 37).
The balance between endothelial cell survival and death is
pivotal for brain remodeling and repair (41). Increased cell
death of cerebrovascular endothelial cells exacerbates inflammatory, ischemic, and degenerative brain diseases (26).
Before a new strategy can be developed to counter these
1

Institute of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Biochemical Pharmaceutics, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.
School of Medicine, Zhejiang University City College, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
The Children’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
4
Department of Physiology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
5
Department of Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
6
Division of Microbiology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.
7
Hypertension, Kidney, and Vascular Research Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia.
*Both authors contributed equally to this work.
2
3

1

2

TAO ET AL.
Innovation

Our study is the first demonstration that nitrosative stress
initiates the ubiquitination of peroxiredoxin 1 (Prx1) and
subsequent disturbance of redox homeostasis in endothelial
cells during ischemia-like injury. Our findings further identified E6-associated protein (E6AP) E3 ligase that ubiquitinated
Prx1. Thus, repression of peroxynitrite (ONOO - ) formation
or E6AP knockdown dampened the ischemia-induced disturbance of Prx1 defense signaling. Since an active Prx1 was
required for optimal neurovascular cell survival, targeting the
Prx1 antioxidant defense pathway may represent a novel
treatment strategy for neurovascular protection after stroke.
synthase and oxidizes tetrahydrabiopterin to dihydrabiopterin,
thereby uncoupling endothelial NO synthase and directing it to
generate O2 - in place of NO. Indeed, endothelial cells are the
primary targets of nitrosative stress in cardiovascular disease,
stroke, and neurodegenerative disorders (18, 48). Although
nitrosative damage to lipids, proteins, and DNA has been
implicated in neurovascular damage following cerebral ischemia, the downstream signaling mechanisms remain elusive
(13, 16, 17, 29).
Peroxiredoxins (Prxs) are thiol-specific antioxidant enzymes that maintain redox balance under both normal conditions and oxidative stress (6, 7, 10, 28). Although Prx1 is
the most abundant and widely distributed member of the
mammalian Prxs (23, 24) and is a recognized peroxidedetoxifying enzyme, its pathophysiological role during brain
disease remains unclear (38, 44). Cultured Prx1-deficient
fibroblasts have decreased proliferation and increased sensitivity to oxidative DNA damage. Prx1-deficient mice developed hemolytic anemia caused by increased erythrocytic
reactive oxygen species (ROS) (34). Furthermore, mutant
Hungtington (mHtt) gene expression decreased Prx1 levels
and increased its sulfonylation (35).
We tested the hypothesis that Prx1 in endothelial cells in
culture and in the brain in vivo is a pivotal antioxidant
pathway but can be damaged by nitrosative stress during
hypoxia or ischemia, thereby exacerbating injury. We report
that oxygen/glucose-deprived endothelial cells ubiquitinate
Prx1 by nitrosative activation of E3 ubiquitin ligase (E6associated protein [E6AP]). The outcome is that Prx1 is targeted for degradation leading to cellular redox imbalance
and loss of the integrity of the endothelial BBB in mice following ischemia. Repression of ONOO - formation or E6AP
knockdown dampened these disturbances of Prx1 defense
signaling in endothelial cells. The initial study was made in
human umbilical vascular endothelial cells, and key observations were confirmed and extended in human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs). Thus, our results
indicate that Prx1 is a pivotal molecule for the protection of
endothelial cells and microvessels from ischemia-induced
neurovascular damage both in vitro and in vivo.
Results

differentially expressed between control and oxygen–glucose
deprivation (OGD)-treated endothelial cells. Figure 1A shows
a silver-stained two-dimensional gel electrophoresis reference
map of the OGD-treated endothelial cultures (Fig. 1A, n = 3,
lower) in comparison to the control profile (Fig. 1A, n = 3,
upper). The spots that showed a twofold or greater difference
between treatments were further characterized by trypsin digestion and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
(MALDI) time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry. Twentytwo different proteins from 36 spots were identified with high
confidence (CI % ranging from 97.5% to 100%) (Supplementary Table S1; Supplementary Data are available online at
www.liebertpub.com/ars). The identified proteins were classified into functional groups (Supplementary Fig. S1). We
selected Prx1 for further study since it was implicated in oxidation–reduction balance and abundantly increased 2.5-fold
after OGD treatment (Supplementary Fig. S2A).
Temporal changes of Prx1 protein levels in endothelial
cells after OGD

Immunoblotting studies demonstrated a time-dependent
increase in Prx1 over 1–6 h followed by a decline after 12 h
(Fig. 1B, C). There was a similar pattern of protein levels of
heat shock protein 27 (HSP27) (Fig. 1B, C). Molecular
chaperones such as HSP27 can defend against protein misfolding after sublethal stressful stimuli (4). Immunocytochemical experiments demonstrated intracellular localization
of Prx1 (Fig. 1D), which increased 6 h after OGD treatment in
the cytosol of endothelial cells (Fig. 1D, E).
Characterization of OGD-induced Prx1 ubiquitination
in endothelial cells

Unexpectedly, our Western blot data demonstrated a
continual increase in the density of a broad, high-molecularweight ( > 118 kDa) band for Prx1 starting 6 h after OGD
treatment (Fig. 2A). A similar increase in a high-molecularweight band ( > 118 kDa) was detected following OGD
treatment after probing with an anti-ubiquitin antibody
(Fig. 2B). The OGD-induced ubiquitination of Prx1 was
confirmed and extended in HBMECs (Fig. 3 A, B) and mouse
cerebral microvascular endothelial cells (bEnd.3) (Supplementary Fig. S2B).
Inhibition of proteosomal uptake with MG132 or lactacystin also increased the high-molecular-weight isoforms of
Prx1 (Fig. 2C and Supplementary Fig. S3). Probing with an
anti-Prx1 antibody in ubiquitin immunocomplexes from
OGD-treated endothelial cells revealed a predominant band
larger than 118 kDa (Fig. 2D and Fig. 3C). OGD-induced
ubiquitination of Prx1 was confirmed by the immunoprecipitation of Prx1 followed by immunoblotting with an antiubiquitin antibody (Fig. 2E and Fig. 3D). Consistently,
Western blot analysis of cell extracts from OGD-treated cells
demonstrated that high-molecular-weight conjugates of Prx1
were significantly reduced in ubiquitin-K48R-transfected
endothelial cells (Fig. 2F and Fig. 3E, F).

Identification of differentially expressed proteins
after oxygen–glucose deprivation in endothelial cells

The role of Prx1 during proapoptotic cascades
after OGD treatment

Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis was performed in
EA.hy926 endothelial cells to identify proteins that were

Proapoptotic proteins were identified by immunoblotting
of EA.hy926 cells transfected with either an empty vector or

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

3

FIG. 1. The proteomic identification of differentially expressed
proteins after OGD in endothelial cells. (A) Representative silverstained two-dimensional gel of
control and OGD-treated EA.hy926
endothelial cells. Whole proteins
(450 lg) were separated on a nonlinear pH gradient (3–10) followed
by 12% SDS-PAGE. (B) Time
course of Prx1 and HSP27 protein
levels in cell lysates of endothelial
cells following OGD. Quantifications of the temporal changes of
Prx1 and HSP27 protein levels are
shown in (C). Immunoblots are
representative of three independent
experiments. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01
versus control. Immunoblotting with
an anti-b-actin antibody showed
equal amounts of loaded protein in
each lane. (D) Changes in the immunostaining of Prx1 (green) 6 h
after OGD. Subcellular localization
of Prx1 was determined by laser
confocal microscopy. Data are representative of three independent
experiments. Scale bar = 20 lm. (E)
Quantification of Prx1 immunofluorescence expressed as IOD as described in the Materials and Methods
section. ***p < 0.001 versus control.
IOD, integrated optical density;
HSP27, heat shock protein 27;
OGD, oxygen–glucose deprivation;
Prx1, peroxiredoxin 1; SDS-PAGE,
sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. To see this
illustration in color, the reader is referred to the web version of this article
at www.liebertpub.com/ars
a Prx1 expression vector following OGD insult (Fig. 4).
Calnexin is a type I integral endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
membrane chaperone involved in folding newly synthesized
(glycol) proteins (8). Overexpression of Prx1 significantly
inhibited calnexin, PERK, and Ire-1a degradation (Fig. 4A,
B) and also inhibited caspase-3 and poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage (Fig. 4C, D). Exposure of vectortransfected cells to OGD for 6 h decreased the phosphorylation
of anti-apoptotic proteins, such as phospho-ERK (Thr202/
Tyr204) and phospho-FKHR (Ser256) (forkhead transcription factor Foxo1), and also decreased the protein levels of
heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) but increased the phosphorylation
of c-Jun N-terminal kinase ( JNK) and P38 (Fig. 4E, F). By
contrast, overexpression of Prx1 after OGD injury resulted in
significant upregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins in endothelial cells (Fig. 4E, F). Exposure of vector-transfected cells
to OGD for 6 h elevated terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive staining
(Fig. 4G, H), whereas overexpression of Prx1 effectively
decreased TUNEL staining (Fig. 4G, H). The apoptosis of
endothelial cells was determined using flow cytometry with
Annexin V-FITC/propidium iodide (PI). In contrast to control cells (2.20%), we found that OGD treatment induced

elevation in the fraction of Annexin V/PI-positive cells
(49.92%). Moreover, Prx1 small interfering RNA (siRNA)
transduction further exaggerated OGD-induced cell death
(Fig. 4I). The present data demonstrate that Prx1 elicits an antiapoptotic effect after OGD injury in endothelial cells, coinciding with its antioxidant function in the endothelium (31).
E6AP activation contributes to Prx1 stress
response after OGD

Since Prx1 has been identified as a novel E6AP-binding
protein (33), the present study further elaborates the role of
E6AP in ubiquitination of Prx1 during OGD. Representative
blots are presented in Figure 5A and show that E6AP was
activated following OGD exposure over 1–24 h (Fig. 5A).
Similar change of E6AP was confirmed in HBMEC (Supplementary Fig. S4A, B) and bEnd.3 endothelial cells after
OGD (Supplementary Fig. S2B). Immunocytochemical
analysis of the endothelial cells revealed OGD-induced
strong immunoreactivity for E6AP (red fluorescence) that
was undetectable in control cells (Fig. 5B–D and Supplementary Fig. S4C, D), which suggests that OGD-induced
ubiquitination of Prx1 is associated with E6AP activation.

4

TAO ET AL.

FIG. 2. OGD induces ubiquitination of Prx1 in EA.hy926 endothelial cells. (A) Temporal changes in the highmolecular-weight Prx1 isoform were observed in OGD-treated endothelial cells. The accumulated polyubiquitinylated
proteins were detected by Western blot analysis with anti-Prx1 antibody. (B) Protein ubiquitination status after OGD
treatment in endothelial cells. The accumulated multiubiquitinylated proteins were detected by Western blot analysis with
an anti-ubiquitin antibody. (C) The changes in polyubiquitinated Prx1 were detected following OGD treatment of endothelial cells with or without proteasome inhibitors. The endothelial cells were treated with 1, 10, or 20 lM MG132 or DMSO
30 min before OGD. The cells were then washed, harvested after 6 h OGD, and analyzed for polyubiquitinated Prx1 levels.
(D) The OGD-induced ubiquitination of Prx1 was detected by the immunoprecipitation of ubiquitin followed by immunoblotting with an anti-Prx1 antibody. (E) Immunoprecipitation of Prx1 from cell lysates of OGD-treated endothelial cells
followed by blotting with an anti-ubiquitin antibody. (F) The ubiquitin K48R mutant decreased OGD-induced
Prx1 ubiquitination in endothelial cells. Endothelial cells were cultured and transfected with plasmid DNA encoding the
ubiquitin-K48R mutant or an empty plasmid, followed by OGD and immunobloting analysis. Immunoblots are representative of three independent experiments. Data are expressed as the percentage of values of control (mean – SEM). *p < 0.05;
**p < 0.01 versus control; #p < 0.05 versus OGD.

E6AP and the active-site cysteine-to-alanine-inactivated
mutant E6AP were expressed in mammalian p3869HAE6AP C-A cells (22, 46). Here, after 48 h of transfection,
siRNA knockdown of E6AP (Fig. 5E, F) or transfection
with the E6AP C-A mutant (Fig. 5G, H) both significantly
blunted the ubiquitination of Prx1 in OGD-treated endothelial cells.
Nitrosative stress associated with the Prx1 defensive
response after OGD

The ONOO - donor 3-morpholinosydnonimine (SIN-1)
induced early dose-dependent elevation of Prx1 (Supple-

mentary Fig. S5A, B) and Prx1 ubiquitination (Fig. 6A, B) in
endothelial cells as detected by immunoblot, accompanied by
increased Prx1 immunostaining (Fig. 6C) and activation of
E6AP (Fig. 6D). Whereas increased nitrotyrosine immunostaining and E6AP immunoreactivity were observed in
OGD-treated cells (Fig. 6E, F), inhibition of ONOO - with
uric acid markedly reduced both nitrotyrosine and E6AP
immunostaining after OGD exposure (Fig. 6E). This was
confirmed by Western blot (Fig. 6G, H). A similar result was
observed in endothelial cells treated with ONOO - decomposition catalysts (FeTPPS, 1 lM) (Supplementary Fig. S6A,
B). E6AP immunoprecipitates from the cell lysates were
probed with anti-nitrotyrosine antibody (Fig. 6I). The results

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

5

FIG. 3. The ubiquitination of
Prx1 in OGD-treated HBMEC.
(A) The time-dependent change of
OGD-induced Prx1 and ubiquitin
expression in HBMECs was detected by Western blot. (B) Densitometry of the Western blots for
(A) was normalized by the level of
b-actin as an internal control. (C)
OGD-treated HBMEC endothelial
cells were lysed and subjected to
immunoprecipitation with antibodies to ubiquitin. The resultant
precipitates were then subjected to
immunoblot analysis with antibodies
to Prx1. (D) Immunoprecipitation
of Prx1 from lysed HBMEC with
or without OGD treatment were
collected for immunoblot analysis
with ubiquitin antibody. (E) The
ubiquitin-K48R mutant transfection
attenuates Prx1 ubiquitination in
OGD-treated endothelial cells.
HBMEC were cultured and transfected with plasmid DNA encoding
the ubiquitin-K48R mutant or an
empty plasmid. (F) Densitometry
of the Western blots for (E) was
normalized by the level of b-actin
as an internal control. Immunoblots
are representative of three independent experiments. Data are expressed
as the percentage of values of control
(mean – SEM). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01
versus control; ##p < 0.01 versus
OGD. HBMEC, human brain microvascular endothelial cell.

demonstrated that the E6AP/nitrotyrosine interaction in
OGD-treated endothelial cells was significantly increased.
Consistently, OGD-induced tyrosine nitration of E6AP was
further confirmed by the immunoprecipitation of nitrotyrosine followed by immunoblotting with an anti-E6AP antibody
(Fig. 6J). In addition, Prx1 immunoprecipitates from the lysates
were probed with anti-nitrotyrosine antibody demonstrating
that OGD did not induce Prx1 protein co-immunoprecipitate
with nitrotyrosine (Supplementary Fig. S7). Melatonin blunted
the ubiquitination of Prx1 in OGD-treated cells (Supplementary Fig. S8), suggesting that nitrosative stress induced Prx1
ubiquitination during OGD.
E6AP activation contributes to Prx1 stress response
in brain microvessels after transient middle cerebral
artery occlusion in mice

Since there are limited in vivo data on the degradation of
Prx1 by ubiquitin ligases in ischemic brain, we used a mouse
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) model
for further study. The immunoreactivity for E6AP was observed predominantly in the ipsilateral brain microvessel
endothelium 6 h after tMCAO (Fig. 7A-e), accompanied by
increased Prx1 immunoreactivity (Fig. 7A-d). A representa-

tive Z-stack image is shown in Figure 7B. However, after
24 h, Prx1 was downregulated where E6AP remained upregulated in the brain microvessel endothelium (Fig. 7A, g-i).
Ubiquitination of Prx1 was elevated significantly in the brain
microvessels 6 h after MCAO (Fig. 7C, D), whereas Prx1
staining was observed in microvessels of sham-operated animals where ubiquitin staining was absent. To further determine E6AP as a key modulator in nitrosative stress-mediated
cerebrovascular damage in vivo, we stereotaxically delivered a
lentivirus carrying mouse shE6AP into the ventricle in mice 2
weeks before MCAO, followed by ischemia and 24 h reperfusion. Western blot analysis showed that lentivirus-mediated cerebral E6AP knockdown reduced cerebrovascular
damage, which was demonstrated by preventing ischemiainduced dephosphorylation of prosurvival kinases and tight
junction proteins breakdown (Fig. 7E–G).
Lentiviral-Prx1 brain transduction protects
against neurovascular damage in tMCAO mice

Two weeks after the cerebroventricular injection of a
lentiviral-GFP vector encoding mouse Prx1 (LV-Prx1), there
was efficient and sustained GFP fluorescence in the brain
ventricles (Fig. 8A), cortex (Fig. 8B), hippocampus, and

6

TAO ET AL.

FIG. 4. Role of Prx1 in the OGD-induced apoptotic cascade in endothelial cells. (A) The effects of Prx1 on OGDinduced ER stress signaling were determined by immunoblotting. (B) Densitometry of Western blots for PERK, Ire-1a, and
calnexin levels 6 h after OGD, with or without Prx1 transfection. Data are expressed as densitometry ratio of control
(mean – SEM). *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001 versus control; #p < 0.05 versus OGD. (C) The effects of Prx1 overexpression on OGDinduced caspase-3 and PARP levels were evaluated by immunoblotting. EA.hy926 cells were cultured and transfected with
plasmid DNA encoding Prx1 or an empty plasmid using Attractene. (D) The quantification data for blots are shown in (C).
Data are expressed as densitometry ratio of control (mean – SEM). **p < 0.01 versus control; #p < 0.05; ##p < 0.01 versus OGD.
(E) The effects of Prx1 overexpression on OGD-induced protein levels were evaluated by immunoblotting. Cells were
transfected with Prx1 plasmid followed by 6 h of OGD or control stimulation. Cell lysates were prepared and resolved by SDSPAGE. The proteins were immunoblotted with antibodies against phospho-ERK, phospho-JNK, phospho-P38, phospho-FKHR
(Ser256), and HO-1. (F) Quantitative analysis of protein levels for (E) was performed by densitometry. Data are expressed as
densitometry ratio of control (mean – SEM). **p < 0.01 versus control; #p < 0.05; ##p < 0.01 versus OGD. (G) Changes in
apoptosis 6 h after OGD were detected using the TUNEL assay. Double staining was performed for TUNEL (green) and DAPI
(blue). The representative images show the increased percentage of TUNEL-positive apoptotic endothelial nuclei (green
fluorescence) 6 h after OGD. Scale bar = 100 lm. (H) Quantification of TUNEL-positive apoptotic endothelial cells with or
without Prx1 transfection. Apoptosis was dramatically reduced following the overexpression of the Prx1 gene in endothelial
cells after OGD. **p < 0.01 versus OGD group. (I) Representative flow cytometric dot plots of apoptotic cells after OGD with
or without Prx1siRNA transfection. Cultured EA.hy926 cells were stimulated for 6 h with OGD with or without Prx1siRNA
transfection. Cells were double-stained with Annexin-V and PI and analyzed by FACS. Immunoblots are representative of
three independent experiments. b-Actin was used as the loading control. DAPI, 4¢,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; HO-1, heme oxygenase-1; JNK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase; PARP, poly ADP-ribose polymerase; siRNA,
small interfering RNA; TUNEL, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling; PI, propidium iodide. To see
this illustration in color, the reader is referred to the web version of this article at www.liebertpub.com/ars

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

7

FIG. 5. E6AP activation contributes to the Prx1 stress response after OGD. (A) The representative image showing
E6AP activation at the indicated time points after OGD treatment. Data are expressed as densitometry ratio of control
(mean – SEM). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 versus control. (B) Immunocytochemical analysis of E6AP expression after OGD
treatment. Laser confocal microscopy demonstrated low to undetectable levels of E6AP in control cells. (C) Highermagnification image of endothelial staining from the insets of (B). DAPI counterstaining indicates nuclear localization
(blue). Scale bar = 20 lm. (D) Quantification of Prx1 immunofluorescence expressed as integrated optical density (IOD).
***p < 0.001 versus control. (E) E6AP knockdown reduced the OGD-induced formation of multiubiquitinylated proteins.
Cells were submitted to E6AP knockdown and OGD or the control condition for 6 h. Cell lysates were prepared and
resolved by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were immunoblotted with antibodies against Prx1, E6AP, and ubiquitin. (F)
Quantitative analyses for (E) are shown in the bar graph as densitometry ratio of control (mean – SEM). **p < 0.01;
***p < 0.001 versus control; #p < 0.05 versus OGD. (G) The E6APC-A mutant decreased OGD-induced Prx1 ubiquitination
in endothelial cells. EA.hy926 cells were cultured and transfected with plasmid DNA encoding the E6APC-A mutant or an
empty plasmid using Attractene. (H) Quantitative analysis of protein levels for (G) was performed by densitometry. Data
are expressed as densitometry ratio of control (mean – SEM). *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001 versus control; #p < 0.05 versus OGD.
Immunodetection of b-actin was used as a loading control. Immunoblots are representative of three independent experiments. E6AP, E6-associated protein. To see this illustration in color, the reader is referred to the web version of this article
at www.liebertpub.com/ars

8

TAO ET AL.

FIG. 6. Nitrosative stress is associated with ubiquitination of Prx1 in endothelial cells. (A) The ubiquitination of Prx1
after SIN-1 stimulation in endothelial cells. The blots were labeled with anti-Prx1 or anti-ubiquitin antibody and visualized with
the ECL system. Molecular sizes are indicated on the right. (B) The SIN-1-induced changes in polyubiquitinated Prx1 were
quantified and shown in the bar graph as densitometry ratio of control (mean – SEM). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 versus control. (C)
Immunocytochemical analysis of Prx1 level after ONOO - treatment by laser confocal microscopy. DAPI counterstaining
indicates nuclear localization (blue). (D) The effects of SIN-1 treatment on E6AP protein levels were examined in cell lysates of
endothelial cells. EA.hy926 endothelial cells were cultured with or without SIN-1 treatment for 6 h at the indicated concentrations. Immunoblots are representative of three independent experiments (mean – SEM). *p < 0.05 versus control. (E)
Fluorescence immunocytochemical staining of E6AP and nitrotyrosine 6 h after OGD in endothelial cells with or without
0.5 mM uric acid treatment. DAPI counterstaining indicates nuclear localization (blue). NT, nitrotyrosine; UA, uric acid. (F)
Higher-magnification image of endothelial staining from the insets is shown in (E). (G) Effect of uric acid on E6AP expression in
endothelial cells following OGD. Immunodetection of b-actin was used as a loading control. (H) Quantification of E6AP protein
levels was performed using densitometric analysis of the immunoblots in (G). Immunoblots are representative of three independent experiments. Data are expressed as the percentage of values of control (mean – SEM). **p < 0.01 versus control;
#
p < 0.05 versus OGD. (I) Immunoprecipitation of E6AP from cell lysates of OGD-treated endothelial cells followed by blotting
with an anti-nitrotyrosine antibody. **p < 0.01 versus control. ( J) The OGD-induced nitration of E6AP was detected by the
immunoprecipitation of nitrotyrosine followed by immunoblotting with an anti-E6AP antibody. Immunoblots are representative
of three independent experiments (mean – SEM). *p < 0.05 versus control. SIN-1, 3-morpholinosydnonimine. To see this
illustration in color, the reader is referred to the web version of this article at www.liebertpub.com/ars
striatum (Supplementary Figs. S9 and S10). Staining of brain
sections from lentiviral-GFP-injected mice with a neuronal
nuclear marker (NeuN) (Fig. 8B-d) and an endothelial marker
CD31 (Fig. 8B-e, f) indicates that the vector successfully
transduced cells in the brain. Although the lentiviral vectors
might directly diffused into the brain parenchyma, the present
data indicate that lentiviral vectors in cerebral ventricular can
diffuse along the neurovascular scaffold. Immunohistochemical analysis of ipsilateral sections revealed stronger
GFP fluorescence in tMCAO mice that formed a continuous
interendothelial staining pattern that colocalized with CD31
(Fig. 8C, D).
The protective effects of Prx1 against ischemia-induced
neurological and functional deficit were evaluated by the
rotarod test and neurological score measurements. The neurological scores were decreased significantly, and rotarod
time was increased in LV-Prx1-treated mice 24 h after
tMCAO (Fig. 9A) and the infarct area was reduced accordingly (Fig. 9B). The breakdown products of spectrin and

calcineurin were increased after tMCAO (Fig. 9C, D), coincident with BBB leakage (Fig. 9E, F). LV-Prx1 treatment
blocked the degradation of tight junction proteins zonula
occludens-1 (ZO-1) and claudin5 (Fig. 9C, D, and G) and
significantly reduced BBB leakage (Fig. 9E, F). LV-Prx1
transduction reduced the O2 - level assessed from dihydroethidium staining in the penumbra region of mice 24 h
after tMCAO (Fig. 9H, I).
Schematic illustration of the mechanisms
by which nitrosative stress induces Prx1 ubiquitination
during ischemic insult in endothelial cells

We hypothesize that ischemia-induced nitrosative stress
causes an early increase in Prx1 production during the
adaptive phase, whereas excessive or prolonged ischemia
activates E6AP E3 ubiquitin ligase, which targets Prx1 for
ubiquitination and degradation during the late phase, thereby
degrading the Prx1-related antioxidant defense pathway and

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

9

FIG. 7. E6AP activation is associated with Prx1 ubiquitination
in brain microvessels of cerebral
ischemia mice. (A) Double immunohistochemical staining for
Prx1 and E6AP in the penumbra
after tMCAO. Fluorescence staining for Prx1 (green) and E6AP
(red) was performed in ipsilateral
brain regions 6 and 24 h after brain
ischemic injury in mice. (B) The
orthogonal projections onto the x - z
(upper) and y - z (right) planes are
shown to confirm the colocalization
of Prx1 and E6AP throughout the
microvessels shown in (A). (C)
Fluorescence immunohistochemical
staining of Prx1 and ubiquitin in
brain microvessels. Anti-ubiquitin
(red) and Prx1 (green) staining was
performed 6 h after tMCAO in
mice. (D) Higher-magnification
image of endothelial staining from
the insets is shown in (C). Each
image shown is representative of
five independent mice. (E) The effect of E6AP knockdown on neurovascular damage after brain
ischemia in mice. The lentivirus
E6AP shRNA knockdown was used
to silence E6AP mRNA. The protein extracts from penumbra brain
region of mice were processed for
Western blotting to detect ZO-1,
Occludin, and phosphorylated AKT,
ERK, FHHR. (F, G) Quantitative
analysis of protein levels in (E) was
performed by densitometry. Densitometry values were normalized to the
average of all sham values (mean –
SEM, n = 6). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01
versus sham mice; #p < 0.05;
##
p < 0.01 versus vehicle-treated
mice. Immunoblotting with an anti-bactin antibody demonstrated equal
protein loading in each lane. tMCAO,
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion; ZO-1, zonula occludens-1;
shRNA, short hairpin RNA. To see
this illustration in color, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article at www.liebertpub.com/ars
rendering the endothelial cells in the microvessels susceptible to ischemic damage (Fig. 10).
Discussion

The present study demonstrates that in endothelial cells OGD
treatment leads to oxidative and nitrosative stress that engage an
early increase in Prx1 production and an antioxidant response.
However, more prolonged or severe ischemia-mediated nitrosative stress ubiquitinates Prx1 by the activation of E6AP
ligase, thereby degrading this antioxidant defense pathway. The
translational studies in mice after MCAO demonstrated that
neurovascular protection was coordinated by active Prx1.

Prx1 initiates the antioxidant response by scavenging free
radicals formed in response to a diverse array of cellular
stresses (40, 44). Upregulation of Prx1 may be secondary to
the activation of NF-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) (24), as Prx1
promoter has two antioxidant response elements that are
putative binding sites for Nrf2. Indeed, we recently demonstrated that Nrf2 signaling coordinates the defense against
ischemia/nitrosative stress in endothelial cells (49).
The ubiquitin–proteasome system is important for protein
degradation in eukaryotic cells (19, 42). Unexpectedly, ubiquitin was not highly expressed in control endothelial cells,
but high-molecular-weight Prx1-polyubiquitin ladders were
observed after OGD or SIN-1 treatment. The aggregation of

10

TAO ET AL.

FIG. 8. The brain microvessels are the primary cell
type transduced by the LVGFP vector in the ipsilateral side of tMCAO mice.
(A) The distribution of LVGFP-Prx1 in the choroid
plexus of the mouse brain 2
weeks after intracerebroventricular injection. Images
demonstrate successful LVGFP-Prx1 transduction in
choroid plexus cells. (B) The
immunohistochemical localization of NeuN-labeled cells
(red) in (d) and CD31marked cells (red) in (e) were
examined in brain cortex of
mice. The inset (f) showing
magnified images from (B-e)
demonstrates the localization
of GFP-Prx1 in the microvessels of the brain. (C) Representative immunostaining
demonstrates that CD31 (red)
colocalized with GFP-Prx1
on the ipsilateral side of the
brain cortex 24 h after
MCAO. (D) Representative
Z-stack images shown in (C).
Each image shown is representative of five independently injected mice. NeuN,
neuronal nuclear marker. To
see this illustration in color,
the reader is referred to the
web version of this article at
www.liebertpub.com/ars

ubiquitinylated Prx1 proteins in endothelial cells after OGD
reflects an imbalance between the amount of toxic unfolded
proteins and the capacity of the proteasomal system to eliminate them, which may culminate in ER stress. Consistent with
our in vitro data, there was an increased ubiquitination of Prx1
in brain microvessels of mice following MCAO that was
associated with endothelial/microvessel injury. The formation of ubiquitin–protein conjugates (ubi-proteins) may mediate ischemic cell death (19, 51). A time-dependent increase
in E6AP after OGD induced Prx1 ubiquitination (33). The
upregulation and colocalization of E6AP with Prx1 after
OGD was blunted by inhibition of nitrosative stress with uric
acid or FeTPPS.
Our results identify E6AP as the E3 ligase that targets Prx1
for degradation in the later phases of OGD. Accordingly, we
tested the functional relevance of this pathway in protecting
the BBB of mice during tMCAO. Brain ischemia increased
E6AP expression in microvessels of the penumbra region.

Nitrosative stress from the reaction of NO generated by NO
synthases in damaged brain cells and O2 - generated during
ischemia underlays the ischemic cerebral cell death (17, 48).
We speculate from our endothelial cell model that ischemic
nitrosative stress induced the overproduction of brain microvascular E6AP. Indeed, the computational predictor evaluated 7 potential tyrosine nitration sites of E6AP with high
score (Supplementary Fig. S11). Additionally, S-nitrosylation has been shown to modify the function of many proteins
(1, 32). Therefore, it will also be important to further characterize the protein S-nitrosylation of thiol and amine groups
during ischemia in the future.
Our finding that inhibition of nitrosative stress and redirection of E6AP restored Prx1 signaling in endothelial cells
defines a new vasoprotective mechanism against the damaging consequences of ischemia. This was exemplified by the
demonstration that Prx1 overexpression in the intact brain
blocked tMCAO-induced neurovascular damage, attenuated

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

11

FIG. 9. Lentiviral-mediated delivery of Prx1 protects against neurovascular protection in tMCAO mice. (A)
Lentiviral-mediated delivery of Prx1 improved neurological functional recovery after focal ischemia. The neurological scores
(upper) and rotarod test (lower) were examined. The data are expressed as the percentage of the values observed in vehicletreated animals (mean – SEM, n = 10). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 versus vehicle-treated mice. (B) LV-Prx1 transduction reduced the
infarct area of mice 24 h after tMCAO. The mice were subjected to 45 min of MCAO, and the infarct area was quantified 24 h
later in cresyl violet-stained brain sections. The data are expressed as the percentage of the infarct area/total area of each brain
section (mean – SEM, n = 10). **p < 0.01 versus vehicle-treated mice. (C) The effect of LV-Prx1 on neurovascular damage
after brain ischemia. The proteins from penumbra brain region of mice were immunoblotted with antibodies against spectrin,
calcineurin, ZO-1, and MMP-9, which are indicative antibodies for neurovascular damage. C, contralateral; I, ipsilateral. (D)
The quantitative analyses are shown in the bar graph as the percentage of values of sham-operated animals (mean – SEM,
n = 4). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01 versus sham mice; #p < 0.05 versus vehicle-treated mice. Immunoblotting with an anti-b-actin
antibody demonstrated equal protein loading in each lane. SBP, spectrin breakdown products; CBP, calcineurin breakdown
products. (E) LV-Prx1 transduction attenuated BBB disruption 24 h after tMCAO. Mice were intravenously injected with
Texas red-dextran in saline and perfused 120 min later. Ex vivo dextran labeling (red fluorescence) indicated extensive BBB
permeability around disrupted brain microvessels in tMCAO mice. (F) Quantification of Texas red-dextran immunofluorescence expressed as integrated optical density (IOD). ***p < 0.001 versus sham; ###p < 0.001 versus vehicle-treated mice. (G)
Effect of LV-Prx1 transduction on the degradation of claudin5. (a) Immunostaining with anti-claudin5 (red fluorescence)
antibody showed brain ischemia-induced claudin5 degradation (c, d) in the microvessels 24 h after tMCAO. LV-Prx1
transduction reduced the degradation of claudin5 (e–g) in the microvessels 24 h after tMCAO. Higher-magnification images of
microvessel staining (b, d, g) from the insets of (a, c, f), respectively. (H) The effect of Prx1 transduction on O2 - levels, as
determined by in situ dihydroethidium staining. LV-Prx1 transduction reduced the O2 - level in the penumbra region
compared to vehicle. Each image shown is representative of five independently injected mice. DHE, dihydroethidium. (I) The
quantitative analyses of dihydroethidium immunofluorescence are shown in the bar graph. **p < 0.01 versus sham; #p < 0.05
versus vehicle-treated mice. BBB, blood–brain barrier; O2 - , superoxide. To see this illustration in color, the reader is referred
to the web version of this article at www.liebertpub.com/ars

12

TAO ET AL.

viously undescribed, nitrosative stress-dependent process
mediated by E6AP-dependent Prx1 ubiquitination and subsequent endothelial barrier damage. Since Prx1 protected
against oxidative stress in endothelial cells to reduce injury
after ischemia, both in vitro- and in vivo-specific inducers of
the Prx1 pathway, or mechanisms to prevent its degradation,
may be targeted for therapeutic benefit in neurovascular
disorders.
Materials and Methods
Reagents

FIG. 10. Schematic illustration of the mechanisms by
which nitrosative stress induces Prx1 ubiquitination in endothelial cells during ischemic insult via E6AP activation.
To see this illustration in color, the reader is referred to the
web version of this article at www.liebertpub.com/ars
BBB damage, preserved the ZO-1, and prevented the activation of metalloproteinases (MMPs). This is similar to the
reports that Prx1 was required also for neurovascular cell
survival during exposure to pathogenic proteins associated
with brain ischemia or with amyloid-b expression in neurons (30). These results are consistent with the finding that
Prx1-deficient mice suffer embryonic lethality because they
lack essential antioxidant function (25, 34, 39). Although
the neurovascular cells might be a critical issue during the
earlier phase of brain ischemia, the functional coupling and
collaborations among the capillaries, glia, and neurons of
the brain should be taken into consideration (9, 37). For
instance, recent studies highlight that pericyte loss causes
BBB breakdown and neurodegeneration (2, 36). Therefore,
how Prx1-mediated vascular protection contributed to the
neuronal survival in the present study, however, is a topic
for further investigation. Prx1 protein levels can prevent
excessive ROS accumulation by interaction with thioredoxin to detoxify hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), ONOO - , and
a range of organic hydroperoxides (34). We found further
that LV transduction reduced O2 - formation in the ipsilateral region of the ischemia brain, which might be a
consequence of ERK and FKHR activation by Prx1. Indeed,
Prxs participate in a very wide range of reactions, including
neuronal differentiation, cell signaling, molecular chaperoning, and mitochondrial function, in both catalytic-dependent and catalytic-independent manners and can interact
with JNK, c-Abl, and apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
(ASK1) in a redox-regulated manner (11, 14, 21, 23). Here,
ipsilateral sections showed stronger GFP fluorescence in
cerebral vessels of tMCAO mice, it might due to the changes
of structural integrity in ischemic region, where dividing
cell also largely accumulated (12, 20).
In summary, our studies identify an intracellular link between nitrosative stress and Prx1 signaling in endothelial
cells following ischemia-like injury. Our description of an
early ischemia-induced activation of beneficial Prx1 generation followed by subsequent inactivation represents a pre-

Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) and fetal
bovine serum were purchased from Gibco. Alexa Fluor 488conjugated anti-rabbit IgG and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated
anti-mouse IgG were obtained from Invitrogen. Uric acid was
obtained from Wako. 5,10,15,20-Tetrakis-[4-sulfonatophenyl]porphyrinato-iron[III] (FeTPPS; Calbiochem) was used as
a specific ONOO - decomposition catalyst. Unless otherwise stated, all reagents and chemicals were obtained from
Sigma-Aldrich.
OGD exposure and experimental treatments
of cell cultures

EA.hy926 cells (16, 43), HBMECs, and mouse brain microvascular endothelial cells (bEnd.3) were used for Western
blot or immunocytochemistry in the present study. Briefly, in
the oxygen and glucose deprivation phase, the culture medium
was replaced and washed with glucose-free Hank’s balanced
salt solution, after which the cultures were placed in an airtight
experimental hypoxia chamber (Billups-Rothenberg) containing a gas mixture comprising 95% N2 and 5% CO2. To
mimic an ischemia-like condition in vitro, cell cultures were
exposed to OGD for 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 h. Cells without OGD
served as controls.
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis

Approximately 450 lg of protein was resuspended in a
rehydration solution [8 M Urea, 2% CHAPS, 20 mM DTT,
0.2% Biolyte (pH range 3–10), and 0.2% Bromphenol blue]
and applied to 17-cm pH 3–10 nonlinear gradient immobiline
strips for isoelectric focusing. Isoelectric focusing was performed using Protean IEF Cell (Bio-Rad), and the proteins in
the IPG strips were subsequently placed on a 12% uniform
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)–polyacrylamide gel. The gels
were silver stained and scanned with an Image Scanner in
transmission mode, after which image analysis was conducted with two-dimensional PDquest (Bio-Rad). The twodimensional gel electrophoresis was repeated three times
using independently grown cultures.
In-gel digestion and mass spectrometry analysis

The in-gel digestion of proteins for mass spectrometric
characterization was performed as published previously (47).
After the tryptic peptide mixture was dissolved with 0.5%
trifluoroacetic acid, peptide mass analysis was performed
using an AB4800 MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometer
(Applied Biosystems). The mass spectra were externally
calibrated with a peptide standard from Applied Biosystems.
Based on the National Center for Biotechnology Information

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

(NCBI) human databases, the mass spectra were analyzed
with a 50 ppm mass tolerance by GPS Explorer version 2.0.1
and Mascot version 1.9.
Plasmid constructs and transfections

The EA.hy926 or HBMEC endothelial cells were cultured
in six-well plates in the growth medium and transfected with
plasmid DNA encoding Prx1, siPrx1, siE6AP, pRK5-HAUbiquitin-K48R (17604; Addgene), or an empty plasmid
control using Attractene (Qiagen). After transfection for 2
days, the cells were collected for related experiments. To
express the active-site cysteine-to-alanine mutant of E6AP in
endothelial cells, p3869HA-E6AP C833A cells (8649; Addgene) were used. The C-A mutation was introduced at the
site of E6AP C833 (22, 27). The K48R mutant ubiquitin was
obtained from Dr. Guanghui Wang (Soochow University)
(27). All the constructs were confirmed by sequencing.
Lentiviral vectors preparation for brain delivery

To construct a lentiviral vector expressing Prx1, two
complementary Prx1 DNA oligonucleotides were synthesized and inserted into the EcoRI-BamHI site of transfer
vector pCDH-CMV-MCS-EF1-copGFP under the control of
promoter CMV. The constructed vector was transformed into
DH5a Escherichia coli and isolated with minipreps plasmid
purification system (Promega). A large production of LVPrx1 was prepared by transfection of human kidney 293T
cells. In brief, 293T cells were cotransfected with a mixture
containing packaging plasmid (pCD/NL-BH*DDD), envelope plasmid (pLTR-G), and transfer vector and Trans-EZ.
For high-titer virus stocks, the supernatant of cells was collected at 72 h after transfection, low-speed centrifuged, filtered, and ultracentrifuged. The titer of LV-Prx1 stock was
determined by transduction of HOS cells with serial dilutions
of concentrated lentivirus and analyzing integrated viral
DNA copies per cell by quantitative polymerase chain reaction. The lentiviral vectors coding for GFP without Prx1
were prepared in a similar manner, as described above, and
used as a control (LV-GFP). In addition, we used a lentivirusmediated RNA interference approach to achieve the inhibition of E6AP levels in the brain. The short hairpin RNA
(shRNA)-mediated Ube3a knockdown vectors were constructed by subcloning the U6 promoter-sh-Ube3a cassette
into the AgeI-EcoRI sites of the pLenti-CMV vector.
The lentiviral vector encoding mouse Prx1 (LV-GFPPrx1), LV-GFP, or sh-E6AP was injected into the right lateral
ventricle over a 10-min duration using a Hamilton microsyringe with the coordinates of 0.5 mm caudal to the bregma,
1 mm lateral to the midline, and 3 mm depth from the skull
surface under the guidance of a stereotaxic instrument. Two
weeks after the introduction of the viral vectors, the MCAO
mice model was prepared as previously reported (51). All
lentivirus batches used for experiments had comparable titers
ranging from 1 · 108 to 1 · 109 integration units/ml. Virus
suspensions were stored at - 80C until use and were briefly
centrifuged and kept on ice immediately before injection.
RNA interference

Prx1 siRNAs or E6AP siRNAs was introduced into
EA.hy926 cells with the transfection medium according to

13

the manufacturer’s instructions. The control set of EA.hy926
cells was transfected with nontargeted siRNAs. The cells
were collected for experiments 72 h after transfection.
Knockdown was confirmed with Western blotting using
whole cell lysates. siPrx1 (sc-36177) and scramble negative
control (sc-37007) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology: siE6AP (sense), 5¢-GCCCAGACACAGAA
AGGUUTT-3¢; scramble negative control (siCont-1, sense),
5¢-UUGCGGGUCUAAUCACCGATT-3¢.
Annexin V/PI flow cytometry analysis

Flow cytometric assays to evaluate apoptosis by Annexin
V/PI (BioVision) staining were performed essentially as
previously described, following the manufacturer’s instruction. Briefly, endothelial cells were transfected with Prx1
siRNAs for 48 h before exposure to 6 h OGD. Annexin
V-FITC and PI were added to the cell suspension and incubated at room temperature for 10 min in the dark. For each
sample, at least 1 · 104 cells were analyzed using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).
TUNEL assay

In situ DNA fragmentation was assessed using a TUNEL
staining combined with 4¢,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
counterstain. Images were recorded after counterstaining with
DAPI (nuclei marker), and endothelial cells were identified by
phase image. Endothelial cells were imaged using 20 · objectives. The apoptotic response was expressed as the percentage
of TUNEL-positive endothelial cells/the total number of nuclei
counted after DAPI staining. The results represented the average of a minimum of three experiments, and a minimum of
600 cells were counted per experiment.
Cell fractionation, immunoprecipitation,
and immunoblotting analysis

Immunoblotting was carried out in endothelial cell lysates
after determination of protein concentrations using the Bradford’s solution. The cell lysates containing equivalent amounts
of protein were applied to 10%–13.5% acrylamide denaturing
gels (SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis [PAGE]) (15).
Proteins were then transferred to an immobilon polyvinylidene
difluoride membrane for 1 h at 50 V. Membranes were blocked
in 20 mM Tris-HCl (PH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, and 0.1% Tween
20 (TBS-T) containing 5% fat-free milk powder for 1 h and
immunodetected with antibodies to HSP27 monoclonal antibody (1:1000), Prx1 polyclonal antibody (1:5000), (Abcam);
HO-1 (1:1000), Phospho-AKT (1:1000), Phospho-ERK
(1:3000), Phospho-JNK (1:1000), Phospho-P38 (1:1000),
Phospho-FKHR (1:3000), and cleaved Caspase-3 (1:1000,
polyclonal antibody; Cell Signaling Technology); procaspase-3 (1:2000), PARP-1 (1:2000), and ubiquitin (1:1000,
polyclonal antibody; Santa Cruz Biotechnology); ZO-1 and
Occludin (1:1000; Invitrogen); E6AP (1:3000) and b-actin
(1:5000, monoclonal antibody; Sigma-Aldrich). After incubation for 12 h, membranes were incubated with the appropriate
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody. Immunoreactivity was visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence (Amersham Life Science). The Prx1 ubiquitylation
assays were performed essentially as described previously (46).
Briefly, cells were treated with 5 lM MG132 (Calbiochem)

14

or with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; control) for 30 min before
OGD. Immunoprecipitates were analyzed by immunoblotting,
using either anti-ubiquitin or anti-Prx1 antibody to detect
ubiquitylated Prx1. In addition, E6AP immunoprecipitates
from the lysates were probed with anti-nitrotyrosine antibody.
Experimental animals

Male C57 mice, weighing 20–23 g, were obtained from the
Zhejiang Medical Animal Centre (Hangzhou, China). Mice
were housed under climate-controlled conditions with a 12-h
light/dark cycle and provided with standard food and water.
Animals were acclimated to their environment for at least 1
week before initiating the experimental protocols. All experimental protocols and animal handling procedures were
performed in accordance with the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) guidelines for the care and use of laboratory
animals and were approved by the Committee for Animal
Experiments at the Zhejiang University in China.
tMCAO model

The transient/reperfusion MCAO model was used to resemble stroke in humans (3, 5), and the surgery was carried
out as previously described (18). Animal procedures were
approved by the Committee on Animal Experiments at the
Zhejiang University. The rectal temperature was monitored
throughout the surgery, and the body temperature was maintained at 37C – 0.5C with a heating pad. Neurological deficit
tests were carried out at 24 h after tMCAO, including neurological scores and rotarod test. Neurological scores were determined 24 h after tMCAO using a previously described
scoring system (45). Rotarod test, which started 3 days before
the surgery to train five times every day, was performed to
examine the motor coordination. The rotarod time (s) that mice
persisted on the rotarod after ischemia was recorded; the data
were expressed as the mean duration of five trials at 24 h after
tMCAO. The brain infarct area of mice 24 h after ischemia was
evaluated from scanned digital images of Nissl-stained brain
sections using Image J software (NIH).
Evaluation of BBB damage

The loss of BBB integrity was also verified by the leakage
of Texas red-conjugated dextran from microvessels after
intravenous injection. Texas red-dextran (70 kDa) solution
(0.1% in phosphate-buffered saline [PBS], 5 ml/kg) was intravenously administered via the tail vein at 22 h after the
onset of MCAO. The mice were perfused transcardially with
saline as above. After decapitation, brains were prepared
according to the immunohistochemical methods, and Texas
red-dextran leakage was determined by immunofluorescence
staining (red fluorescence).
Confocal immunofluorescence staining and analysis

For immunofluorescence analysis in cultured endothelial
cells, cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde/PBS as previously
reported (16). Cells were labeled with Prx1 (1:300, polyclonal antibody; Abcam), Nitrotyrosine (1:200, monoclonal
antibody; Millipore), E6AP (1:300, polyclonal antibody;
Invitrogen), and ubiquitin (1:200, monoclonal antibody; Cell
Signaling Technology), followed by immunofluorescence
using a standard protocol from PerkinElmer Life Sciences,

TAO ET AL.

Inc. Nuclei were stained with DAPI dihydrochloride bisbenzimide (5 lM). Immunolocalization and changes in Prx1,
E6AP, and nitrotyrosine in cultured endothelial cells were
visualized by confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM 510).
For immunohistochemistry, mice were anesthetized at the
time of sacrifice and transcardially perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS as previously described (16). The
whole brains were immediately removed and post-fixed
overnight at 4C. Then, brains were cut into 35-lm-thick
serial sections using a vibratome. Sections were incubated at
room temperature in PBS with 0.01% Triton-X100 for 30 min
and for 1 h in 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS. For
immunolabeling, the brain slices were incubated with antibodies targeting Prx1 (1:300; Abcam), CD31 (1:200; Santa
Cruz Biotechnology), Claudin5 (1:200; Invitrogen), E6AP
(1:300; Sigma-Aldrich), NeuN (1:300), and Nitrotyrosine
(1:200) (Millipore) overnight at 4C. After washing, the
sections were incubated with Alexa fluor 488-conjugated
anti-rabbit IgG (1:400) and Alexa fluor 594-conjugated antimouse IgG (1:400) (Invitrogen) in (Tris-NaCl-blocking) TNB
buffer (1:400). In addition, the oxidative fluorescent indicator
dihydroethidium was used to evaluate in situ O2 - generation
as previously reported (45). Immunofluorescence was visualized by using a Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope.
Statistical analysis

The data were analyzed with t-tests when means between
two groups were compared. For multigroup comparisons,
statistical significance was determined using one-way
ANOVA followed by a post hoc Tukey’s test or Dunnett’s
comparison to control. All data are expressed as the mean –
SEM. A value of p < 0.05 was considered to be significant.
Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (81120108023, 91232705,
81202533); the Zhejiang Provincial Qianjiang Talent Plan
(2012R10036); the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science
Foundation of China (R2100281); NIH grants (NHLBI HL68686, NIDDK DK-49870, and DK-36079).
Author Disclosure Statement

No competing financial interests exist.
References

1. Aracena P, Tang W, Hamilton SL, and Hidalgo C. Effects
of S-glutathionylation and S-nitrosylation on calmodulin
binding to triads and FKBP12 binding to type 1 calcium
release channels. Antioxid Redox Signal 7: 870–881, 2005.
2. Armulik A, Genové G, Mäe M, Nisancioglu MH, Wallgard
E, Niaudet C, He L, Norlin J, Lindblom P, Strittmatter K,
Johansson BR, and Betsholtz C. Pericytes regulate the
blood-brain barrier. Nature 468: 557–561, 2010.
3. Braeuninger S and Kleinschnitz C. Rodent models of focal
cerebral ischemia: procedural pitfalls and translational
problems. Exp Transl Stroke Med 1: 8, 2009.
4. Brunet Simioni M, De Thonel A, Hammann A, Joly AL,
Bossis G, Fourmaux E, Bouchot A, Landry J, Piechaczyk
M, and Garrido C. Heat shock protein 27 is involved in
SUMO-2/3 modification of heat shock factor 1 and thereby

NEUROVASCULAR PROTECTIVE ROLE OF PEROXIREDOXIN 1

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.
20.

modulates the transcription factor activity. Oncogene 28:
3332–3344, 2009.
Carmichael ST. Rodent models of focal stroke: size,
mechanism, and purpose. NeuroRx 2: 396–409, 2005.
Chae HZ, Kang SW, and Rhee SG. Isoforms of mammalian
peroxiredoxin that reduce peroxides in presence of thioredoxin. Methods Enzymol 300: 219–226, 1999.
Chae HZ, Oubrahim H, Park JW, Rhee SG, and Chock PB.
Protein glutathionylation in the regulation of peroxiredoxins: a family of thiol-specific peroxidases that function as
antioxidants, molecular chaperones, and signal modulators.
Antioxid Redox Signal 16: 506–523, 2012.
Coe H, Bedard K, Groenendyk J, Jung J, and Michalak M.
Endoplasmic reticulum stress in the absence of calnexin.
Cell Stress Chaperones 13: 497–507, 2008.
del Zoppo GJ. . The neurovascular unit, matrix proteases, and
innate inflammation. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1207: 46–49, 2010.
Fisher AB. Peroxiredoxin 6: a bifunctional enzyme with
glutathione peroxidase and phospholipase A2 activities.
Antioxid Redox Signal 15: 831–844, 2011.
Gan Y, Ji X, Hu X, Luo Y, Zhang L, Li P, Liu X, Yan F,
Vosler P, Gao Y, Stetler RA, and Chen J. Transgenic
overexpression of peroxiredoxin-2 attenuates ischemic
neuronal injury via suppression of a redox-sensitive prodeath signaling pathway. Antioxid Redox Signal 17: 719–
732, 2012.
Geraerts M, Eggermont K, Hernandez-Acosta P, GarciaVerdugo JM, Baekelandt V, and Debyser Z. Lentiviral vectors mediate efficient and stable gene transfer in adult neural
stem cells in vivo. Hum Gene Ther 17: 635–650, 2006.
Girouard H, Park L, Anrather J, Zhou P, and Iadecola C.
Cerebrovascular nitrosative stress mediates neurovascular
and endothelial dysfunction induced by angiotensin II.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 27: 303–309, 2007.
Guo X, Yamada S, Tanimoto A, Ding Y, Wang KY, Shimajiri S, Murata Y, Kimura S, Tasaki T, Nabeshima A,
Watanabe T, Kohno K, and Sasaguri Y. Overexpression of
peroxiredoxin 4 attenuates atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein
E knockout mice. Antioxid Redox Signal 17: 1362–1375,
2012.
Han F, Ali Raie A, Shioda N, Qin ZH, and Fukunaga K.
Accumulation of beta-amyloid in the brain microvessels
accompanies increased hyperphosphorylated tau proteins
following microsphere embolism in aged rats. Neuroscience 153: 414–427, 2008.
Han F, Chen YX, Lu YM, Huang JY, Zhang GS, Tao RR, Ji
YL, Liao MH, Fukunaga K, and Qin ZH. Regulation of the
ischemia-induced autophagy-lysosome processes by nitrosative stress in endothelial cells. J Pineal Res 51: 124–
135, 2011.
Han F, Shirasaki Y, and Fukunaga K. Microsphere embolisminduced endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression mediates
disruption of the blood-brain barrier in rat brain. J Neurochem
99: 97–106, 2006.
Han F, Tao RR, Zhang GS, Lu YM, Liu LL, Chen YX,
Lou YJ, Fukunaga K, and Hong ZH. Melatonin ameliorates
ischemic-like injury-evoked nitrosative stress: Involvement
of HtrA2/PED pathways in endothelial cells. J Pineal Res
50: 281–291, 2011.
Hu BR, Martone ME, Jones YZ, and Liu CL. Protein aggregation following transient cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci
20: 3191–3199, 2000.
Jakobsson J and Lundberg C. Lentiviral vectors for use in
the central nervous system. Mol The 13: 484–493, 2006.

15

21. Kakihana T, Nagata K, and Sitia R. Peroxides and peroxidases in the endoplasmic reticulum: integrating redox homeostasis and oxidative folding. Antioxid Redox Signal 16:
763–771, 2012.
22. Kao WH, Beaudenon SL, Talis AL, Huibregtse JM, and
Howley PM. Human papillomavirus type 16 E6 induces
self-ubiquitination of the E6AP ubiquitin-protein ligase.
J Virol 74: 6408–6417, 2000.
23. Kim SY, Kim TJ, and Lee KY. A novel function of peroxiredoxin 1 (Prx-1) in apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
(ASK1)-mediated signaling pathway. FEBS Lett 582:
1913–1918, 2008.
24. Kim YJ, Ahn JY, Liang P, Ip C, Zhang Y, and Park YM.
Human prx1 gene is a target of Nrf2 and is upregulated by
hypoxia/reoxygenation: implication to tumor biology.
Cancer Res 67: 546–554, 2007.
25. Kisucka J, Chauhan AK, Patten IS, Yesilaltay A, Neumann
C, Van Etten RA, Krieger M, and Wagner DD. Peroxiredoxin1 prevents excessive endothelial activation and early
atherosclerosis. Circ Res 103: 598–605, 2008.
26. Leblanc GG, Golanov E, Awad IA, and Young WL. Biology of Vascular Malformations of the Brain NINDS
Workshop Collaborators. Biology of vascular malformations of the brain. Stroke 40: e694–e702, 2009.
27. Liu C, Fei E, Wang H, Tao R, Iwata A, Nukina N, Zhou J,
and Wang G. Assembly of lysine 63-linked ubiquitin conjugates by phosphorylated-synuclein implies lewy body
biogenesis. J Biol Chem 282: 14558–14566, 2007.
28. Liu G, Feinstein SI, Wang Y, Dodia C, Fisher D, Yu K, Ho
YS, and Fisher AB. Comparison of glutathione peroxidase
1 and peroxiredoxin 6 in protection against oxidative stress
in the mouse lung. Free Radic Biol Med 49: 1172–1181,
2010.
29. Liu QB, Liu LL, Lu YM, Tao RR, Huang JY, Han F, and
Lou YJ. The induction of reactive oxygen species and
loss of mitochondrial Omi/HtrA2 is associated with
S-nitrosoglutathione-induced apoptosis in human endothelial cells. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 244: 374–384, 2010.
30. Manczak M, Mao P, Calkins MJ, Cornea A, Reddy AP,
Murphy MP, Szeto HH, Park B, and Reddy PH.
Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants protect against amyloidbeta toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease neurons. J Alzheimers
Dis 20: S609–S631, 2010.
31. Mowbray AL, Kang DH, Rhee SG, Kang SW, and Jo H.
Laminar shear stress up-regulates peroxiredoxins (PRX) in
endothelial cells: PRX 1 as a mechanosensitive antioxidant.
J Biol Chem 283: 1622–1627, 2008.
32. Nakamura T and Lipton SA. S-nitrosylation of critical
protein thiols mediates protein misfolding and mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases. Antioxid
Redox Signal 14: 1479–1492, 2011.
33. Nasu J, Murakami K, Miyagawa S, Yamashita R, Ichimura
T, Wakita T, Hotta H, Miyamura T, Suzuki T, Satoh T,
and Shoji I. E6AP ubiquitin ligase mediates ubiquitindependent degradation of peroxiredoxin 1. J Cell Biochem
111: 676–685, 2010.
34. Neumann CA, Krause DS, Carman CV, Das S, Dubey DP,
Abraham JL, Bronson RT, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH, and Van
Etten RA. Essential role for the peroxiredoxin Prdx1 in
erythrocyte antioxidant defence and tumour suppression.
Nature 424: 561–565, 2003.
35. Pitts A, Dailey K, Newington JT, Chien A, Arseneault R,
Cann T, Thompson LM, and Cumming RC. Dithiol based
compounds maintain expression of antioxidant protein

16

36.
37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.

TAO ET AL.

peroxiredoxin 1 that counteracts toxicity of mutant hungtington. J Biol Chem 287: 22717–22729, 2012.
Quaegebeur A, Segura I, and Carmeliet P. Pericytes: bloodbrain barrier safeguards against neurodegeneration? Neuron
68: 321–323, 2010.
Quaegebeur A, Lange C, and Carmeliet P. The neurovascular link in health and disease: molecular mechanisms and
therapeutic implications. Neuron 71: 406–424, 2011.
Rabilloud T, Heller M, Gasnier F, Luche S, Rey C, Aebersold R, Benahmed M, Louisot P, and Lunardi J.
Proteomics analysis of cellular response to oxidative
stress. Evidence for in vivo overoxidation of peroxiredoxins at their active site. J Biol Chem 277: 19396–
19401, 2002.
Rani V, Neumann CA, Shao C, and Tischfield JA. Prdx1
deficiency in mice promotes tissue specific loss of heterozygosity mediated by deficiency in DNA repair and increased oxidative stress. Mutat Res 735: 39–45, 2012.
Riddell JR, Maier P, Sass SN, Moser MT, Foster BA, and
Gollnick SO. Peroxiredoxin 1 stimulates endothelial cell
expression of VEGF via TLR4 dependent activation of
HIF-1a. PLoS One 7: e50394, 2012.
Rizzo MT and Leaver HA. Brain endothelial cell death:
modes, signaling pathways, and relevance to neural development, homeostasis, and disease. Mol Neurobiol 42:
52–63, 2010.
Rott R, Szargel R, Haskin J, Bandopadhyay R, Lees AJ,
Shani V, and Engelender S. a-Synuclein fate is determined
by USP9X-regulated monoubiquitination. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 108: 18666–186671, 2011.
Satoh M, Fujimoto S, Haruna Y, Arakawa S, Horike H,
Komai N, Sasaki T, Tsujioka K, Makino H, and Kashihara
N. NAD (P) h oxidase and uncoupled nitric oxide syntase
are major sources of glomerular superoxide in rats with
experimental diabetic nephropathy. Am J Physiol Renal
Physiol 288: F1144–F1152, 2005.
Schreibelt G, van Horssen J, Haseloff RF, Reijerkerk A,
van der Pol SM, Nieuwenhuizen O, Krause E, Blasig IE,
Dijkstra CD, Ronken E, and de Vries HE. Protective effects
of peroxiredoxin-1 at the injured blood-brain barrier. Free
Radic Biol Med 45: 256–264, 2008.
Shioda N, Han F, Moriguchi S, and Fukunaga K. Constitutively active calcineurin mediates delayed neuronal
death through Fas-ligand expression via activation of
NFAT and FKHR transcriptional activities in mouse brain
ischemia. J Neurochem 102: 1506–1517, 2007.
Shirakura M, Murakami K, Ichimura T, Suzuki R, Shimoji
T, Fukuda K, Abe K, Sato S, Fukasawa M, Yamakawa Y,
Nishijima M, Moriishi K, Matsuura Y, Wakita T, Suzuki T,
Howley PM, Miyamura T, and Shoji I. E6AP ubiquitin
ligase mediates ubiquitylation and degradation of hepatitis
C virus core protein. J Virol 81: 1174–1185, 2007.
Sultana R, Perluigi M, Newman SF, Pierce WM, Cini C,
Coccia R, and Butterfield DA. Redox proteomic analysis of
carbonylated brain proteins in mild cognitive impairment
and early Alzheimer’s disease. Antioxid Redox Signal 12:
327–336, 2010.
Tan KH, Harrington S, Purcell WM, and Hurst RD. Peroxinitrite mediates nitric oxide-induced blood-brain barrier
damage. Neurochem Res 29: 579–587, 2004.
Tao RR, Ji YL, Lu YM, Fukunaga K, and Han F. Targeting
nitrosative stress for neurovascular protection: new implications in brain diseases. Curr Drug Targets 13: 272–284,
2012.

50. Wilcox CS and Pearlman A. Chemistry and antihypertensive effects of tempol and other nitroxides. Pharmacol Rev
60: 418–469, 2008.
51. Zhang GS, Tian Y, Huang JY, Tao RR, Liao MH, Lu YM,
Ye WF, Wang R, Fukunaga K, Lou YJ, and Han F. The
c-Secretase blocker DAPT reduces the permeability of the
blood-brain barrier by decreasing the ubiquitination and
degradation of occludin during permanent brain ischemia.
CNS Neurosci Ther 19: 53–60, 2012.

Address correspondence to:
Dr. Feng Han
Institute of Pharmacology, Toxicology
and Biochemical Pharmaceutics
Zhejiang University
Hangzhou 310058
China
E-mail: changhuahan@zju.edu.cn
Date of first submission to ARS Central, April 18, 2013; date
of final revised submission, November 12, 2013; date of acceptance, December 2, 2013.
Abbreviations Used
ASK1 ¼ apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1
BBB ¼ blood–brain barrier
DAPI ¼ 4¢,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
DMEM ¼ Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
E6AP ¼ E6-associated protein
ER ¼ endoplasmic reticulum
FKHR ¼ forkhead transcription factor Foxo1
H2 O2 ¼ hydrogen peroxide
HBMEC ¼ human brain microvascular endothelial cell
HO-1 ¼ heme oxygenase-1
HSP27 ¼ heat shock protein 27
JNK ¼ c-Jun N-terminal kinase
MALDI-TOF ¼ matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionizationtime-of-flight
mHtt ¼ mutant Hungtington
MMPs ¼ metalloproteinases
NeuN ¼ neuronal nuclear marker
NO ¼ nitric oxide
Nrf2 ¼ NF-E2-related factor 2
O2 - ¼ superoxide
OGD ¼ oxygen–glucose deprivation
ONOO- ¼ peroxynitrite
PAGE ¼ polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
PARP ¼ poly ADP-ribose polymerase
PBS ¼ phosphate-buffered saline
PI ¼ propidium iodide
Prx ¼ peroxiredoxin
ROS ¼ reactive oxygen species
SDS ¼ sodium dodecyl sulfate
shRNA ¼ short hairpin RNA
SIN-1 ¼ 3-morpholinosydnonimine
siRNA ¼ small interfering RNA
tMCAO ¼ transient middle cerebral artery occlusion
TUNEL ¼ terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
dUTP nick end labeling
ZO-1 ¼ zonula occludens-1

This article has been cited by:
1. María E. Cabrillana, Pamela Uribe, Juana V. Villegas, Juan Álvarez, Raúl Sánchez, Miguel W. Fornés. 2016. Thiol oxidation by
nitrosative stress: Cellular localization in human spermatozoa. Systems Biology in Reproductive Medicine 62:5, 325-334. [CrossRef]
2. Bowen Wu, Hao Yu, Yifan Wang, Zongfu Pan, Yihan Zhang, Tong Li, Lu Li, Weichen Zhang, Lijun Ge, Ying Chen, Choe Kyong
Ho, Danyan Zhu, Xin Huang, Yijia Lou. 2016. Peroxiredoxin-2 nitrosylation facilitates cardiomyogenesis of mouse embryonic
stem cells via XBP-1s/PI3K pathway. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 97, 179-191. [CrossRef]
3. Rui Wang, Shu-Ting Wang, Yu-Di Wang, Gang Wu, Yan Du, Man-Qing Qian, Xing-Guang Liang, Mahmoud H. Elbatreek,
Hong-Yu Yang, Zhi-Rong Liu, Kohji Fukunaga, Jian-Xiang Liu, Ying-Mei Lu. 2016. Stress-responsive heme oxygenase-1
isoenzyme participates in Toll-like receptor 4-induced inflammation during brain ischemia. NeuroReport 27:6, 445-454.
[CrossRef]
4. Bodo Speckmann, Holger Steinbrenner, Tilman Grune, Lars-Oliver Klotz. 2016. Peroxynitrite: From interception to signaling.
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 595, 153-160. [CrossRef]
5. Xin Li, Rong-Rong Tao, Ling-Juan Hong, Juan Cheng, Quan Jiang, Ying-Mei Lu, Mei-Hua Liao, Wei-Feng Ye, Nan-Nan
Lu, Feng Han, Yong-Zhou Hu, You-Hong Hu. 2015. Visualizing Peroxynitrite Fluxes in Endothelial Cells Reveals the Dynamic
Progression of Brain Vascular Injury. Journal of the American Chemical Society 137:38, 12296-12303. [CrossRef]
6. Emiliano Panieri, Massimo M. Santoro. 2015. ROS signaling and redox biology in endothelial cells. Cellular and Molecular Life
Sciences 72:17, 3281-3303. [CrossRef]

