Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Neurochemistry International
j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w. e l s e v i e r. c o m / l o c a t e / n c i

Malibatol A protects against brain injury through reversing
mitochondrial dysfunction in experimental stroke
Wenjie Yang a,b, Xiang Chen a,b, Jie Pan a,b, Huiming Ge c, Kailin Yin a,b, Zhengzheng Wu a,
Xiaoxi Li a, Dujuan Sha a, Yun Xu a,b,c,d,*
a

Department of Neurology, Aﬃliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China
Diagnosis and Therapy Center of Stroke in Jiangsu Province, China
c
Institute of Functional Biomolecules, State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
d Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China
b

A R T I C L E

I N F O

Article history:
Received 11 June 2014
Received in revised form 8 October 2014
Accepted 17 November 2014
Available online 20 November 2014
Keywords:
Malibatol A
Ischemic stroke
Oxidative stress
Mitochondria

A B S T R A C T

Ischemic stroke is particularly susceptible to free radicals mediated secondary neuronal damage, especially mitochondrial dysfunction. Malibatol A (MA), a novel resveratrol oligomer, has shown potential
antioxidant property in vitro. But little is known about its effect on central nervous system (CNS) in vivo.
In the present study, the effect of MA was evaluated in focal cerebral ischemia induced by right middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in mice. MA at the dose of 20 mg/kg was administered by caudal-vein
injection within 15 min after reperfusion. At 24 h after cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury, ameliorated neurological scores and reduced infarct volume was observed in MA treated group. Also, MA
treatment restored the increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS), 3-Nitrotyrosine (3-NT), and
4-Hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) induced by MCAO. The activities of respiratory enzyme complex I, III and
mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Δ<PSI>m) were effectively preserved compared with MCAO group
through MA treatment. Western blot analysis showed a marked increase in Bcl-2 and decrease in Bax
expression after MA treatment as compared with MCAO group. Moreover, MA treatment prevented release
of cytochrome c from mitochondria into cytoplasm and blunted activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3.
Collectively, the present study indicates that MA can ameliorate MCAO-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, and this might partially contribute to its protective effect on brain damage after 24 h of I/R injury.
© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Stroke is one of the leading causes of death throughout the world,
responsible for 9% of the total deaths each year (Kissela et al., 2012).
However, as the only current eﬃcacious treatment for ischemic
stroke, thrombolysis is extremely limited in clinical therapeutics,
due to the short therapeutic window and high risk of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA)-related intracranial
hemorrhage. Therefore, exploring the pathologic mechanisms and
further searching for effective neuroprotective agents of ischemic
stroke are of critical importance.
The mechanisms of cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury are
complex and multi-factorial, including oxidative stress, inﬂammation and immunity, apoptosis, and autophagy, etc. Many studies have

* Corresponding author. Department of Neurology, Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, 321 Zhongshan Road, Nanjing City, Jiangsu 210008, China.
Tel.: +86 25 83105208; fax: +86 2583105208.
E-mail address: xuyun20042001@aliyun.com (Y. Xu).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuint.2014.11.003
0197-0186/© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

demonstrated the involvement of oxidative stress in pathophysiology of cerebral I/R injury, claiming that the increased level of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) induced by ischemic stroke may contribute to the major tissue injury. The elevated ROS that quickly
exceed the scavenging capacity of antioxidant defense directly
provoke damage to protein, lipid and DNA by modifying their chemical structure and generating oxidation-derived products. Besides,
ROS also act as a molecular trigger for the apoptotic signaling
pathway, resulting in the apoptotic cell death following ischemic
attack (Broughton et al., 2009). Further, ROS initiates the elevated
expression of inﬂammatory mediators that lead to the burst of inﬂammation (Lakhan et al., 2009). In a few words, a complicated series
of biochemical cascades mediated by oxidative stress may take place
after ischemic insult, ultimately contributing to the malignant progression of stroke (Piotrowska et al., 2012).
Mitochondria are critical for the regulation of cytosolic calcium
homeostasis, modulation of intracellular pH, and synthesis of ATP
via tricarboxylic acid cycle (TAC) and electron transport chain (ETC).
Therefore, oxidative mitochondrial damage plays a pivotal role in
the processes of neuronal cell death. Recent studies have shown that

34

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

and advanced to occlude the origin of the MCA until a slight resistance was felt. The nylon ﬁlament was allowed to remain in the place
for 2 h. After 2 h of occlusion, the suture was slowly retracted so
as to allow reperfusion of the ischemic region. In the sham group,
mice were operated but the ﬁlament was pulled out within 60 s.
All the mice were sacriﬁced at 24 h after MCAO.
MA with a purity of over 95% was obtained from State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University (Ge
et al., 2009), and freshly prepared in PBS. According to a dosedependent experiment, 20 mg/kg is the best dose on decreasing
infarct area after MCAO (data not shown). Therefore, 20 mg/kg MA
was administered by caudal-vein injection within 15 min after
reperfusion for sham + MA and MCAO + MA group. For sham and
MCAO group, equal volume of PBS was administered at the same
time.
Fig. 1. Chemical structure of Malibatol A.

mitochondria play dual roles as both the initiator and the ﬁrst target
of ROS (Madamanchi and Runge, 2007). ROS can lead to loss of mitochondrial inner membrane integrity, inhibition of the mitochondrial
ETC, and mitochondrial depolarization. Also, ROS can promote the
opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP),
resulting in activation of mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway
(Szeto, 2008). Associated with both necrosis and apoptosis following I/R injury, mitochondria are a major therapeutic target of ischemic
stroke.
Resveratrol (Res) belongs to stilbene in structure, and has received considerable attention for its anti-cancer (Piotrowska et al.,
2012), anti-inﬂammatory (Rahal et al., 2012), and anti-diabetic (Xu
et al., 2012) properties. Some studies have validated the promising
neuroprotective properties of resveratrol, with different mechanisms suggested, including modulation of nitric oxide (NO) expression
(Tsai et al., 2007) and matrix metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) activity
(Dong et al., 2008). Recently, a structurally novel Res oligomer,
Malibatol A (MA, Fig. 1), isolated from stem wood of Hopea hainanensis
endemic to Hainan Island of China, was found to show strong ability
of scavenging radicals (DPPH• and O2•-) in vitro (Ge et al., 2009). Given
the important role of oxidative stress in cerebral damage following
ischemia, we hypothesized that MA could exert neuroprotective effect
through anti-oxidant mechanism during cerebral ischemia.
The aim of the present study was, therefore, to evaluate the potential therapeutic effect of MA on ischemic stroke, and elucidate
the mechanism of neuroprotection by focusing on mitochondria that
are one of the main sources of ROS.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) and drug treatment in
mice
Male ICR mice weighing 25–30 g were randomly divided into four
groups: sham, sham + MA, MCAO, and MCAO + MA group. All animals
were housed individually at 22 ± 2 °C with a relative humidity of
50 ± 10% and a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle.
MCAO was produced using the intraluminal ﬁlament technique as described previously (Niu et al., 2012). Brieﬂy, the mice
were anesthetized with peritoneal injection of 1% carbrital at the
dose of 45 mg/kg. The right common carotid artery was exposed
through a midline neck incision and gently dissected free of surrounding nerves and fascia from its bifurcation to the base of the
skull. Then the external carotid artery and internal carotid artery
were isolated in turn. A nylon monoﬁlament (BEIJING SUNBIO
BIOTECH CO., LTD., Beijing, China) was inserted through the proximal external carotid artery stump into the internal carotid artery,

2.2. Evaluation of neurological deﬁcit
The modiﬁed neurological severity score (mNSS) test was performed at 24 h after the induction of MCAO by an investigator
blinded to the experimental groups as describes previously (Niu et al.,
2012). mNSS, a composite of motor, sensory, balance and reﬂex tests,
is graded on a scale of 0–18 (normal score, 0; maximal deﬁcit score,
18). In the severity scores of injury, 1 score point is awarded for the
inability to perform the test or for the lack of a tested reﬂex; thus,
the higher score, the more severe the injury is.
2.3. Measurement of infarct volume
Infarct volume was measured according to the procedures described previously (Chen et al., 2010). The mice were sacriﬁced at
24 h after MCAO; brains were removed, sectioned (2.0 mm thick),
and stained by 1% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC, Sigma,
St. Louis, MO, USA) at 37 °C for 30 min. The images were captured
by a high-resolution scanner and infarct volumes were calculated
using Image Pro Plus 6.0 (Media Cybernetics, Rockville, MD, USA).
Corrected infarct area (%) = [contralateral hemisphere area − (ipsilateral hemisphere area − infarct area)]/contralateral hemisphere
area × 100%.
2.4. Measurement of ROS level
Intracellular ROS production was determined using DCFH-DA (2′7′-dichloroﬂuorescein diacetate) – reactive oxygen species detection
assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Jiancheng
Bioengineering Institute, Jiangsu, China). Brieﬂy, brain cortical tissues
were isolated, weighted, and homogenized in 20 ml/g (tissue weight)
of 100 mmol/L PBS buffer using a tissue disperser (IKA, Staufen,
Germany) on the ice for about 10 s. The supernatant of homogenate was incubated with 1 mmol/L DCFH-DA at 37 °C for 30 min.
The ﬂuorescence was measured on a ﬂuorescence microplate reader
(HITACHI, Tokyo, Japan) with an excitation wavelength of 485 nm
and emission wavelength of 525 nm. Protein analysis was performed by using BCA method according to manufacturer’s instruction
(Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). The ROS level
in each group was calculated as ﬂuorescence units per milligram
protein (UF/mg).
2.5. Measurement of oxidative stress markers by ELISA
The tissue contents of 3-Nitrotyrosine (3-NT), 4-Hydroxynonenal
(4-HNE) and 8-hydroxy-2′-deoxyguanisine (8-OHdG), which have
been applied as biomarkers of protein, lipid and DNA peroxidation,
were measured using commercial ELISA kits (Cayman Chemical
Company, Ann Arbor, MI USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, 40 μl of sample dilution and 10 μl of sample

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

homogenate were added into each well of the microplate and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C. Afterwards, secondary antibody was
added to the plate and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. The antibody binding to the plate was then incubated with 50 μl of
chromogenic reagent A and B for 15 min at 37 °C. The absorbance
of each sample was measured by using a microplate reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT, USA) at a wavelength of 450nm.

35

the JC-1 concentration. In healthy cells with high mitochondrial
Δ<PSI>m, JC-1 spontaneously forms complexes known as J-aggregates
with intense red ﬂuorescence. On the contrary, in apoptotic cells
with low Δ<PSI>m, JC-1 remains in the monomeric form, which
shows only green ﬂuorescence. The quantitative analysis of ﬂuorescent JC-1 monomer (green ﬂuorescence) and J-aggregate (red
ﬂuorescence) was recorded at λ ex/em: 490/590 nm or 490/
530 nm on ﬂuorescence microplate reader.

2.6. Isolation of mitochondria
2.9. Western blot
Mitochondria were isolated from the cortical tissues using a mitochondrial isolation kit (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology)
following manufacturer’s guidelines. Brieﬂy, freshly collected ischemic brain tissues were weighed, rinsed with ice-cold PBS, and
homogenized 10 times with mitochondrial isolating regent A on the
ice. The homogenate was centrifuged at 600 g, 4 °C for 5 min and
the supernatant was centrifuged at 11,000 g, 4 °C for 10 min. The
mitochondria suspension was obtained by re-suspending the sediment with mitochondrial storage solution. Mitochondrial protein
concentration was determined spectrophotometrically using BSA
as standard.
2.7. Assay of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes
(I–IV) activities
The activities of mitochondrial complexes (I–IV) were measured following the method described by Zhu et al. (Zhu et al., 2013)
using activity assay kits provided by GENMED (Genmed Scientiﬁcs
Inc., Shanghai, China).
Mitochondrial complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase) activity was monitored by the oxidation of NADH to NAD by
ubiquinone-1 at 30 °C. 20 μl samples containing 2 μg mitochondrial proteins were incubated in a total volume of 200 μl reaction
buffer. The absorbance of each sample was recorded using a plate
reader at a wavelength of 340 and 380 nm every 30 s for 3 min.
Mitochondrial complex II (succinate–ubiquinone oxidoreductase) activity was estimated as the rate of reduction of ubiquinone
to ubiquinol by succinate, which can be followed by the secondary reduction of 2,6-dichlorophenolindophenol (DCPIP) as the
ubiquinol forms. 20 μl samples containing 2 μg mitochondrial proteins were incubated in a total volume of 200 μl reaction mixes, and
the absorbance of each sample was recorded using a plate reader
at a wavelength of 600 nm every minute for 5 min.
Mitochondrial complex III (ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase)
activity was assayed by following the increase in absorbance as cytochrome c becomes reduced at 30 °C. 20 μl samples containing 2 μg
mitochondrial proteins were incubated in a total volume of 200 μl
reaction buffer. The absorbance of each example was recorded using
a plate reader at a wavelength of 550 nm every 30 s for 5 min.
For measurement of mitochondrial complex IV (cytochrome c
oxidase) activity, 20 μl samples containing 0.4 μg mitochondrial proteins were suspended in 200 μl of reaction buffer, and the absorbance
of each example was recorded using a spectrometer at a wavelength of 550 nm every 60 s for 5 min.
2.8. Measurement of mitochondrial transmembrane
potential (Δ<PSI>m)
Mitochondrial membrane potential (Δ<PSI>m) was assessed
using the JC-1 mitochondrial membrane potential assay kit
(Genmed Scientiﬁcs Inc., Arlington, MA, USA) according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. 5,5′,6,6′-Tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′tetraethylbenzimidazolcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1) is a lipophilic,
cationic dye that can selectively enter into the mitochondria and
reversibly change color from green to red. The distribution of JC-1
is directly affected by Δ<PSI>m, the higher the Δ<PSI>m, the greater

Cortical tissues from the ischemic hemisphere were dissected,
weighed, homogenized in ice-cold cell lysis buffer (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology), and centrifuged at 12,000 g, 4 °C for 20 min.
Tissue total protein concentrations were determined by BCA method.
40 μl tissue total protein (Bcl-2 and Bax) or mitochondrial protein
(cytochrome c) was loaded and run in 10–12% sodium dodecyl
sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and then
transferred onto a PVDF membrane using an electroblotting apparatus. The membrane was then blocked with 5% non-fat milk for
1 h. After being washed three times with TBS-T (200 mM tris, 1.5 M
NaCl, 0.1% Tween-20, pH 7.5), the membranes were incubated overnight with primary antibodies against α-Tubulin (1:3000, Abcam,
Cambridge, MA, USA), VDAC1 (1:500, Bioworld, Dublin, OH, USA),
Bcl-2 (1:4000; Bioworld, USA), Bax (1:1000; Cell Signaling, Danvers,
MA, USA) and cytochrome c (1:500; Abcam). After being washed
three times with TBS-T, membranes were then incubated with the
appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h and washed three times. Immunoreactive proteins
were visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL). The
signals were quantiﬁed by densitometry using a western blotting
detection system (Gene Company Limited, Hong Kong, China). The
protein bands of α-Tubulin and VDAC1 served as internal loading
controls.
2.10. Caspase activity assay
Activities of caspase-9 and caspase-3 were evaluated by using
a commercial caspase activity assay kit (Houzai Biology Inc., Jiangsu
China). As described in the manufacturer’s instructions, the cortical tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer supplemented with DTT.
After being incubated for 15 min on ice, the supernatant was transferred into another ice cold centrifuge tube, and centrifuged at 500 g,
4 °C for 5 min. Protein levels were determined with the BCA assay.
10 μl of protein samples (20–50 μg proteins) were incubated with
90 μl of reaction buffer and 10 μl of synthetic peptide substrate AcDEVD-pNA at 37 °C for 2 h. The absorbance at 405 nm of the released
pNA was monitored with a spectrophotometer.
2.11. Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± SD. The comparisons among groups
were determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by post hoc Student–Newman–Keuls test (SNK) or Fisher’s
protected least signiﬁcant difference (PLSD) tests. All data analyses were conducted with the SPSS 17.0 software package (SPSS, Inc.,
Chicago, IL, USA). A value of P < 0.05 was considered to be statistically signiﬁcant.
3. Results
3.1. Neuroprotection of MA on experimental stroke
To assess protection of MA against MCAO-induced brain damage,
neurological scores and brain infarct volumes were evaluated at
24 h after MCAO using mNSS and TTC staining, respectively. As

36

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

shown in Fig. 2, MCAO group showed neurological deﬁcits (P < 0.01)
and visible brain infarction (P < 0.01) as evidenced by the white
patches in brain tissues. Administration of MA signiﬁcantly ameliorated the behavioral deﬁcit (Fig. 2C, P < 0.01) and decreased the
infarct volume (Fig. 2A and B, P < 0.01) as compared with MCAO
group.
3.2. Effects of MA on oxidative stress
To determine whether neuroprotective effect of MA was
associated with its antioxidant property, ROS production was
tested using DCFH-DA assay at 24 h after ischemic-reperfusion. As
shown in Fig. 3A, there is no difference in ROS production between
sham and sham + MA group. However, ROS was increased in MCAO
group compared with sham group (P < 0.01), which was signiﬁ-

cantly restored by MA treatment (Fig. 3A, P < 0.05). But signiﬁcant
difference between sham and MCAO + MA group was also presented, indicating that MA treatment could not rehabilitate ROS
totally.
To further conﬁrm the antioxidant effect of MA against cerebral ischemic-reperfusion injury, we investigated changes in the
levels of 3-NT, 4-HNE and 8-OHdG, as biomarkers of protein, lipid
and DNA peroxidation, respectively, at 24 h after ischemicreperfusion. As shown in Fig. 3B, MCAO induced the signiﬁcant
increase in 3-NT levels as compared with sham group (P < 0.01),
whereas MA treatment reversed it toward normal level (Fig. 3B,
P < 0.01). Similarly, 4-HNE levels were found to be signiﬁcantly increased (P ≤ 0.05) after MCAO as compared with sham group. But
MA treatment signiﬁcantly restored 4-HNE levels when compared
with MCAO group (Fig. 3C, P < 0.05). No signiﬁcant difference was
found in the 8-OHdG expressions between MCAO and MCAO + MA
group (Fig. 3D).
3.3. Effects of MA on Δ<PSI>m
To establish whether MA attenuated MCAO-induced ROS accumulation by modulating mitochondrial dysfunctions, the level of
Δ<PSI>m was evaluated using JC-1 dye at 24 h after ischemicreperfusion. As shown in Fig. 4, I/R injury caused Δ<PSI>m decreasing
compared with sham group (P < 0.05), which was reversed by MA
treatment (P < 0.05), indicating the restoration of the damaged membrane potential by MA treatment (Fig. 4).
3.4. Effects of MA on the activity of mitochondrial complexes (I–IV)
Furthermore, we tested the activities of mitochondrial respiratory complexes (I–IV). As shown in Fig. 5, I/R injury signiﬁcantly
decreased the activity of complex I and III by 55.5% (P < 0.01) and
24.1% (P < 0.05), respectively, as compared with the sham group. MA
treatment exhibited a signiﬁcant restoration in the activity of mitochondrial complex I (P < 0.05) and III (P < 0.05). No signiﬁcant
changes appeared in the activity of complex II and IV between MCAO
with MA and without MA.
3.5. Effects of MA on the expressions of Bcl-2 and Bax
Bcl-2 and Bax are members of Bcl-2 protein family. Bcl-2 suppresses cell death and promotes cell survival whereas Bax accelerates
apoptosis in response to apoptotic stimuli. In our study, expression of apoptosis-related proteins was examined by western blotting.
The results revealed that Bcl-2 level was signiﬁcantly decreased in
the MCAO group compared with sham group (P < 0.01). MA treatment restored the Bcl-2 expression (P < 0.05), but could not restitute
it to normal level, as evidenced by the difference between sham and
MCAO + MA group (P < 0.05). On the contrary, Bax expression was
signiﬁcantly increased during I/R injury (P < 0.05), which was preserved by MA treatment (Fig. 6A and B, P < 0.05). As a result of MA
supplementation, the decreased ratio of Bcl-2/Bax induced by MCAO
was preserved obviously (P < 0.01), even though it was not reversed to normal condition (Fig. 6C, P < 0.05).
3.6. Effects of MA on the release of cytochrome c and activity
of caspase-9

Fig. 2. Neuroprotective effect of MA treatment against cerebral ischemia at 24 h after
MCAO. (A) Representative brain sections of TTC staining in different groups. (B) Measurement of infarct volume. MA treatment signiﬁcantly reversed the MCAOinduced increase in infarct volume. (C) Evaluation of neurological deﬁcit. MA treatment
ameliorated behavioral deﬁcit. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA, and the
values were expressed as the means ± SD. **P < 0.01 versus sham group; ##P < 0.01
versus MCAO group, n = 10 for each group.

Release of cytochrome c from mitochondria into cytosol is considered as a death signal that initiates the cascade of apoptosis.
Western blot analysis showed that the level of cytochrome c in mitochondria was decreased in MCAO group (P < 0.01). MA treatment,
however, signiﬁcantly prevented cytochrome c escaping to cytoplasm, as evidenced by the increased cytochrome c level in

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

37

Fig. 3. Effects of MA on cerebral I/R-Induced oxidative stress. (A) Effect of MA on ROS generation. MA signiﬁcantly restored the ROS generation induced by cerebral I/R injury.
(B–D) Effects of MA on levels of 3-NT, 4-HNE and 8-OHdG at 24 h after I/R injury. MA treatment reversed the increased 3-NT and 4-HNE levels induced by MCAO. The data
were analyzed by one-way ANOVA, and the values were expressed as the means ± SD. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus sham group; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01 versus MCAO group,
n = 6 for each group.

mitochondria in MCAO + MA group as compared with MCAO group
(Fig. 7A and B, P < 0.01).
Cytochrome c release activates downstream cascades, the intrinsic pathway involved in apoptosis signal transduction. In this
study, we detected the activities of caspase-9 and capase-3 that must
be passed through in the apoptosis cascade. As shown in Fig. 7C,
activation of caspase-9 was induced by MCAO (P < 0.01), but
lessened in the present of MA (P < 0.01). Also, a signiﬁcant increase in caspase-3 activity was increased in MCAO group as
compared with sham group (P < 0.01), but MA administration abrogated caspase-3 activity (Fig. 7C, P < 0.01).

Fig. 4. Membrane potential of mitochondria isolated from ischemic cortex in each
group. The decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential induced by MCAO was
blunted by MA treatment. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA, and the values
were expressed as the means ± SD. *P < 0.05 versus sham group; #P < 0.05 versus MCAO
group, n = 6 for each group.

4. Discussion
MA, one of the Res oligomers, has been reported to exhibit
anti-HIV capacity (Dai et al., 1998). But until now, the effects of
MA on ischemic brain have not been examined. In the present

Fig. 5. Effect of MA on activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes (I–
IV). The activities of mitochondrial enzyme complex I, II, III, and IV were measured
spectrophotometrically. MA treatment preserved activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I and III following I/R injury. The data were analyzed by oneway ANOVA, and expressed as the means ± SD. The values of enzyme activities were
normalized against the values of the sham group and expressed as the percentage
of sham, set to 100%. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus sham group; #P < 0.05 versus MCAO
group; ★P < 0.05 versus sham + MA group, n = 6 for each group.

38

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

Fig. 6. Effect of MA on expression of Bcl-2 and Bax protein. (A) Representative western blot. Lane 1: Sham; lane 2: Sham + MA; lane 3: MCAO; lane 4: MCAO + MA. (B) Semiquantiﬁcation by densitometry. MA treatment reserved the down expression of Bcl-2 and up expression of Bax. (C) Ratio of Bcl-2/Bax (%). The data were analyzed by oneway ANOVA, and expressed as the means ± SD. The results were normalized as relative % of sham, set at 100%. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 versus sham group; #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01
versus MCAO group, n = 6 for each group.

study, we found that treatment of MA at a dose of 20 mg/kg exhibited neuroprotective effect at 24 h after focal cerebral ischemia
in a MCAO mice model, and highlighted for the ﬁrst time that modulating of mitochondria-dependent apoptosis was an important
mechanism by which MA attenuated oxidative stress following I/R
injury.
Oxidative stress has emerged as a key deleterious factor in cerebral I/R damage, and ROS contributes directly to necrosis and
apoptosis through a number of pathways in ischemic tissue
(Manzanero et al., 2013). A previous in vitro study suggested that
MA could serve as a radical scavenging agent due to its hydroxyl
groups in the ortho or para position and 4,4′-dihydroxy-transstilbene substructure (Ge et al., 2009). We here observed that the
increased ROS generation in the ischemic brain was partially reversed by MA (Fig. 3A), which could be attributed to its antioxidant
nature. Oxidative stress can damage cellular macromolecules, inﬂicting protein modiﬁcation, lipid peroxidation, and DNA damage
(Madamanchi and Runge, 2007). We observed a signiﬁcant increase in 3-NT and 4-HNE level in MCAO group at 24 h after I/R,
which also was restored by MA treatment (Fig. 3B, 3C and D), indicating that MA could serve as a potent scavenger of ROS, thereby
inhibiting the damage to protein and lipid.
Mitochondria are essential organelles involved in the production of cellular energy, generation of ROS and regulation of apoptosis,
thus playing a crucial role in the neuronal survival. Not only the
source of ROS, mitochondria are also considered as the targets of
oxidative stress (Kalogeris et al., 2012). Enzymes of the respiratory chain, responsible for metabolism and ATP production, are
susceptible to cerebral I/R-induced oxidative damage, since many
enzymes in the ETC may lose function due to protein peroxidation
(Szeto, 2008). The dysfunction in respiratory chain promotes electrons leakage and favors ROS production, which has been suggested
as the major cause of the secondary mitochondrial dysfunction

(Murphy, 2009). Such secondary dysfunction, occurring as early as
4–6 h after reperfusion, may lead to permanent mitochondrial
damage and play an important role in the expansion of an infarct
after reperfusion (Sims and Muyderman, 2010). Therefore, protective intervention in these early changes might contribute to the
amelioration of ischemia-related brain damage. In the present study,
MCAO induced marked mitochondrial dysfunction at 24 h after I/R
injury, displayed as signiﬁcant decrease in activities of mitochondrial complexes I and III. MA treatment was found to be eﬃcient
in meliorating the mitochondrial function as evidenced by the increased activities of mitochondrial complex I and III compared with
MCAO group (Fig. 5). Abnormal Δ<PSI>m, resulting from energetic
impairments after ischemic events, is a sensitive indicator reﬂecting dysfunction of mitochondria. We observed that MA treatment
rescued MCAO-induced impairment of Δ<PSI>m (Fig. 4), indicating the important role of MA in the integrality of mitochondrial
function. Together, our data demonstrated that MA treatment could
prevent free radical damage to the components of the respiratory
chain, thereby leading to a hyperpolarized MMP and preserved mitochondrial energy metabolism. Considering mitochondrial
contribution to ischemia, such protective effects of MA on
mitochondria may partly account for the reduction of I/R-induced
brain damage.
Mitochondrial dysfunction may result in the opening of the permeability transition pore as well as the subsequent release of
cytochrome c from mitochondria into cytosol, which triggers the
downstream activation of caspases. Bcl-2 family proteins, which
include anti-apoptotic members (Bcl-2, Bcl-xL) and pro-apoptotic
members (Bax, Bad, and Bid), act as important regulators
in mitochondria-dependent apoptotic signaling pathways.
Overexpression of Bax activated by apoptotic stimuli could trigger
the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria into cytosol (Niizuma
et al., 2009). As predicated, we found that Bcl-2 expression was

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

39

and 3. However, MA treatment blocked these changes. MA treatment suppressed the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria
(Fig. 7A and 7B), which might be due to the restoration of Bcl-2 and
Bax expressions in MCAO + MA group. Accordingly, the activities of
caspase-9 and caspase-3 were lessened by MA treatment (Fig. 7C).
These ﬁnding suggested that MA treatment prevented the release
of apoptotic factors from mitochondria, leading to the inhibition of
mitochondria-dependent cellular apoptosis after ischemia and
reperfusion.
Considering the important role of mitochondria in the pathology of ischemia-reperfusion, we speculated that the ability of MA
ameliorating I/R-induced mitochondrial damage may be one of the
potential mechanisms underlying its neuroprotection against I/R
injury. Although other mechanisms may also be involved in the protective actions of MA, like anti-inﬂammation, this is the ﬁrst study
on their role in neuroprotective effect by preserving mitochondrial function. However, the precise mechanism is still elusive, such
as Nrf2/ARE/HO1 signaling pathway (Ren et al., 2011), p53/Bax
pathway (Eleawa et al., 2014), PGC1-α/SOD2&UCP2 pathway (Shin
et al., 2012), and so on.
In conclusion, we highlight for the ﬁrst time that MA provides
partial neuroprotection on focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury
in MCAO mice. By identifying a profound effect of MA against cerebral ischemic injury via preserving mitochondrial function, the
current study suggests that MA might be an excellent therapeutic
potential for treatment of stroke. However, the exact targets or pathways through which these effects arise are still elusive and need
further investigation.

Acknowledgements

Fig. 7. Effect of MA on the mitochondria-dependent apoptotic pathway. (A) Western
data and semi-quantiﬁcation by densitometry of cytochrome c in mitochondria. Data
were normalized to VDAC1 as an internal control and expressed relative to sham
group. MA treatment inhibited I/R induced release of cytochrome c from mitochondria to cytosol. (B) Activities of caspase-9 and capase-3. Caspase activities were
measured spectrophotometrically and relative activities were expressed as % of sham,
set at 100%. The data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA, and expressed as the
means ± SD. **P < 0.01 versus sham group; ##P < 0.01 versus MCAO group, n = 6 for
each group.

signiﬁcantly increased while Bax expression decreased in MCAO + MA
group compared with MCAO group, indicating that MA may inhibit
apoptosis by mediating Bcl-2 and Bax expression. It is well known
that the balance between anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and pro-apoptotic Bax
plays an important role in regulating apoptotic cell death. Increasing the ratio of Bcl-2 to Bax (Bcl-2/Bax > 1:2) could prevent apoptotic
cell death (Lee et al., 2003). Our study showed that the decreased
ratio of Bcl-2/Bax caused by MCAO was partially restored by MA
treatment (Fig. 6), indicating that MA might exhibit its potential
neuroprotective effect against apoptosis by maintaining the balance
of pro- and anti-apoptotic proteins.
Activated by some pro-apoptotic factors, such as Bax, cytochrome c releases from mitochondria and further activates
downstream caspases (Cabon et al., 2012). Caspase-9 is an initiator of the cytochrome c-dependent caspase cascade while caspase-3
is identiﬁed as a key mediator involved in apoptotic signaling transduction (Broughton et al., 2009). The release of cytochrome c
activates caspase 9 and caspase 3, eventually leading to cytoskeletal
degradation and DNA fragmentation. In the present study, we also
observed the effects of MA on proteins involved in the mitochondriadependent apoptotic pathway. Results showed that the release of
cytochrome c from mitochondria was initiated following ischemia
and reperfusion, resulting in activation of downstream caspase 9

The authors would like to thank Brad Peterson for modifying the
English. This study was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (81171085, 81230026), the Natural Science
Foundation of Jiangsu Province, China (BL2012013), and the Medical
Leading Talent and Innovation Team Project of Jiangsu Province
(LJ201101).

References
Broughton, B.R., Reutens, D.C., Sobey, C.G., 2009. Apoptotic mechanisms after cerebral
ischemia. Stroke 40, e331–e339.
Cabon, L., Galan-Malo, P., Bouharrour, A., Delavallee, L., Brunelle-Navas, M.N., Lorenzo,
H.K., et al., 2012. BID regulates AIF-mediated caspase-independent necroptosis
by promoting BAX activation. Cell Death Differ. 19, 245–256.
Chen, Z.B., Huang, D.Q., Niu, F.N., Zhang, X., Li, E.G., Xu, Y., 2010. Human urinary
kallidinogenase suppresses cerebral inﬂammation in experimental stroke and
downregulates nuclear factor-kappaB. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 1356–1365.
Dai, J.R., Hallock, Y.F., Cardellina, J.H., 2nd, Boyd, M.R., 1998. HIV-inhibitory and
cytotoxic oligostilbenes from the leaves of Hopea malibato. J. Nat. Prod. 61,
351–353.
Dong, W., Gao, D., Lin, H., Zhang, X., Li, N., Li, F., 2008. New insights into mechanism
for the effect of resveratrol preconditioning against cerebral ischemic stroke:
possible role of matrix metalloprotease-9. Med. Hypotheses 70, 52–55.
Eleawa, S.M., Alkhateeb, M.A., Alhashem, F.H., Bin-Jaliah, I., Sakr, H.F., Elrefaey, H.M.,
et al., 2014. Resveratrol reverses cadmium chloride-induced testicular damage
and subfertility by downregulating p53 and Bax and upregulating gonadotropins
and Bcl-2 gene expression. J. Reprod. Dev. 60, 115–127.
Ge, H.M., Yang, W.H., Zhang, J., Tan, R.X., 2009. Antioxidant oligostilbenoids from the
stem wood of Hopea hainanensis. J. Agric. Food Chem. 57, 5756–5761.
Kalogeris, T., Baines, C.P., Krenz, M., Korthuis, R.J., 2012. Cell biology of ischemia/
reperfusion injury. Int. Rev. Cell Mol. Biol. 298, 229–317.
Kissela, B.M., Khoury, J.C., Alwell, K., Moomaw, C.J., Woo, D., Adeoye, O., et al., 2012.
Age at stroke: temporal trends in stroke incidence in a large, biracial population.
Neurology 79, 1781–1787.
Lakhan, S.E., Kirchgessner, A., Hofer, M., 2009. Inﬂammatory mechanisms in ischemic
stroke: therapeutic approaches. J. Transl. Med. 7, 97.
Lee, M., Rentz, J., Bikram, M., Han, S., Bull, D.A., Kim, S.W., 2003. Hypoxia-inducible
VEGF gene delivery to ischemic myocardium using water-soluble lipopolymer.
Gene Ther. 10, 1535–1542.
Madamanchi, N.R., Runge, M.S., 2007. Mitochondrial dysfunction in atherosclerosis.
Circ. Res. 100, 460–473.

40

W. Yang et al./Neurochemistry International 80 (2015) 33–40

Manzanero, S., Santro, T., Arumugam, T.V., 2013. Neuronal oxidative stress in acute
ischemic stroke: sources and contribution to cell injury. Neurochem. Int. 62,
712–718.
Murphy, M.P., 2009. How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species. Biochem.
J. 417, 1–13.
Niizuma, K., Endo, H., Chan, P.H., 2009. Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction
as determinants of ischemic neuronal death and survival. J. Neurochem. 109
(Suppl. 1), 133–138.
Niu, F.N., Zhang, X., Hu, X.M., Chen, J., Chang, L.L., Li, J.W., et al., 2012. Targeted
mutation of Fas ligand gene attenuates brain inﬂammation in experimental stroke.
Brain Behav. Immun. 26, 61–71.
Piotrowska, H., Myszkowski, K., Ziolkowska, A., Kulcenty, K., Wierzchowski, M.,
Kaczmarek, M., et al., 2012. Resveratrol analogue 3,4,4′,5-tetramethoxystilbene
inhibits growth, arrests cell cycle and induces apoptosis in ovarian SKOV-3 and
A-2780 cancer cells. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 263, 53–60.
Rahal, K., Schmiedlin-Ren, P., Adler, J., Dhanani, M., Sultani, V., Rittershaus, A.C., et al.,
2012. Resveratrol has antiinﬂammatory and antiﬁbrotic effects in the
peptidoglycan-polysaccharide rat model of Crohn’s disease. Inﬂamm. Bowel Dis.
18, 613–623.

Ren, J., Fan, C., Chen, N., Huang, J., Yang, Q., 2011. Resveratrol pretreatment attenuates
cerebral ischemic injury by upregulating expression of transcription factor Nrf2
and HO-1 in rats. Neurochem. Res. 36, 2352–2362.
Shin, J.A., Lee, K.E., Kim, H.S., Park, E.M., 2012. Acute resveratrol treatment modulates
multiple signaling pathways in the ischemic brain. Neurochem. Res. 37, 2686–
2696.
Sims, N.R., Muyderman, H., 2010. Mitochondria, oxidative metabolism and cell death
in stroke. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1802, 80–91.
Szeto, H.H., 2008. Mitochondria-targeted cytoprotective peptides for ischemiareperfusion injury. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 10, 601–619.
Tsai, S.K., Hung, L.M., Fu, Y.T., Cheng, H., Nien, M.W., Liu, H.Y., et al., 2007. Resveratrol
neuroprotective effects during focal cerebral ischemia injury via nitric oxide
mechanism in rats. J. Vasc. Surg. 46, 346–353.
Xu, Y., Nie, L., Yin, Y.G., Tang, J.L., Zhou, J.Y., Li, D.D., et al., 2012. Resveratrol protects
against hyperglycemia-induced oxidative damage to mitochondria by activating
SIRT1 in rat mesangial cells. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 259, 395–401.
Zhu, X., Ye, L., Ge, H., Chen, L., Jiang, N., Qian, L., et al., 2013. Hopeahainol A attenuates
memory deﬁcits by targeting beta-amyloid in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Aging
Cell 12, 85–92.

