Liu Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:115
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/5/115

COMMENTARY

Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural
stem cells: new hope for stroke?
Jia Liu
See related research by Yuan et al., http://stemcellres.com/content/4/3/73

Abstract
Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) have
attracted increasing interest in the field of ischemic
stroke therapy, due to the lack of ethical concerns and
reduced risk of immune rejection. However, the safety
and efficiency of the donor iPSC derivates in the
ischemic brain challenged the therapeutic efficacy of
iPSC transplantation. Studies have focused on
improving the methods to induce neural derivates
from iPSCs and on trying to determine how these cells
and the host ischemic environment influence each
other. A recent study by Yuan and colleagues reported
that neural stem cells induced from human iPSCs
using retinoic acid and serum-free medium showed
stable neural phenotype. After acute transplantation
into the ischemic stroke model, these cells survived,
migrated into the ischemic penumbra, differentiated
into mature neural cells and showed beneficial effects
on functional recovery. Their findings take a clear step
towards the clinical application of human iPSCs for
ischemic stroke. A wide range of careful studies may
be raised from their work, from basic research to
preclinic, to develop the best therapy for ischemic
stroke.
Stroke is the leading cause of death and disability among
the adult population around the world. Ischemic stroke
comprises the majority, accounting for 80% of the total
strokes. Recent advances have improved stroke management, while current therapeutic strategies offer only
modest effects. Alternatively, stem cell-based therapies
using a variety of embryonic, fetal and adult stem cells
have been investigated as potential regenerative and/or
protective treatments for ischemic stroke over the last
Correspondence: jialiu2013@yeah.net
Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet,
5th floor, Novum, SE-141 86, Stockholm, Sweden
© 2013 BioMed Central Ltd.

two decades, with encouraging functional improvements
in animal experiments. However, these types of stem or
progenitor cells raise ethical issues and inevitably are
genetically dissimilar to the recipient with potential risk
of immune rejection. The creation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) through reprogramming of somatic cells has revolutionized cell therapy by providing a
source of autologous cells for transplantation. These
cells could be obtained from the stroke patients,
avoiding ethical concerns and reducing the need for immunosuppression. A recent article by Yuan and colleagues [1] investigated a modified protocol to induce
neural stem cells (NSCs) from human iPSCs, and the
survival, migration and differentiation of NSCs and functional recovery of animals were evaluated after acute
transplantation [1].
In preclinical stroke studies, the issues recommended
by the Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable
(for example, sample size, blinded evaluation of outcome) should be taken into consideration when designing and conducting the experiments and assessments
[2,3]. In the work by Yuan and coworkers, the sample
size for each experimental group was small (five cases/
group) [1], which may weaken the statistical power of
the results. The authors stated that the experimental
groups were divided randomly but did not describe how
the randomization was achieved. Furthermore, they
failed to perform the neurobehavioral tests blindly,
which is extremely important for the scientific society to
evaluate whether the results raised from the current
study are solid enough to believe or not. A sample size
calculation, an appropriate method for randomization
and a blind functional assessment as recommended by
the Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable are
therefore desired in future studies [2].
Safety is one major issue in the preclinical cell therapy
for stroke. Despite the lack of an ethical problem, the
high teratoma-forming property of iPSCs is a critical
problem. iPSCs might have greater risk for

Liu Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:115
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/5/115

tumorigenesis than embryonic stem cells (ESCs) due to
genetic and epigenetic aberrations [4]. Therefore, an optimal and efficient method to generate iPSC-NSCs is extremely crucial. Yuan and colleagues induced human
iPSCs into NSCs using the combination of retinoic acid
and serum-free medium to increase the efficiency and to
avoid contamination from serum and other cells [1]. The
induced NSCs showed stable neural phenotype and capacity of proliferation and differentiation into neural lineages, and the authors reported that no tumor was found
in two transplanted rats after 3 months. Others have
reported similar findings by dual inhibition of the
SMAD pathway to induce iPSC-NSCs [5,6].
Different induction methods may lead to differences in
characteristics of iPSC-NSCs. Thus, it is worth comparing whether iPSC-NSCs generated through different protocols could lead to the same results under equivalent
experimental conditions, and which protocol might be
better to generate iPSC-NSCs for use in ischemic stroke.
Current neural induction methods for iPSCs mainly depend on previous findings for ESCs. Although similar,
ESCs and iPSCs display significant differences [7]. Thus,
it is crucial to conduct careful and detailed investigations
on the neural induction method for iPSCs. Noteworthy,
in the work by Yuan and colleagues the observation
period for tumor formation in the majority cases was
short at only 2 weeks [1]. In one study with spinal cord
injury, even the functional outcome was improved at an
early stage within 6 weeks after human ESC-derived
NSCs transplantation, but the tumor formation was
found 12 weeks post-implantation [8], suggesting that
the short duration may be not enough for the grafted
cells to achieve overproliferation and therefore form a
tumor. Yuan and colleagues further made an effort to
conduct long-term observation on tumorigenesis of the
grafted iPSC-NSCs, but it is hard to draw solid conclusions with the really small sample size of only two cases.
Long-term studies with larger sample size on the
tumorigenesis of iPSC-NSCs are thus needed . Furthermore, although Yuan and colleagues and others all demonstrated that no tumors were found in the ischemic
brain [1,5,6], the potential for tumor formation in other
organs must be considered, particularly when a systemic
delivery route of cells is chosen.
Before addressing the effects of iPSC-NSCs on the
host, it is necessary to determine how the host environment affects the grafted cells. Yuan and colleagues
reported that the transplanted iPSC-NSCs survived and
differentiated into mature neurons and astrocytes in the
ischemic brain [1]. This observation demonstrated that
the host ischemic environment at least was not completely hostile to iPSC-NSCs. The authors further
showed that grafted iPSC-NSCs migrated from the striatum toward the ischemic boundary, indicating it is

Page 2 of 3

possible to design less invasive ways to deliver cells instead of injecting cells directly into the injury site due to
their migration property. One should note that current
iPSC-NSC transplantation occurred during the acute
stage. However, the derivation of human iPSCs and their
derivates is still a month-long process that hardly fits
with the stroke adage that ‘time-is-brain’. Thus, to
achieve autologous iPSC-NSC transplantation for stroke
patients, preclinical studies of subacute and chronic
transplantation are needed.
The central issue of cell therapy is whether the grafted
cells could exert beneficial effects to the host. Yuan and
colleagues observed significantly improved functions in
grafted rats 3 weeks after transplantation [1], which provided valuable evidence for the clinical application of
human iPSC-NSCs in ischemic stroke. However, the authors did not determine the potential mechanism leading to the functional recovery. One major feature of
ischemic stroke caused by large vascular occlusion is the
significant reduction of cerebral blood flow in the infarct
core and surrounding area. The ischemic penumbra has
been defined as a hypoperfused area around the ischemic core that is potentially reversible with a timely intervention. Murine NSCs derived from fetal central
nervous tissues were reported to release elevated levels
of proangiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial
growth factor [9,10] and nitric oxide [11], and to promote angiogenesis with increased cerebral blood flow in
the ischemic boundary region [12]. Therefore, one reasonable hypothesis is that human iPSC-NSCs might be
able to restore cerebral blood flow in the ischemic penumbra through angiogenesis. In addition, human iPSCNSCs might also exert other effects on the penumbra
tissues, such as rescue of apoptotic cells, modulation of
stroke-induced inflammation and enhancement of intrinsic repair mechanism. Further studies are urgently
needed to understand the possible mechanisms behind
the functional recovery and to provide reliable and
strong evidence for translating iPSC-based cell therapy
into the clinical setting.
The article by Yuan and colleagues has provided the
scientific community with a lot to think about, and,
more importantly, a number of doable studies may result
from their work. The final goal of cell therapy research
is to provide the maximum therapeutic effects to
patients with the least amount of suffering and risk.
Therefore, the development of autologous iPSC-NSC
treatment requires huge efforts, continual accumulations
of major findings and careful studies on multiple aspects, which will contribute to achieving the best
therapy.
Abbreviations
ESC: embryonic stem cell; iPSC: induced pluripotent stem cell; NSC: neural
stem cell.

Liu Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013, 4:115
http://stemcellres.com/content/4/5/115

Competing interests
The author declares that she has no competing interests.

Published: 25 September 2013
References
1. Yuan T, Liao W, Feng NH, Lou YL, Niu X, Zhang AJ, Wang Y, Deng ZF:
Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural stem cells survive,
migrate, differentiate, and improve neurological function in a rat model
of middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stem Cell Res Ther 2013, 4:73.
2. Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, Hurn PD, Kent TA, Savitz SI, Lo EH:
Update of the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical
recommendations. Stroke 2009, 40:2244–2250.
3. Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable (STAIR): Recommendations
for standards regarding preclinical neuroprotective and restorative drug
development. Stroke 1999, 30:2752–2758.
4. Tsuji O, Miura K, Okada Y, Fujiyoshi K, Mukaino M, Nagoshi N, Kitamura K,
Kumagai G, Nishino M, Tomisato S, Higashi H, Nagai T, Katoh H, Kohda K,
Matsuzaki Y, Yuzaki M, Ikeda E, Toyama Y, Nakamura M, Yamanaka S, Okano
H: Therapeutic potential of appropriately evaluated safe-induced
pluripotent stem cells for spinal cord injury. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010,
107:12704–12709.
5. Mohamad O, Drury-Stewart D, Song M, Faulkner B, Chen D, Yu SP, Wei L:
Vector-free and transgene-free human iPS cells differentiate into
functional neurons and enhance functional recovery after ischemic
stroke in mice. PLoS One 2013, 8:e64160.
6. Polentes J, Jendelova P, Cailleret M, Braun H, Romanyuk N, Tropel P, Brenot
M, Itier V, Seminatore C, Baldauf K, Turnovcova K, Jirak D, Teletin M, Come J,
Tournois J, Reymann K, Sykova E, Viville S, Onteniente B: Human induced
pluripotent stem cells improve stroke outcome and reduce secondary
degeneration in the recipient brain. Cell Transplant 2012, 21:2587–2602.
7. Puri MC, Nagy A: Concise review: Embryonic stem cells versus induced
pluripotent stem cells: the game is on. Stem Cells 2012, 30:10–14.
8. Sundberg M, Andersson PH, Akesson E, Odeberg J, Holmberg L, Inzunza J,
Falci S, Ohman J, Suuronen R, Skottman H, Lehtimaki K, Hovatta O,
Narkilahti S, Sundstrom E: Markers of pluripotency and differentiation in
human neural precursor cells derived from embryonic stem cells and
CNS tissue. Cell Transplant 2011, 20:177–191.
9. Harms KM, Li L, Cunningham LA: Murine neural stem/progenitor cells
protect neurons against ischemia by HIF-1alpha-regulated VEGF
signaling. PLoS One 2010, 5:e9767.
10. Madhavan L, Ourednik V, Ourednik J: Neural stem/progenitor cells initiate
the formation of cellular networks that provide neuroprotection by
growth factor-modulated antioxidant expression. Stem Cells 2008, 26:254–
265.
11. Wang L, Shi J, van Ginkel FW, Lan L, Niemeyer G, Martin DR, Snyder EY, Cox
NR: Neural stem/progenitor cells modulate immune responses by
suppressing T lymphocytes with nitric oxide and prostaglandin E2. Exp
Neurol 2009, 216:177–183.
12. Jiang Q, Zhang ZG, Ding GL, Zhang L, Ewing JR, Wang L, Zhang R, Li L, Lu
M, Meng H, Arbab AS, Hu J, Li QJ, LiPourabdollah Nejad DS, Athiraman H,
Chopp M: Investigation of neural progenitor cell induced angiogenesis
after embolic stroke in rat using MRI. Neuroimage 2005, 28:698–707.
doi:10.1186/scrt326
Cite this article as: Liu: Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neural
stem cells: new hope for stroke?. Stem Cell Research & Therapy 2013 4:115.

Page 3 of 3

