European Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 40, pp. 3111–3119, 2014

doi:10.1111/ejn.12675

DISORDERS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM

Leukemia inhibitor factor promotes functional recovery
and oligodendrocyte survival in rat models of focal
ischemia
Derrick D. Rowe,1 Lisa A. Collier,1 Hilary A. Seifert,1 Cortney B. Chapman,1 Christopher C. Leonardo,1
Alison E. Willing1,2 and Keith R. Pennypacker1
1

Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, Morsani College of Medicine University of South Florida, 12901 Bruce
B. Downs Blvd., Tampa,
FL 33612, USA
2
Center of Excellence for Aging and Brain Repair, Morsani College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA
Keywords: antioxidant, behavior, cell culture, central nervous system injury, stroke

Abstract
Human umbilical cord blood (HUCB) cells have shown efficacy in rodent models of focal ischemia and in vitro systems that recapitulate stroke conditions. One potential mechanism of protection is through secretion of soluble factors that protect neurons and
oligodendrocytes (OLs) from oxidative stress. To overcome practical issues with cellular therapies, identification of soluble factors
released by HUCB and other stem cells may pave the way for treatment modalities that are safer for a larger percentage of stroke
patients. Among these soluble factors is leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), a cytokine that exerts pleiotropic effects on cell survival.
Here, data show that LIF effectively reduced infarct volume, reduced white matter injury and improved functional outcomes when
administered to rats following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. To further explore downstream signaling, primary oligodendrocyte cultures were exposed to oxygen–glucose deprivation to mimic stroke conditions. LIF significantly reduced lactate
dehydrogenase release from OLs, reduced superoxide dismutase activity and induced peroxiredoxin 4 (Prdx4) transcript. Additionally, the protective and antioxidant capacity of LIF was negated by both Akt inhibition and co-incubation with Prdx4-neutralising
antibodies, establishing a role for the Akt signaling pathway and Prdx4-mediated antioxidation in LIF protection.

Introduction
Human umbilical cord blood (HUCB) cell therapy has shown promise in experimental stroke models, with beneﬁts that include
enhanced cell viability, improved functional recovery (Vendrame
et al., 2004, 2005; Hall et al., 2009a; Rowe et al., 2010), dampened
apoptotic signaling and increased expression of survival-associated
proteins (Rowe et al., 2010). However, this and other cell therapies
present difﬁculties in standardisation, as well as additional health
risks. Our laboratory has focused on identifying protective factors
within the mononuclear HUCB cell fraction that may be administered as an alternative to cellular implantation.
Soluble factors secreted by these cells include cytokines, chemokines, metalloproteinase inhibitors, growth factors and interleukins
(Neuhoff et al., 2007). Among the possible protective factors, we
have been investigating leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) as a potential player in HUCB cell protection. LIF is a 180-amino-acid single
4-a-helix glycoprotein that binds to the LIF cell surface receptor
complex, which includes the LIF receptor b (LIFR) and the gp130
receptor chain (Kurek, 2000; Metcalf, 2003). Following LIF

Correspondence: Keith R. Pennypacker, as above.
E-mail: kpennypa@health.usf.edu
Received 22 March 2014, revised 12 June 2014, accepted 16 June 2014

binding, LIFR and gp130 dimerises and activates the gp130 intracellular signaling cascade, thus activating several pathways including
Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator for transcription (JAK/
STAT) (Stahl et al., 1994), Ras mitogen activated and phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3/Akt) (Stahl et al., 1995; Oh et al., 1998).
Several lines of evidence indicate that LIF may play a key role in
HUCB cell protection. In ischemic models, LIF protein expression
was increased in neurons of rats subjected to middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) and cultured astrocytes exposed to oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD; Slevin et al., 2008), suggesting a neuroprotective function in response to injury. In addition, intracerebral
injections of LIF attenuated injury when administered after focal
ischemia (Suzuki et al., 2005). Interestingly, LIF mRNA was upregulated in neural stem/precursor cells challenged with IFNc (Laterza
et al., 2013), a proinﬂammatory cytokine that we have identiﬁed as
a major contributor to neurodegenerative injury following permanent
focal ischemia (Seifert et al., 2012). Although no studies have yet
investigated whether LIF is secreted by HUCB cells, these data support the notion that LIF signaling may account for the beneﬁcial
effects of this and other cellular therapies in reducing neurodegenerative injury following stroke.
In addition to neuronal damage, advances in imaging technology
and an improved understanding of the complexity of stroke injury

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd

3112 D. D. Rowe et al.
have sparked interest in the functional consequences of white matter
damage. Of the glial cell types, oligodendrocytes (OLs) predominate
in the cerebral white matter and are most susceptible to ischemia
(Lyons & Kettenmann, 1998). This inherent susceptibility has been
linked to high metabolic rate, increased iron content and reduced
antioxidant capacity (Braughler et al., 1986; Connor & Menzies,
1996; Juurlink, 1997; Juurlink et al., 1998). The devastating effects
of white matter injury on functional outcomes have been extensively
documented in preterm and newborn infants exposed to hypoxic–
ischemic events (McQuillen & Ferriero, 2004; Back, 2014), and
white matter injury is now recognised as a hallmark of stroke
pathology that must be evaluated when determining the efﬁcacy of
experimental therapeutics.
Based upon these ﬁndings and our previous work with HUCB
cells, we sought to determine whether LIF might mediate the protective effects of this cellular therapy. By extension, we also investigated whether LIF-mediated protection of primary OL cultures from
OGD is dependent upon AKT signaling, as we have previously
shown that HUCB cells protect OLs from OGD through the actions
of secreted factors and a mechanism involving Akt signal transduction (Rowe et al., 2010).

Materials and methods
Animal care
All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the NIH
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals with a protocol
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
at the University of South Florida. Experiments were designed to
minimise the number of animals required. Sprague–Dawley rats were
purchased from Harlan Labs (Indianapolis, IN, USA), maintained on
a 12-h light–dark cycle (07:00–19:00 h) in a climate-controlled
room, and allowed access to food and water ad libitum. Neonatal
rats birthed from untimed-pregnant dams were used for in vitro
experiments and 300- to 350-g male rats were used for in vivo
experiments.
Permanent focal ischemia and LIF administration
Permanent focal ischemia was induced using the permanent MCAO
(pMCAO) procedure, as previously described (Ajmo et al., 2006).
Brieﬂy, a 40-mm monoﬁlament was introduced into the external carotid artery, fed distally into the internal carotid artery, advanced
~25 mm to the base of the MCA, and secured in place to achieve
permanent occlusion of the MCA. Blood ﬂow was monitored
throughout the procedure using a Laser Doppler monitoring system
(Moore Lab Instruments, Farmington, CT, USA). Exclusion criteria
were set such that only animals with ≥ 60% blood ﬂow reduction
were included. Based upon this criterion, there were no animals
excluded from the present study. For treatment, rats were administered either vehicle (PBS, pH 7.4) or LIF (25 or 125 lg/kg, i.v.) at
6, 24 and 48 h after pMCAO. Final injection volumes were weightbased (1.25 mL/kg), resulting in an average injection volume of
~0.4 mL. Rats were assessed for functional outcomes immediately
before killing at 72 h post-stroke.
Functional outcomes
Animals were assessed for functional outcomes immediately prior to
being killed. Rats were evaluated for neurological and functional
deﬁcits using the following tests: Circling, Step Test, Paw Exten-

sion, and Elevated Body Swing Test (EBST). These tests provide
reproducible measures of simple sensorimotor skills that are affected
by stroke, and therefore are effective in identifying unilateral impairments. For circling, rats were placed in an open ﬁeld and allowed to
move freely. Circling behavior was recorded as ‘absence’ or ‘presence’. For Step Test, each forepaw was dragged across a tabletop
edge and the number of paw plants was recorded for each forepaw.
For Paw Extension, rats were suspended by the tail and an ability to
extend the affected forelimb was recorded as ‘absence’ or ‘presence’. For EBST, rats were suspended by the tail and the number of
turns toward each side was recorded. Circling and Paw Extension
data were expressed as the percentage of rats with ‘presence’,
whereas EBST and Step Test data were expressed as the bias toward
the affected side.
Fluoro-Jade histochemistry
For determination of infarct volume, Fluoro-Jade (Histochem, Jefferson, AR, USA) staining was performed to label degenerating
neurons. This method was adapted from that originally developed
by Schmued et al. (1997) and has been subsequently detailed
(Duckworth et al., 2005). Thaw-mounted sections were placed in
100% ethanol for 3 min, followed by 70% ethanol and deionised
water for 1 min each. Sections were then oxidised for 15 min in a
0.06% KMnO4, followed by three rinses in ddH2O for 1 min each.
Sections were then stained in a 0.001% solution of Fluoro-Jade in
0.1% acetic acid for 30 min. Slides were again rinsed, dried at
45°C for 20 min, cleared with xylene and coverslipped using DPX
mounting medium (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Ft. Washington,
PA, USA).
Mixed glial culture preparation and OL purification
All in vitro experiments were conducted using > 95% pure OL cultures, as previously described (Hall et al., 2009a). Postnatal day 3
rat pups were used for all experiments. Rat cortices were collected,
dissociated in a solution of 0.25% trypsin in 2.21 mM EDTA, triturated, and pelleted. The pellet was resuspended in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Mediatech, Manassas, VA, USA)
supplemented with 2.5% fetal bovine serum, 10% horse serum and
1% antibiotic/antimycotic (DMEM+). Trypan Blue exclusion was
used to assess cell viability. Cells were seeded (1.5 9 107) into
poly-L-lysine-treated 75-cm2 tissue culture ﬂasks. Medium was changed for fresh DMEM+ the following day and cultures were incubated for 8 days at 37°C (Gottschall et al., 1995).
Mixed glial cultures were mechanically shaken for 1 h to separate
microglial cells from the OL–astrocyte monolayer and medium was
discarded. Fresh DMEM+ was added and the ﬂask was returned to
the incubator for an additional 2 days at 37°C. OLs were puriﬁed
from mixed glial preparations by shaking the preparations for 18 h
to separate OLs and microglia from the astrocyte monolayer. The
medium was removed and the cells were pelleted and re-suspended
in DMEM+. Viable cells were then counted using Trypan Blue
exclusion. Microglia- and OL-containing medium was added to 10cm plastic tissue culture dishes at a density of 107 cells/dish and
incubated for 15 min at 37°C (procedure repeated three times for
microglial adherence to the plastic). After incubation, the dishes
were gently swirled and medium collected. The remaining suspension was pelleted, re-suspended in DMEM+ and plated on glass
poly-L-lysine-treated coverslips at 3 9 105 cells/coverslip (McCarthy
& de Vellis, 1980). The following day, medium was changed to
Neurobasal complete (Neurobasal supplemented with B-27, 0.5 mM

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

LIF protection from ischemia 3113
L-glutamine and 10 ng/mL platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
-AA (Barres et al., 1993; Yang et al., 2005). OLs remained in Neurobasal complete and PDGF-AA for 7 days to encourage proliferation. After the proliferation period, PDGF-AA was withdrawn for
5 days to induce OL differentiation into the mature phenotype
(Yang et al., 2005). Experiments were conducted immediately following the 5-day PDGF-AA withdrawal.
Luxol fast blue myelin staining
Myelin disruption was assessed using Luxol fast blue staining with
Cresyl violet counterstaining. Thaw-mounted sections were dried,
washed in ddH2O for 2 min, then 95% ethanol for 1 min. Slides
were then incubated in Luxol fast blue solution overnight at 37°C.
Slides were subsequently rinsed in 95% ethanol for 1 min followed
by ddH2O for 2 min. Differentiation was achieved using a 0.05%
lithium carbonate solution for 10 s with agitation, followed by 60 s
in 70% ethanol and one ddH2O rinse. This sequence was performed
twice, and tissues were then counterstained with a 0.1% Cresyl
violet solution for 1 min and washed in ddH2O. Tissues were then
dehydrated in ethanol (70, 95 and 100% for 2 min each), cleared
with xylene, and coverslipped using DPX mounting medium.

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and superoxide dismutase
(SOD)
Oligodendrocyte cell death in culture was determined using the
LDH assay (Takara Bio, Inc., Madison, WI, USA). Brieﬂy, 100 lL
of tissue culture medium from each experimental group was added
to a 96-well plate and 100 lL of LDH reagent was added to each
well. Plates were incubated for 30 min at 25°C and absorbances
were read on a microplate reader at a 548-nm wavelength. Medium
from LIF working solution without cells served as a control for buffer-derived nonspeciﬁc absorbance. Absorbances from negative control wells were subtracted from the total absorbance of the OL wells
to remove background LDH activity from the analysis. A standard
curve was used to extrapolate OL cell death from LDH levels after
lysing cells, as previously described (Hall et al., 2009b), and data
from LDH assays are presented as OL equivalents.
Superoxide dismutase activity in OL cultures was determined
using the SOD Assay (Kamiya Bomedical, Seattle, WA, USA). Tissue culture medium from each experimental group and supplied
reagents were added to a 96-well plate as directed by the manufacturer. Plates were incubated for 25 min at 25°C and absorbances
were read on a microplate reader at a 450-nm wavelength. SOD
activity was determined from recorded absorbances using the equation provided by the manufacturer.

OGD
Cells were subjected to normoxia or OGD as previously described
(Hall et al., 2009a). Brieﬂy, cells undergoing OGD were placed in
an airtight hypoxic chamber maintained at 37°C. The chamber was
then ﬂushed with hypoxic gas (95% N2, 4% CO2, 1% O2; Airgas,
Tampa, FL, USA) for 15 min and sealed for the duration of exposure, which was 24 h. Normoxic cells were maintained at 37°C in a
standard tissue culture incubator. The medium from each well was
collected and clariﬁed by centrifugation, and LDH analysis was
performed immediately following OGD exposure.
Cell treatment
Oligodendrocytes were seeded onto glass coverslips and randomly
assigned to OGD (DMEM without glucose) or normoxia (DMEM
with glucose) conditions. Data were obtained from three independent cultures. LIF (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA: 10–1000 ng/mL)
or vehicle (DMEM containing 50 mM sodium phosphate, 1 mM
DTT, 10% glycerol, 250 mM Nacl, pH 7.4, and 0.02% Tween 20)
was added to medium as treatment required. Akt Inhibitor IV
(10 lM/mL; EMD4Biosciences, Gibbstown, NJ, USA) was added to
medium as treatment required. This compound inhibits Akt phosphorylation and activation by targeting the ATP binding site of a
kinase upstream of Akt, but downstream of PI3K, therefore blocking
Akt activity without affecting PI3K. All experimental groups
received equal volumes of medium. Negative controls of medium
and LIF working solution without cells were included to quantify
medium and buffer solution contributions to the LDH assay for each
experimental condition. Akt Inhibitor IV was dissolved in DMSO
and placed in appropriate medium at a ﬁnal concentration of 10 lM.
An equivalent volume of DMSO was added to media in experimental groups that did not receive Akt Inhibitor IV. Anti-Prdx4 (rabbit
polyclonal; Abcam) was reconstituted as described for Akt Inhibitor
IV and was added to selected cultures at a concentration of 10 lg/
mL. The same concentration of normal rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling,
Danvers, MA, USA) was also used in parallel cultures exposed to
the same conditions, as a control for non-speciﬁc effects of antibody
treatment.

RNA collection and purification
All collection and puriﬁcation steps were performed under nucleasefree conditions using DNAse/RNAse-free materials. For RNA lysate
collection, 10 lL of b-mercaptoethanol (Pharmacia Biotech, Uppsala, Sweden) was added to 1 mL RTL buffer (Qiagen Inc., Valencia,
CA, USA) and 350 lL of the resulting mixture was added to each
OL-containing well to lyse the cells. Cell lysates were then stored at
80°C prior to extracting the RNA. The Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit
was used to extract total RNA from each cell lysate using the
optional Qiagen RNase-Free DNase set for DNase digestion (Qiagen
Inc.). Following the extraction, 1 lL of each RNA sample was
tested in an Agilent 2100 Bio-analyzer to determine the purity and
quantity of RNA present. The remaining samples were stored at
80°C for subsequent analysis.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
Primers for Prdx4 were purchased from SABiosciences (Frederick,
MD, USA; sequences are proprietary). Total RNA (10 ng/lL) from
OL cultures was subjected to qRT-PCR. The RT reaction mixture
consisted of 3 lL Oligo (dT) primers, 10 lL cDNA Synthesis Master Mix (2 9 ), 1 lL of Afﬁnity Script RT/RNase Block enzyme
mixture, and RNase-free water to a total volume of 20 lL (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). The reaction was incubated at 25°C for
5 min to allow primer annealing, then incubated at 42°C for 45 min
to allow cDNA synthesis followed by 5 min incubation at 95°C to
terminate the cDNA synthesis reaction.
Complementary DNA from the RT reaction was added to a PCR
reaction mix consisting of 1 lL cDNA, 12.5 lL 2 9 Brilliant 490
SYBR Green QPCR Master Mix (Stratagene), 2 lL primer, and
nuclease-free PCR-grade water to a total volume of 25 lL. The samples were ampliﬁed using a BioRad ICycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories,
Hercules, CA, USA) with the following protocol: heating to 95°C
for 15 min, 40 cycles of 30 s denaturation at 95°C, 30 s of annealing at 55°C, and 30 s of elongation at 72°C. GADPH was used as a
reference gene to calculate the mean normalised expression.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

3114 D. D. Rowe et al.
Image analyses
All analyses were performed by experimenters who were blinded to
the experimental treatments. Coronal brain sections encompassing
the corpus striatum (Bregma coordinates +1.7 to
0.3) were
collected from each animal. Images were generated using a Zeiss
Axioskop2 microscope controlled by OPENLAB software. Images were
captured with a Zeiss Axiocam Color camera. The IMAGEJ 1.410
program was used to measure total area occupied by ﬂuorescent signal, and the relative intensity ratios of ipsilateral vs. contralateral
hemispheres were determined to control for nonspeciﬁc Fluoro-Jade
signal and ipsilateral brain swelling caused by edema. The mean
area occupied by signal was calculated for each group and these
numbers were extrapolated between selected Bregma points to
calculate infarct volume.

preserves white matter (Fig. 2). Results showed clear differences in
white matter staining intensity between groups. Gross observations
indicated a marked reduction in ipsilateral white matter staining after
administration of vehicle compared to LIF treatment (Fig. 2, insets).
This effect on white matter included the white matter-rich region of
the external capsule and the striatal white matter bundles. A closer
examination revealed substantial white matter degradation and
disorganisation of intrafascicular OL arrangement within the ipsilateral external capsule after treatment with vehicle (Fig. 2A–D). Additionally, labeled cells within the external capsule appeared larger
compared to contralateral cells, which may reﬂect injury-induced
swelling. In contrast, 125 lg/kg LIF treatment showed an ipsilateral staining intensity, OL arrangement and size that closely resembled the corresponding contralateral cells within this structure
(Fig. 2E–H).

Statistical analyses
Data from all experiments were quantiﬁed and analysed using
GRAPHPAD PRISM 4.0 (GraphPad, La Jola, CA, USA) software. For all
statistical tests, the threshold for signiﬁcant differences between
groups was set at P < 0.05. For behavioral tests, Bartlett’s test for
unequal variance showed no signiﬁcant differences between groups.
Based upon these statistics, signiﬁcant effects of treatment were
determined using unpaired two-tailed t-tests with Welch’s correction.
For all other data, main effects were determined using one-way or
two-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s least signiﬁcant difference
(LSD) test for pairwise comparisons between treatment groups.

A

B

C

D

Results
Delayed LIF administration reduced infarct volume at 72 h
To ﬁrst determine whether LIF provides efﬁcacy in reducing infarct
volume, rats were subjected to sham surgery or pMCAO and
administered either vehicle or LIF (25 or 125 lg/kg, i.v.) at 6, 24
and 48 h after pMCAO. Rats were then euthanised at 72 h poststroke for quantiﬁcation of infarct volume using Fluoro-Jade histochemistry (Fig. 1). Rats subjected to sham surgery showed no Fluoro-Jade staining (Fig. 1A), indicating no regions of cerebral
infarction which might have arisen from errant placement of the
laser Doppler probe or from other surgical errors. Rats that were
subjected to pMCAO and administered vehicle showed large
expanses of ﬂuorescent staining (Fig. 1B), marking neurodegeneration that was largely limited to the corpus striatum and neighboring
cortical areas. Rats administered 25 lg/kg LIF also showed large
expanses of staining in the corpus striatum (Fig. 1C), similar to
those from vehicle-treated rats, although there was less cortical
staining in the 25 lg/kg group upon comparison. However, rats
administered 125 lg/kg LIF showed very little ﬂuorescent staining
within the corpus striatum and cortical regions (Fig. 1D). Quantiﬁcation (Fig. 1E) showed that infarct volume was signiﬁcantly
reduced in rats treated with 125 lg/kg LIF relative to vehicle controls (P = 0.022, F3,15 = 4.3). Data were analysed using one-way
ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD test.
Delayed LIF administration preserves white matter integrity at
72 h
As infarct volume was signiﬁcantly reduced following treatment
with 125 lg/kg LIF, adjacent sections were stained with Luxol fast
blue and counterstained with Cresyl violet to determine whether LIF

E

Fig. 1. Delayed LIF administration reduces infarct volume at 72 h. Photomicrographs of Fluoro-Jade stained sections from rats subjected to pMCAO
and administered vehicle or LIF. (A) Sham-operated control rat shows no
ﬂuorescent signal. (B) Vehicle-treated rat shows large regions of ﬂuorescent
staining, indicating severe infarction throughout the cortex and corpus
striatum. (C) Rat treated with 25 lg/kg LIF shows ﬂuorescent staining
throughout the corpus striatum, but no cortical infarct. (D) Rat treated with
125 lg/kg LIF shows marked decrease in ﬂuorescent signal within the corpus
striatum, and no cortical infarction. (E) Quantiﬁcation shows a signiﬁcant
increase in infarct volume for vehicle-treated (n = 5) rats relative to shamoperated (n = 5) controls (*P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from sham), whereas
125 lg/kg LIF (n = 5) signiﬁcantly reduced infarct volume relative to
vehicle-treated rats (#P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from vehicle). Veh, vehicle. LIF,
leukemia inhibitory factor. Scale bars = 2 mm.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

LIF protection from ischemia 3115

A

B

E

F

C

D

G

H

Fig. 2. Delayed LIF administration preserves white matter integrity at 72 h. Photomicrographs of sections stained with Luxol fast blue and counterstained with
Cresyl violet from rats subjected to pMCAO and administered vehicle (A–D) or LIF (E–H) following stroke. Insets show gross effects of treatment at 2.5 9
magniﬁcation. Section from a vehicle-treated animal shows intense myelin staining in the contralateral external capsule and dorsal striatum (A) that was markedly reduced in the ipsilateral stroke hemisphere (B). Higher magniﬁcation (C, D) shows disruption of the intrafascicular OL arrangement within the ipsilateral
external capsule. Section from an animal treated with 125 lg/kg LIF shows intense white matter staining (E, F) and preservation of intrafascicular OLs (G, H).
Veh, vehicle. LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor. Scale bars = 100 lm.

A

B

C

D

Delayed LIF administration improves functional outcomes at
72 h
To determine whether histological assessments were associated with
improved functional outcomes, animals subjected to sham surgery or
pMCAO and administered vehicle or LIF, as described, were evaluated for functional deﬁcits using four separate measures: circling,
elevated body swing, paw extension, and step (Fig. 3). Treatment
with 125 lg/kg LIF resulted in signiﬁcant improvements for circling
(P = 0.033, t = 2.5), elevated body swing (P = 0.028, t = 2.5), paw
extension (P = 0.033, t = 2.6) and step (P = 0.047, t = 2.5), while
the 25 lg/kg dose did not signiﬁcantly improve performance in any
of the assessments. The most striking result was in circling, in
which circling was essentially eliminated in rats treated with
125 lg/kg LIF. These results were consistent with the infarct volume data, indicating that LIF was effective in reducing neurodegenerative injury and promoting functional recovery at the 125 lg/kg
dose. Data were analysed using unpaired, two-tailed t-test with
Welch’s Correction.
Akt inhibition abolishes LIF protection in primary OL cultures
subjected to OGD
Primary rat OLs were cultured, proliferated and differentiated to the
mature phenotype (Fig. 4A) prior to investigating LIF protection
and signaling. Concentration-response experiments were ﬁrst performed to determine whether LIF administration attenuates OGDinduced OL injury, and if so, to identify the optimal concentration
for subsequent investigations. LIF was added to media at concentrations ranging from 10 to 1000 ng/mL (Fig. 4B). Primary OL cultures were subjected to 24 h of OGD in the presence of vehicle or
LIF, after which cellular cytotoxicity was assessed using the LDH
assay. OL equivalents were derived from LDH values, as described
in Methods. Co-incubation with 200 ng/mL LIF signiﬁcantly
reduced LDH levels in OLs subjected to OGD relative to OGD-only

Fig. 3. Delayed LIF administration improves functional outcomes at 72 h.
Rats were evaluated for performance on a series of neurological/functional
tests after being subjected to pMCAO and treated with vehicle or LIF. (A)
Stroke-induced circling behavior was evident in rats treated with vehicle
(n = 5) or 25 lg/kg LIF (n = 6), but was absent in rats treated with 125 lg/
kg LIF (n = 5; *P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from vehicle and 25 lg/kg LIF). (B)
EBST bias toward the affected side was signiﬁcantly reduced in rats treated
with 125 lg/kg LIF relative to vehicle-treated rats (*P < 0.05), whereas the
lower dose did not result in any improvement. (C) Stroke-induced impairments in paw extension were not evident in rats treated with 125 lg/kg LIF
(*P < 0.05), whereas there was no signiﬁcant difference between the vehicle
and 25 lg/kg LIF groups. (D) Step bias was not different between the vehicle and 25 lg/kg LIF groups, whereas treatment with 125 lg/kg LIF signiﬁcantly reduced the step bias relative to vehicle-treated rats (*P < 0.05). Veh,
vehicle. LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor (25, 125 lg/kg).

cultures (P = 0.0047, F4,16 = 5.0). Based upon these data, the
200 ng/mL concentration was selected for all subsequent experiments examining the signaling mechanisms activated by LIF. Data
were analysed using one-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD test.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

3116 D. D. Rowe et al.
A

B

C

Fig. 4. Akt inhibition abolishes LIF protection in OLs during OGD. Primary rat OL cultures were subjected to normoxia or OGD in the presence or absence
of vehicle, LIF, or Akt IV. (A) Representative micrograph taken at 20 9 magniﬁcation shows mature OLs immunostained for myelin basic protein. (B) Concentration-response showing the effects of LIF on cellular injury, as measured by LDH release, during OGD. Co-incubation with 200 lg/mL LIF signiﬁcantly
reduced OGD-induced injury relative to vehicle controls (*P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from vehicle). (C) OLs subjected to normoxia or OGD were treated with
200 ng/mL LIF, Akt IV, or LIF+Akt IV. Co-incubation with LIF signiﬁcantly reduced OGD-induced injury (#P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from OGD), while cultures
treated with LIF in the presence of Akt IV showed no reduction in OGD-induced injury (*P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from normoxia). n = 3 independent cultures.
Veh, vehicle. LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor (10, 50, 200, 1000 ng/mL). Norm, normoxia. OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation. Akt IV, Akt Inhibitor IV.

Our previous studies have linked the efﬁcacy of HUCB cells to Akt
phosphorylation and anti-oxidant protein expression, both in vitro and
when administered after focal ischemia (Rowe et al., 2012). To determine whether soluble LIF is involved in HUCB cell-mediated protection, primary OL cultures were used as a controlled system in which
to selectively target this protective pathway. Cultures were exposed to
24 h OGD or normoxia and co-incubated with LIF in the presence or
absence of Akt Inhibitor IV (Fig. 4C). The addition of 200 ng/mL
LIF or 10 lM Akt Inhibitor IV to normoxic cultures, whether alone or
in combination, had no signiﬁcant effect on LDH release. As
expected, cultures subjected to OGD showed signiﬁcant elevations in
LDH release relative to normoxic controls (P < 0.00010, F7,56 = 6.1),
indicating marked cellular injury. After co-incubation with LIF, OGDexposed OLs showed a signiﬁcant reduction in LDH release relative
to OGD alone (P = 0.032), and OGD+LIF levels were not signiﬁcantly different from normoxic cells. Furthermore, LIF failed to
protect cells subjected to Akt inhibition, as LDH release in cultures
co-incubated with either LIF+Akt Inhibitor IV or Akt Inhibitor IV
alone was signiﬁcantly higher than normoxic cells (P = 0.042) and was
not signiﬁcantly different from levels detected in the OGD-only group.
Data were analysed by two-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD test.
LIF induces Prdx4 mRNA expression through Akt signaling
Prdx4 was previously shown to be upregulated by HUCB cell treatment and is known to reduce reactive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation (Hozumi et al., 1998; Hofmann et al., 2002; Rowe et al.,

2010). To determine whether Prdx4 is a downstream regulator of
LIF protection, qRT-PCR was performed to analyse Prdx4 transcript
in LIF-treated OL cultures subjected to normoxia or OGD. Additionally, the relative contribution of Akt signaling was evaluated by
co-incubating LIF with Akt Inhibitor IV (Fig. 5). No signiﬁcant differences in Prdx4 transcript were detected across normoxic groups,
or between normoxic and OGD cells cultured in the absence of LIF
or Akt inhibition. However, co-incubation with LIF or Akt Inhibitor
IV resulted in signiﬁcant alterations in Prdx4 transcript (P = 0.029,
F7,50 = 3.7). LIF treatment increased Prdx4 mRNA in OLs subjected to OGD relative to OGD alone (P = 0.0081). Furthermore,
Prdx4 transcript was signiﬁcantly reduced in OGD-exposed cells
co-incubated with Akt Inhibitor IV alone or Akt Inhibitor IV+LIF
relative to the OGD+LIF group (P = 0.0075). For both OGD groups
co-incubated with Akt Inhibitor IV, Prdx4 mRNA levels were not
signiﬁcantly different from the OGD-only group, demonstrating that
Prdx4 transcript induction in this culture system is Akt-dependent.
Data were analysed using two-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD
test.
Prdx4 is required for Akt-mediated LIF protection in cultured
OLs
As Prdx4 transcript was upregulated following LIF treatment, and
these effects were blocked by Akt inhibition, we sought to determine whether Prdx4 might be responsible, at least in part, for the
protective effects of LIF. The same paradigm of OGD and LIF

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

LIF protection from ischemia 3117
rabbit IgG did not signiﬁcantly alter the actions of LIF. Data were
analysed using two-way ANOVA followed by Fisher’s LSD test.
Because the effects of the neutralising antibody were so pronounced, a second series of experiments was conducted to validate
these data and further explore the precise mechanism by which
Prdx4 confers oligoprotection. Cultured OLs were subjected to the
same normoxic or OGD conditions and extracellular oxidation was
evaluated by measuring SOD activity in the media (Fig. 6B). Data
showed signiﬁcant effects from co-incubation with LIF and antiPrdx4 (P = 0.012, F4,23 = 3.716). SOD activity was signiﬁcantly
reduced in medium from LIF-treated OLs relative to the OGD-only
group (P = 0.033). Furthermore, co-incubation of LIF with antiPrdx4 resulted in signiﬁcantly increased SOD activity levels relative
to the OGD+LIF group (P = 0.027), demonstrating that blocking
Prdx4 function effectively negated LIF-mediated reductions in SOD
activity. Data were analysed using two-way ANOVA followed by
Fisher’s LSD test.
Fig. 5. LIF induces Prdx4 mRNA transcript in OLs during OGD. Primary
rat OL cultures were subjected to normoxia or OGD in the presence or
absence of vehicle, 200 ng/mL LIF, or Akt IV. There were no signiﬁcant differences in Prdx4 mRNA expression between any of the normoxic groups.
Following OGD exposure, LIF-treated cells showed a signiﬁcant increase in
Prdx4 mRNA (*P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from OGD), and parallel cultures
co-incubated with Akt IV showed Prdx4 mRNA levels that were signiﬁcantly
lower than cells treated with LIF alone (#P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from
OGD+LIF). n = 3 independent cultures. Norm, normoxia. OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation. LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor. Akt IV, Akt Inhibitor IV.

treatment was used to test whether the addition of a Prdx4 neutralising antibody could block the protective effects of LIF (Fig. 6A).
Data showed signiﬁcant effects of treatment and alterations in LDH
release that resulted from blocking Prdx4 activity (P = 0.00010,
F9,61 = 19) Consistent with previous results, co-incubation with LIF
signiﬁcantly attenuated OGD-induced cell death relative to OGDonly cultures (P = 0.038). Additionally, OLs subjected to OGD and
co-incubated with LIF+anti-Prdx4 were not protected, showing a
marked increase in cellular injury relative to all other experimental
groups (P = 0.00016). Co-incubation of LIF-treated cells with anti-

Discussion
Human umbilical cord blood cellular therapy is effective in rodent
stroke models by inhibiting the pro-inﬂammatory immune response
and activating neural cell survival signaling. This protection is conferred, in part, through released soluble factors that activate the survival-associated protein kinase Akt (Rowe et al., 2012), leading to
the increased expression of antioxidant genes. Although HUCB cell
therapy demonstrates potential as a stroke therapeutic, identifying
the factors that elicit these pro-survival actions will help develop
safer, targeted approaches for standardised care. The present study
investigated the therapeutic potential of LIF in improving functional
outcomes and reducing cerebral infarction in rats subjected to permanent focal ischemia, while investigating the signaling pathways
activated by LIF in primary OL cultures exposed to conditions
similar to those which occur during stroke.
Previous studies have highlighted LIF protective effects in disease
states including spinal cord injury and EAE (Kerr & Patterson,
2005; Azari et al., 2006; Butzkueven et al., 2006). Furthermore,

A

B

Fig. 6. Prdx4 is required for LIF-mediated OL protection during OGD. Primary rat OL cultures were subjected to normoxia or OGD in the presence or absence
of vehicle, 200 ng/mL LIF, Akt IV, anti-Prdx4 or anti-rabbit IgG. (A) Data from LDH assays shows no signiﬁcant differences in cellular injury between any of
the normoxic groups. Cells exposed to OGD and treated with LIF showed a signiﬁcant reduction in cellular injury relative to OGD-only cultures (*P < 0.05,
signiﬁcant from OGD), while LDH levels in parallel cultures co-incubated with Akt IV were not signiﬁcantly different from OGD controls. Co-incubation of
LIF-treated cells with the Prdx4 neutralising antibody increased cellular injury to levels that were signiﬁcantly higher than all other OGD cultures (#P < 0.05,
#
signiﬁcant from all other OGD groups). There were no signiﬁcant differences in LDH release in LIF-treated cells co-incubated with anti-rabbit IgG. (B) Data
from SOD assays shows signiﬁcantly reduced SOD activity in medium from LIF-treated cultures (*P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from OGD), whereas cultures co-incubated with Akt IV showed SOD activity levels that were not different from OGD-only controls. Co-incubation of LIF-treated cells with the Prdx4 neutralising
antibody resulted in signiﬁcantly increased SOD activity levels relative to OGD+LIF cultures (#P < 0.05, signiﬁcant from OGD+LIF). Co-incubation of LIFtreated cultures with anti-rabbit IgG produced no signiﬁcant effects on LIF-induced SOD activity. n = 3 independent cultures. Norm, normoxia. OGD, oxygen
glucose deprivation. LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor. Akt IV, Akt Inhibitor IV. anti-Prdx4, Prdx4 neutralising antibody. IgG, anti-rabbit IgG.
© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

3118 D. D. Rowe et al.
LIF expression is upregulated in vitro in cells exposed to OGD, and
is rapidly expressed in the infarct boundary post-stroke (Slevin
et al., 2008). Thus, upregulation of LIF in disease states appears to
have a protective effect. Data here document the protective efﬁcacy
of LIF when administered following permanent focal ischemia, providing proof of concept that LIF treatment is a viable therapeutic
option for the treatment of stroke.
Additionally, our results support the idea that LIF acts through
similar mechanisms as those previously identiﬁed for HUCB cell
therapy. Experiments with primary OL cultures demonstrated a role
for Akt signaling and the antioxidant actions of Prdx4, consistent
with our previous work in the same culture system (Rowe et al.,
2012). These ﬁndings are also consistent with LIF protection in
other injury models, as well as its capacity in eliciting these downstream responses. For example, LIF was shown to preserve white
matter integrity through STAT3 and PI3/Akt activation following
spinal cord injury (Metcalf & Gearing, 1989b; Azari et al., 2006).
In the experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE) model of multiple sclerosis, LIF administration promoted OL viability, while
administration of LIF blocking antibodies enhanced disease pathology (Metcalf & Gearing, 1989a,b; Butzkueven et al., 2002).
Another report demonstrated that LIF rescued mature OLs from
interferon gamma- (IFNc) and tumor necrosis factor alpha- (TNFa)
induced cell death through the activation of the JAK/STAT and PI3/
Akt pathways (Slaets et al., 2008).
Interestingly, a recent, detailed study showed that LIF transcript
was upregulated in neural stem/precursor cells stimulated with IFNc
and TNFa, and transplanted but undifferentiated cells improved outcomes in EAE mice (Laterza et al., 2013). The fact that undifferentiated cells exerted such effects is indirect evidence that soluble LIF
may be responsible, at least in part, for the protection afforded by
stem cell therapy. Interestingly, we have previously documented an
important role for IFNc in stroke-induced inﬂammatory signaling and
neural injury in the present model of focal ischemia (Seifert et al.,
2012). As LIF induction reﬂects a response to IFNc and other stimuli
that are well-known to facilitate the pro-inﬂammatory response following stroke (Amor et al., 2013; Siniscalchi et al., 2014), it is conceivable that the neuroprotective effects of HUCB cell therapy result
from the actions of LIF. Indeed, a previous report showed that LIF
inhibits the production of pro inﬂammatory mediators, including
TNFa and macrophage-derived ROS (Hendriks et al., 2008). Taken
together, these data suggest that LIF is upregulated in response to proinﬂammatory signals, such as IFNc, as means of protecting the brain
from additional injurious cascades. However, LIF also exerts both
proliferative and protective effects on glial cells, which are critically
important in preserving neuronal cell function and the integrity of the
neurovascular unit. For example, LIF stimulated GFAP expression in
astrocytic progenitors, whereas in oligodendrocyte progenitor cultures, LIF enhanced myelin basic protein expression, survival, maturation and generation (Mayer et al., 1994; Nakagaito et al., 1995).
Therefore, it is possible that the protective effects of LIF in the
MCAO model are due to one or more of these actions.
One important ﬁnding, which was documented with HUCB cell
therapy and conﬁrmed in the present study, is that antioxidant protein function is critical in the protection of OLs exposed to OGD
conditions. Following ischemic stroke, reductions in cerebral blood
ﬂow induce ROS production and lead to mitochondrial dysfunction,
which is attenuated by PI3/Akt activation (Zhao et al., 2006). In
regards to white matter injury, relatively low antioxidant content
renders OLs vulnerable to excessive ROS and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) accumulation (Juurlink, 1997; Juurlink et al., 1998). In
addition, iron is an important myelin cofactor that is highly reactive

and conducive to ROS/RNS generation, free radical formation and
lipid peroxidation following stroke (Braughler et al., 1986; Connor
& Menzies, 1996; McTigue & Tripathi, 2008; Allen & Bayraktutan,
2009). Among the reactive species that facilitate cellular injury,
superoxide is the primary ROS from which other ROS are generated
(Allen & Bayraktutan, 2009). Here, LIF treatment increased Prdx4
mRNA expression in cultured OLs exposed to OGD, and either neutralising Prdx4 activity or blocking Akt signaling negated protection
while increasing SOD activity. In response to excessive oxidative
stress, SOD is upregulated to prevent cellular injury (Allen & Bayraktutan, 2009), which is consistent with the observed elevations in
SOD upon inhibition of Prdx4 extracellular antioxidant activity.
Due to the nature of this response and the present ﬁndings, it is
tempting to attribute the protective effects and increased SOD activity to the antioxidant activity of Prdx4. However, Prdx4 exhibits
multiple functions, serving as a free radical scavenger through its
peroxidase activity, detoxifying a range of free radical-forming
organic hydroperoxides (Hofmann et al., 2002), and engaging in
chaperone activity (Jang et al., 2004) that prevents free radicalinduced aggregation of cytosolic proteins (Jang et al., 2004; Kang
et al., 2005). Although we did not investigate cytosolic protein
aggregation in the present study, it is possible that this chaperone
activity contributes to the protection afforded by Prdx4 in culture.
Future investigations into this mechanism are necessary and should
be conducted to further explore the therapeutic potential and identify
new treatment options for focal ischemia.

Disclosure
A.E. Willing is a consultant to Saneron CCEL Therapeutics, Inc.
and is an inventor on cord blood-related patents.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the National Institutes of Health (R01
NS052839 and R21NS078517), and the University of South Florida Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology.

Abbreviations
DMEM, Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium; DMEM+, DMEM supplemented with 2.5% fetal bovine serum, 10% horse serum and 1% antibiotic/
antimycotic; EBST, Elevated Body Swing Test; HUCB, human umbilical
cord blood; JAK/STAT, Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator for transcription; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LIF, leukemia inhibitory factor;
LIFR, LIF receptor b; LSD, least signiﬁcant difference; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; OGD, oxygen–glucose deprivation; OL, oligodendrocyte; PI3/Akt, phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase; pMCAO, permanent MCAO;
SOD, superoxide dismutase.

References
Ajmo, C.T. Jr., Vernon, D.O., Collier, L., Pennypacker, K.R. & Cuevas, J.
(2006) Sigma receptor activation reduces infarct size at 24 hours after permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Curr. Neurovasc. Res., 3,
89–98.
Allen, C.L. & Bayraktutan, U. (2009) Oxidative stress and its role in the
pathogenesis of ischaemic stroke. Int. J. Stroke, 4, 461–470.
Amor, S., Peferoen, L.A., Vogel, D.Y., Breur, M., van der Valk, P., Baker,
D. & van Noort, J.M. (2013) Inﬂammation in neurodegenerative diseases
– an update. Immunology, 142, 151–166.
Azari, M.F., Profyris, C., Karnezis, T., Bernard, C.C., Small, D.H., Cheema,
S.S., Ozturk, E., Hatzinisiriou, I. & Petratos, S. (2006) Leukemia
inhibitory factor arrests oligodendrocyte death and demyelination in spinal
cord injury. J. Neuropath. Exp. Neur., 65, 914–929.
Back, S.A. (2014) Cerebral white and gray matter injury in newborns: new
insights into pathophysiology and management. Clin. Perinatol., 41, 1–24.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

LIF protection from ischemia 3119
Barres, B.A., Schmid, R., Sendnter, M. & Raff, M.C. (1993) Multiple extracellular signals are required for long-term oligodendrocyte survival. Development, 118, 283–295.
Braughler, J.M., Duncan, L.A. & Chase, R.L. (1986) The involvement of
iron in lipid peroxidation. Importance of ferric to ferrous ratios in initiation. J. Biol. Chem., 261, 10282–10289.
Butzkueven, H., Zhang, J.G., Soilu-Hanninen, M., Hochrein, H., Chionh, F.,
Shipham, K.A., Emery, B., Turnley, A.M., Petratos, S., Ernst, M., Bartlett,
P.F. & Kilpatrick, T.J. (2002) LIF receptor signaling limits immune-mediated demyelination by enhancing oligodendrocyte survival. Nat. Med., 8,
613–619.
Butzkueven, H., Emery, B., Cipriani, T., Marriott, M.P. & Kilpatrick, T.J.
(2006) Endogenous leukemia inhibitory factor production limits autoimmune demyelination and oligodendrocyte loss. Glia, 53, 696–703.
Connor, J.R. & Menzies, S.L. (1996) Relationship of iron to oligodendrocytes and myelination. Glia, 17, 83–93.
Duckworth, E.A., Butler, T.L., De Mesquita, D., Collier, S.N., Collier, L. &
Pennypacker, K.R. (2005) Temporary focal ischemia in the mouse: technical aspects and patterns of Fluoro-Jade evident neurodegeneration. Brain
Res., 1042, 29–36.
Gottschall, P.E., Yu, X. & Bing, B. (1995) Increased production of gelatinase
B (matrix metalloproteinase-9) and interleukin-6 by activated rat microglia
in culture. J. Neurosci. Res., 42, 335–342.
Hall, A.A., Guyer, A.G., Leonardo, C.C., Ajmo, C.T. Jr., Collier, L.A., Willing, A.E. & Pennypacker, K.R. (2009a) Human umbilical cord blood cells
directly suppress ischemic oligodendrocyte cell death. J. Neurosci. Res.,
87, 333–341.
Hall, A.A., Leonardo, C.C., Collier, L.A., Rowe, D.D., Willing, A.E. & Pennypacker, K.R. (2009b) Delayed treatments for stroke inﬂuence neuronal
death in rat organotypic slice cultures subjected to oxygen glucose deprivation. Neuroscience, 164, 470–477.
Hendriks, J.J., Slaets, H., Carmans, S., de Vries, H.E., Dijkstra, C.D., Stinissen, P. & Hellings, N. (2008) Leukemia inhibitory factor modulates production of inﬂammatory mediators and myelin phagocytosis by
macrophages. J. Neuroimmunol., 204, 52–57.
Hofmann, B., Hecht, H.J. & Flohe, L. (2002) Peroxiredoxins. Biol. Chem.,
383, 347–364.
Hozumi, I., Inuzuka, T. & Tsuji, S. (1998) Brain injury and growth inhibitory factor (GIF)–a minireview. Neurochem. Res., 23, 319–328.
Jang, H.H., Lee, K.O., Chi, Y.H., Jung, B.G., Park, S.K., Park, J.H., Lee,
J.R., Lee, S.S., Moon, J.C., Yun, J.W., Choi, Y.O., Kim, W.Y., Kang,
J.S., Cheong, G.W., Yun, D.J., Rhee, S.G., Cho, M.J. & Lee, S.Y. (2004)
Two enzymes in one; two yeast peroxiredoxins display oxidative stressdependent switching from a peroxidase to a molecular chaperone function.
Cell, 117, 625–635.
Juurlink, B.H. (1997) Response of glial cells to ischemia: roles of reactive
oxygen species and glutathione. Neurosci. Biobehav. R., 21, 151–166.
Juurlink, B.H., Thorburne, S.K. & Hertz, L. (1998) Peroxide-scavenging deﬁcit underlies oligodendrocyte susceptibility to oxidative stress. Glia, 22,
371–378.
Kang, S.W., Rhee, S.G., Chang, T.S., Jeong, W. & Choi, M.H. (2005) 2-Cys
peroxiredoxin function in intracellular signal transduction: therapeutic
implications. Trends Mol. Med., 11, 571–578.
Kerr, B.J. & Patterson, P.H. (2005) Leukemia inhibitory factor promotes
oligodendrocyte survival after spinal cord injury. Glia, 51, 73–79.
Kurek, J. (2000) AM424: history of a novel drug candidate. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. P., 27, 553–557.
Laterza, C., Merlini, A., De Feo, D., Rufﬁni, F., Menon, R., Onorati, M.,
Fredrickx, E., Muzio, L., Lombardo, A., Comi, G., Quattrini, A., Taveggia, C., Farina, C., Cattaneo, E. & Martino, G. (2013) iPSC-derived neural
precursors exert a neuroprotective role in immune-mediated demyelination
via the secretion of LIF. Nat. Commun., 4, 2597.
Lyons, S.A. & Kettenmann, H. (1998) Oligodendrocytes and microglia
are selectively vulnerable to combined hypoxia and hypoglycemia injury
in vitro. J. Cerebr. Blood F. Met., 18, 521–530.
Mayer, M., Bhakoo, K. & Noble, M. (1994) Ciliary neurotrophic factor and
leukemia inhibitory factor promote the generation, maturation and survival
of oligodendrocytes in vitro. Development, 120, 143–153.
McCarthy, K.D. & de Vellis, J. (1980) Preparation of separate astroglial and
oligodendroglial cell cultures from rat cerebral tissue. J. Cell Biol., 85,
890–902.
McQuillen, P.S. & Ferriero, D.M. (2004) Selective vulnerability in the developing central nervous system. Pediatr. Neurol., 30, 227–235.
McTigue, D.M. & Tripathi, R.B. (2008) The life, death, and replacement of
oligodendrocytes in the adult CNS. J. Neurochem., 107, 1–19.

Metcalf, D. (2003) The unsolved enigmas of leukemia inhibitory factor. Stem
Cells, 21, 5–14.
Metcalf, D. & Gearing, D.P. (1989a) Fatal syndrome in mice engrafted with
cells producing high levels of the leukemia inhibitory factor. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA, 86, 5948–5952.
Metcalf, D. & Gearing, D.P. (1989b) A myelosclerotic syndrome in mice
engrafted with cells producing high levels of leukemia inhibitory factor
(LIF). Leukemia, 3, 847–852.
Nakagaito, Y., Yoshida, T., Satoh, M. & Takeuchi, M. (1995) Effects of leukemia inhibitory factor on the differentiation of astrocyte progenitor cells
from embryonic mouse cerebral hemispheres. Brain Res. Dev. Brain Res.,
87, 220–223.
Neuhoff, S., Moers, J., Rieks, M., Grunwald, T., Jensen, A., Dermietzel, R.
& Meier, C. (2007) Proliferation, differentiation, and cytokine secretion of
human umbilical cord blood-derived mononuclear cells in vitro. Exp.
Hematol., 35, 1119–1131.
Oh, H., Fujio, Y., Kunisada, K., Hirota, H., Matsui, H., Kishimoto, T. &
Yamauchi-Takihara, K. (1998) Activation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
through glycoprotein 130 induces protein kinase B and p70 S6 kinase
phosphorylation in cardiac myocytes. J. Biol. Chem., 273, 9703–9710.
Rowe, D.D., Leonardo, C.C., Hall, A.A., Shahaduzzaman, M.D., Collier,
L.A., Willing, A.E. & Pennypacker, K.R. (2010) Cord blood administration induces oligodendrocyte survival through alterations in gene expression. Brain Res., 1366, 172–188.
Rowe, D.D., Leonardo, C.C., Recio, J.A., Collier, L.A., Willing, A.E. &
Pennypacker, K.R. (2012) Human umbilical cord blood cells protect oligodendrocytes from brain ischemia through Akt signal transduction. J. Biol.
Chem., 287, 4177–4187.
Schmued, L.C., Albertson, C. & Slikker, W. Jr. (1997) Fluoro-Jade: a novel
ﬂuorochrome for the sensitive and reliable histochemical localization of
neuronal degeneration. Brain Res., 751, 37–46.
Seifert, H.A., Hall, A.A., Chapman, C.B., Collier, L.A., Willing, A.E. &
Pennypacker, K.R. (2012) A transient in spleen size following stroke corresponds to splenocyte release into systemic circulation. J. Neuroimmune
Pharm., 7, 1017–1024.
Siniscalchi, A., Gallelli, L., Malferrari, G., Pirritano, D., Serra, R., Santangelo, E. & De Sarro, G. (2014) Cerebral stroke injury: the role of cytokines
and brain inﬂammation. J. Basic Clin. Physiol. Pharmacol., 25, 131–137.
Slaets, H., Dumont, D., Vanderlocht, J., Noben, J.P., Leprince, P., Robben,
J., Hendriks, J., Stinissen, P. & Hellings, N. (2008) Leukemia inhibitory
factor induces an antiapoptotic response in oligodendrocytes through
Akt-phosphorylation and up-regulation of 14-3-3. Proteomics, 8, 1237–
1247.
Slevin, M., Krupinski, J., Mitsios, N., Perikleous, C., Cuadrado, E., Montaner, J., Sanfeliu, C., Luque, A., Kumar, S., Kumar, P. & Gaffney, J.
(2008) Leukaemia inhibitory factor is over-expressed by ischaemic brain
tissue concomitant with reduced plasma expression following acute stroke.
Eur. J. Neurol., 15, 29–37.
Stahl, N., Boulton, T.G., Farruggella, T., Ip, N.Y., Davis, S., Witthuhn, B.A.,
Quelle, F.W., Silvennoinen, O., Barbieri, G., Pellegrini, S., Ihle, J.N. & Yancopoulos, G.D. (1994) Association and activation of Jak-Tyk kinases by
CNTF-LIF-OSM-IL-6 beta receptor components. Science, 263, 92–95.
Stahl, N., Farruggella, T.J., Boulton, T.G., Zhong, Z., Darnell, J.E. Jr. &
Yancopoulos, G.D. (1995) Choice of STATs and other substrates speciﬁed
by modular tyrosine-based motifs in cytokine receptors. Science, 267,
1349–1353.
Suzuki, S., Yamashita, T., Tanaka, K., Hattori, H., Sawamoto, K., Okano, H.
& Suzuki, N. (2005) Activation of cytokine signaling through leukemia
inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR)/gp130 attenuates ischemic brain injury in
rats. J. Cerebr. Blood F. Met., 25, 685–693.
Vendrame, M., Cassady, J., Newcomb, J., Butler, T., Pennypacker, K.R.,
Zigova, T., Sanberg, C.D., Sanberg, P.R. & Willing, A.E. (2004) Infusion
of human umbilical cord blood cells in a rat model of stroke dose-dependently rescues behavioral deﬁcits and reduces infarct volume. Stroke, 35,
2390–2395.
Vendrame, M., Gemma, C., De Mesquita, D., Collier, L., Bickford, P.C.,
Sanberg, C.D., Sanberg, P.R., Pennypacker, K.R. & Willing, A.E. (2005)
Anti-inﬂammatory effects of human cord blood cells in a rat model of
stroke. Stem Cells Dev., 14, 595–604.
Yang, Z., Watanabe, M. & Nishiyama, A. (2005) Optimization of oligodendrocyte progenitor cell culture method for enhanced survival. J. Neurosci.
Meth., 149, 50–56.
Zhao, H., Sapolsky, R.M. & Steinberg, G.K. (2006) Phosphoinositide-3kinase/akt survival signal pathways are implicated in neuronal survival
after stroke. Mol. Neurobiol., 34, 249–270.

© 2014 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 3111–3119

