Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Experimental Neurology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/yexnr

Reduction of zinc accumulation in mitochondria contributes to decreased
cerebral ischemic injury by normobaric hyperoxia treatment in an
experimental stroke model
Wen Dong a, Zhifeng Qi a,⁎, Jia Liang a, Wenjuan Shi a, Yongmei Zhao a, Yumin Luo a, Xunming Ji a, Ke Jian Liu a,b,⁎⁎
a
b

Cerebrovascular Diseases Research Institute, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 45 Changchun Street, Beijing 100053, China
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 26 January 2015
Revised 22 March 2015
Accepted 10 April 2015
Available online 17 April 2015
Keywords:
Zinc
Mitochondria
Oxygen
Ischemia
Brain
Penumbra

a b s t r a c t
Cerebral ischemia interrupts oxygen supply to the affected tissues. Our previous studies have reported that
normobaric hyperoxia (NBO) can maintain interstitial partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) in the penumbra of ischemic stroke rats at the physiological level, thus affording signiﬁcant neuroprotection. However, the mechanisms
that are responsible for the penumbra rescue by NBO treatment are not fully understood. Recent studies have
shown that zinc, an important mediator of intracellular and intercellular neuronal signaling, accumulates in
neurons and leads to ischemic neuronal injury. In this study, we investigate whether NBO could regulate zinc accumulation in the penumbra and prevent mitochondrial damage in penumbral tissue using a transient cerebral
ischemic rat model. Our results showed that NBO signiﬁcantly reduced zinc-staining positive cells and zincstaining intensity in penumbral tissues, but not in the ischemic core. Moreover, ischemia-induced zinc accumulation in mitochondria, isolated from penumbral tissues, was greatly attenuated by NBO or a zinc-speciﬁc chelator, N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine (TPEN). NBO or TPEN administration stabilized the
mitochondrial membrane potential in the penumbra after cerebral ischemia. Finally, ischemia-induced cytochrome c release from mitochondria in penumbral tissues was signiﬁcantly reduced by NBO or TPEN treatment.
These ﬁndings demonstrate a novel mechanism for NBO's neuroprotection, especially to penumbral tissues,
providing further evidence for the potential clinical beneﬁt of NBO for acute ischemic stroke.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Introduction
Oxygen deﬁciency is one of the critical features of ischemic stroke
due to insufﬁcient cerebral blood supply to afﬂicted areas (An et al.,
2012). Ischemic penumbra is an area compromised by partially reduced
cerebral blood ﬂow and disturbed energy metabolism surrounding the
severely injury ischemic core (Astrup et al., 1981). It is deﬁned as a
tissue that could be “potentially reversible” with a timely intervention
(Foley et al., 2010; Zhou and van Zijl, 2011; Song and Yu, 2014). We
previously reported that normobaric hyperoxia (NBO) could maintain
tissue oxygenation in the penumbra of cerebral ischemic rats (Liu
Abbreviations: NBO, normobaric hyperoxia; pO2, pressure of oxygen; TPEN, N,N,N′,N′tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; TTC,
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; NG, Newport Green;
MTG, Mito Tracker Green; BSA, bovine serum albumin; JC-1, 5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′tetraethylbenzimidazolcarbocyanine iodide; OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation.
⁎ Corresponding author.
⁎⁎ Correspondence to: K.J. Liu, College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA. Fax: +1 505 272 0704.
E-mail addresses: email_qzf@163.com (Z. Qi), kliu@salud.unm.edu (K.J. Liu).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.04.005
0014-4886/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

et al., 2006). It has been demonstrated by us and others that NBO treatment exhibits neuroprotective effects in stroke animal models (Singhal
et al., 2002; Henninger et al., 2007; Shin et al., 2007; Liu et al., 2009) and
in patients in pilot studies (Singhal et al., 2005; Chiu et al., 2006),
suggesting that NBO is a potential treatment for acute ischemic stroke.
However, the mechanisms related to penumbral tissues rescue by
NBO during cerebral ischemia are not fully understood.
Besides Ca2+, zinc is another cation that is associated with neuronal
injury (Shuttleworth and Weiss, 2011; Leng et al., 2014; Lai et al., 2014).
Zinc is highly enriched in the central nervous system. Most zinc ions
were reported to be stored in synaptic vesicles, which would be released
from glutamatergic terminals of neurons during ischemia (Galasso and
Dyck, 2007). Intracellular compartments and zinc binding proteins are
involved in keeping zinc homeostasis (Sensi et al., 2009; Shuttleworth
and Weiss, 2011). Among these, mitochondria are the key intracellular
organelles for buffering zinc levels in neurons. In vitro studies demonstrated that zinc overload in mitochondria would induce multiple
mitochondrial injuries (Sensi et al., 2000, 2003; Dineley et al., 2005;
Gazaryan et al., 2007) and activate mitochondrial-mediated proapoptotic factors (Jiang et al., 2001). Zinc was also reported to activate

182

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

Materials and methods

brain. The infarct volume was calculated as a percentage of the volume
of the contralateral brain. In TTC assay,7 rats were used in each group to
conﬁrm the success of MCAO model and to calculate infarct volume.
Then 4 rats were randomly chosen out of 7 rats for other assays in
each group.
Penumbral tissue is operationally deﬁned as the ischemic area that
will undergo apoptosis without treatment but is rescued with treatment
(Ford et al., 2012; Zhu et al., 2012). The differences in infarct area
between NBO (TPEN) groups and normoxic (DMSO) groups were considered as the penumbra (Fig. 1A) as our previous studies described
(Liu et al., 2004).
As illustrated in Fig. 1A, brain tissue in black rectangle was collected
for isolating mitochondria and then mitochondria-related assay. The
images from small orange rectangle were selected as the representatives of the penumbra in NG or RhodZin-3 staining.

Animal model and experimental group

Cytosolic zinc staining

Animal procedures for this study were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee of Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical
University (Beijing, China). Male Sprague–Dawley rats (280–300 g)
were subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) surgery as
descried previously (Zhao et al., 2014). Right MCAO was induced
using the modiﬁed intraluminal ﬁlament method (Tajiri et al., 2013;
Qi et al., 2014). The animals underwent 90 min of MCAO and then
were reperfused for 22.5 h by careful withdrawal of the ﬁlament.
Successful MCAO was assessed by circling to the non-ischemic side
(left) at the end of ischemia then further conﬁrmed by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining at the end of reperfusion (see Infarct
measurement below).
Twenty-eight rats with successful MCAO were divided at random
into four groups: normoxia, NBO, DMSO, and TPEN (n = 7 in each
group). Three rats with unsuccessful MCAO were excluded from this
study. No rats died due to surgical or stroke complications.

Brain sections (20 μm) were stained with the zinc-selective
membrane-impermeable ﬂuorescent indicator Newport Green (NG,
Invitrogen) to detect cytosolic free zinc. Sections were washed in PBS
and incubated with NG (10 μM) and DAPI (a nuclear speciﬁc marker)
in the dark for 3 min. After washing in PBS, images were acquired
with a ﬂuorescence microscope (Nikon 80i, Japan) and analyzed with
Leica Qwin software (Zhao et al., 2014). Three different areas in the
penumbra from each rat were selected to count NG-positive cells and
analyze ﬂuorescent intensity. The ﬂuorescent intensity was assessed
after subtraction of background ﬂuorescent intensity.

mitochondrial outer membrane channels (Bonanni et al., 2006) and
cytochrome c discharged from mitochondria (Calderone et al., 2004)
in transient global ischemic animals. Our previous study has reported
that a combination of zinc and hypoxia synergistically leads to high
astrocytic cell death in vitro, suggesting the augmentation of zinc cytotoxicity under ischemic conditions (Pan et al., 2013). Therefore, we hypothesize that NBO may prevent zinc accumulation in the mitochondria
of penumbral tissues and reduce zinc toxicity to mitochondrial functions under ischemic conditions, affording neuroprotection during
recovery from acute ischemic brain injury.
In the current study, we investigated the role of NBO in reducing
ischemia-induced mitochondrial injury in the penumbra via preventing
zinc accumulation in mitochondria in a transient ischemic rat model.

NBO and TPEN treatment
Ten minutes after the onset of MCAO, the animals were put into
an anesthesia box, which delivered 100% oxygen (NBO, 5 L/min)
and lasted until the start of reperfusion (Liu et al., 2006). The normoxic
rats underwent similar treatment except for ventilation with air (21%
O2, 5 L/min).
A speciﬁc zinc chelator, N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)
ethylenediamine (TPEN, Sigma-Aldrich), was dissolved in dimethyl
sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich) and then further diluted into physiological saline with 20% DMSO. TPEN (15 mg/kg) was administrated by
intraperitoneal injection at 30 min prior to MCAO onset. In our previous
study, we found that 15 mg/kg of TPEN by intraperitoneal injection
30 min before MCAO were able to reduce infarct volume and block
zinc activities following ischemia (Zhao et al., 2014). Therefore, intraperitoneal injection TPEN (15 mg/kg) 30 min before the onset of MCAO was
chosen in this study. The vehicle DMSO (20% in saline) was given to rats
as the control group.
Tissue collection, infarct measurement, and penumbra identiﬁcation
Rats were decapitated after 22.5 h of reperfusion. Brains were quickly removed and sectioned into four 2-mm thick slices from an 8-mm
thick region 5 mm away from the tip of the frontal lobe. The ﬁrst and
third slices were prepared for isolating cerebral mitochondria. The
fourth slice was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at − 80 °C
for zinc staining.
The second slice was stained with 1% TTC solution at 37 °C for
20 min. The infarct volume was measured using the TTC-stained slice
as described previously (Swanson et al., 1990). The non-infarcted area
in the ipsilateral brain was subtracted from that in the contralateral

Isolation of brain mitochondria
Highly puriﬁed mitochondria were isolated from non-ischemic and
ischemic brain tissues, according to the manufacturer's protocol of a
Qproteome mitochondria isolation kit (Qiagen). Brain tissues (200 mg)
were cut into pieces and incubated in 500 μL ice-cold Lysis Buffer with
protease inhibitors. Homogenization of the sample was performed
using the Tissue Ruptor rotor-stator homogenizer for 10s. The homogenate was centrifuged at 1000×g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the cell pellets
were resuspended in 1.5 mL ice-cold Disruption Buffer by pipetting up
and down using a 1 mL pipette tip. The lysate was centrifuged at
1000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a new
tube and centrifuged at 6000×g for 10 min at 4 °C. The pellet containing
full active intact mitochondria was collected and resuspended in Storage
Buffer and stored at −80 °C for further analysis. To avoid the excess injury, the mitochondria were pipetted gently and they appear aggregated in the images shown in ﬁgures.
Measurements of zinc levels in mitochondria
Free zinc in mitochondria was measured using a mitochondrialspeciﬁc ﬂuorescent zinc indicator RhodZin-3 (Invitrogen)(Bonanni
et al., 2006). Two methods were used in this study to evaluate zinc
level in mitochondria within the penumbra.
(i) Quantiﬁcation of zinc levels in isolated mitochondria. Isolated
mitochondria were co-stained with RhodZin-3(10 μM, Invitrogen) and
mitochondrial membrane potential-independent probe Mito Tracker
Green (MTG, 100nM, Invitrogen) for 45 min at room temperature. Mitochondrial zinc ﬂuorescence was detected using a ﬂuorescence microplate reader in a spectrophotometer (Thermo ﬁsher) at 550/575 nm
and 490/516 nm as excitation/emission wavelengths, respectively. The
ﬂuorescence of MTG here was used as a loading control for the amount
of mitochondria.
(ii) Co-staining of zinc with neuronal cells in brain sections of ischemic rats. Brain sections were co-stained with RhodZin-3 and
NeuN (a neuronal speciﬁc marker, Millipore). Brain sections (20 μm)
were ﬁxed in cold acetone for 10 min and blocked in 3% bovine serum

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

183

Fig. 1. Zinc accumulation in different brain regions during cerebral ischemia/reperfusion. (A) The illustration of ischemic penumbra (P), core, and contralateral (Contr) regions in a rat brain
section. Representative co-stained images of zinc-speciﬁc NG staining (green) and nuclear speciﬁc indicator DAPI (blue) in the contralateral tissues (B), the penumbra (C), and the core (D).
Scale bar = 10 μm.

albumin (BSA) for 1 h. Sections were incubated with anti-NeuN (1: 500)
as the primary antibody, followed by AlexaFluor488 anti-mouse IgG
(Invitrogen) as the secondary antibody. The sections were then stained
with RhodZin-3 (150nM) for 45 min. Images were performed on a ﬂuorescence microscope.
Analysis of mitochondrial membrane potential
To detect variations of mitochondrial membrane potential,
we utilized a lipophilic cation5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′tetraethylbenzimidazolcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1) kit (Genmed), according to the protocol of manufacturer. JC-1 is capable of entering
into mitochondria and exhibits potential-dependent accumulation in
mitochondria. Mitochondrial depolarization is indicated by a decrease
in the red/green ﬂuorescence of JC-1. Brieﬂy, isolated mitochondria
(10 μL, about 5 μg mitochondrial proteins) were incubated in JC-1 staining buffer for 10 min at room temperature in the dark. Images were
then performed on a ﬂuorescence microscope. The ﬂuorescence was
assessed using a ﬂuorescence microplate reader (Thermo ﬁsher) at
490/516 nm (green) and 490/590 nm (red) as excitation/emission
wavelengths, respectively. The ratio of red/green intensity was measured to evaluate the membrane potential of isolated mitochondria
from each group.
Western blot assay for mitochondrial cytochrome c
Isolated mitochondria were incubated with lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2, 0.05% Brij-35, 1% Triton
X-100) for 30 min for SDS–PAGE. All blots were probed with cytochrome
c antibody (1:500, BD Biosciences). The membranes were re-probed with
anti-COX4 (1:500, Proteintech) as loading control.
Statistical analysis
Data were presented as mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was performed using student t-tests or ANOVA. A value of p b 0.05 was considered statistical signiﬁcance.

Results
Intracellular zinc accumulates in the ischemic penumbra and core of
ischemia stroke rats
Cytosolic free zinc in ischemic or contralateral hemisphere was
double stained with zinc-speciﬁc NG staining and DAPI. Representative
merged images in the contralateral area, the ischemic penumbra, and
the core were shown in Fig. 1B–D. NG-positive cells were hardly visible
in contralateral tissue (Fig. 1B). On the contrary, there were numerous
NG-positive cells in the penumbra (Fig. 1C) and core (Fig. 1D) in rats
with 90-min MCAO plus 22.5-h reperfusion, suggesting intracellular
zinc accumulation may be involved in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
injury.
NBO reduces zinc accumulation in the penumbra and shows similar
protective effect as a zinc chelator, TPEN
We next investigated whether NBO treatment could reduce
ischemia-induced zinc accumulation. Typical zinc-staining images in
the ischemic penumbra and core from NBO or normoxic groups are
shown in Fig. 2A. Statistical analysis demonstrated that the number of
NG-positive cells in the penumbra was markedly reduced to 164 ± 34
in the NBO group compared to 330 ± 46 in the normoxic group
(Fig. 2B). In contrast, there was no signiﬁcant change in positively
zinc-stained cells in the ischemic core between NBO and the normoxic
group (Fig. 2B). Quantitative analysis also showed that NBO signiﬁcantly
reduced cytosolic zinc ﬂuorescence intensity in NG-positive cells in the
penumbra to 35 ± 8, when compared with 77 ± 21 in normoxic group
(Fig. 2C). These results indicate that NBO can reduce zinc accumulation
in the ischemic penumbra, but not in the core region.
TTC staining results demonstrated that NBO treatment signiﬁcantly
reduced the infarct size of ischemic rats, as compared with the normoxic
group (Fig. 2D). To address whether the decreased infarct volume by
NBO in ischemic rats is related to reduction of zinc levels, we measured
the infarct volume in ischemic rats injected with selective zinc chelator,
TPEN, which has been shown to reduce zinc accumulation and lead
to decreased brain injury following ischemia (Zhao et al., 2014). As

184

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

Fig. 2. NBO reduces zinc accumulation in the penumbra and shows similar protective effect as a zinc chelator, TPEN. (A) Typical images of NG staining in the penumbra and core in
normoxic- or NBO-treated rats. Scale bar = 50 μm. (B) Quantitative analysis of the number of NG-positive cells that were counted from three different ﬁelds of the penumbra or core
in each rat. The images in small orange rectangle were selected as the representatives of the penumbra for NG staining quantiﬁcation. (C) Quantitative analysis of the ﬂuorescence intensity
in NG-positive cells in the penumbra. (D) NBO reduced infarction volume in ischemic rats. NBO was initiated 10 min after the onset of MCAO and lasted until reperfusion. The control rats
were ventilated with air. The infarction volume was assessed at the end of reperfusion. (E) A zinc-speciﬁc chelator, TPEN, decreased infarction volume in ischemic rats. TPEN or vehicle
control (DMSO) was administrated 30 min before MCAO. Quantiﬁcation of cerebral infarct volume was assessed at the end of reperfusion. Data are represented by means ± SD (n = 5
for A, B, and C; n = 7 for D, E); *P b 0.05 vs normoxic-treated or DMSO-treated MCAO group.

shown in Fig. 2E, compared with the DMSO group, TPEN treatment
reversed MCAO-induced infarction. These data suggest that NBO has
the same neuroprotective effect as zinc chelator, TPEN, and may share
the same neuroprotective mechanism as TPEN by blocking zinc toxicity
in the penumbra.
NBO treatment decreases zinc accumulation in mitochondria isolated from
penumbral tissue of ischemic rats.
As zinc overload in mitochondria is associated with mitochondrial
injury under ischemic conditions, we investigated whether NBO could
reduce zinc accumulation in mitochondria in the penumbra. Mitochondria were isolated from the penumbra of ischemic hemisphere and
contralateral region and co-stained with mitochondria-speciﬁc zinc indicator RhodZin-3, and MTG, a speciﬁc potential-independent mitochondrial probe, a loading control for the amount of mitochondria.
Quantitative analysis, calculating the ratio of RhodZin-3/MTG, showed

that 90-min ischemia with 22.5-h of reperfusion triggered more zinc accumulation in mitochondria from the penumbra than those from nonischemic hemisphere. NBO treatment signiﬁcantly reduced ischemiatriggered zinc overload in mitochondria from the penumbral area, as
compared to normoxic rats (Fig. 3A). We also used TPEN administration
as a positive control for reducing zinc in the mitochondria. We found
that chelating zinc with TPEN signiﬁcantly suppressed zinc accumulation in mitochondria in penumbral area, as compared with the DMSO
group (Fig. 3B). These ﬁndings suggest that NBO treatment may prevent
penumbral injury by reducing ischemia-induced zinc accumulation in
mitochondria.
NBO treatment suppresses mitochondrial zinc in neuronal cells of the
penumbra
Whereas the survival of neurons in the penumbra is closely correlated
with good outcomes for stroke animals, mitochondrial zinc accumulation

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

185

Fig. 3. NBO treatment decreases zinc level in mitochondria isolated from the penumbra. (A) Quantiﬁcation of the ratio of ﬂuorescence RhodZin-3/MTG in normoxic or NBO rats. Mitochondria
were isolated from ischemic hemisphere (I) or contralateral region (Non-I), and were co-stained with RhodZin-3 and MTG, as a loading control. (B) Quantiﬁcation of the ratio of ﬂuorescence
RhodZin-3/MTG in TPEN or DMSO rats. TPEN treatment signiﬁcantly reversed ischemia-induced mitochondrial zinc level in the penumbra. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 4 for each
group). *P b 0.05 vs Non-I in normoxic group or DMSO group; #P b 0.05 vs. I in normoxic or DMSO group.

is closely related to the fate of neurons. To clarify whether the increased
mitochondrial zinc (Fig. 3) is located in neurons, the brain sections
were co-stained with RhodZin-3 and NeuN (a speciﬁc marker of neuronal cells). Typical images in the penumbral region showed that
mitochondrial-selective zinc staining was co-localized with NeuNpositive cells in normoxic rats. NBO treatment signiﬁcantly decreased
the mitochondrial-speciﬁc zinc accumulation in NeuN-positive cells in
the penumbra (Fig. 4A). Similarly, chelating zinc by TPEN signiﬁcantly
suppressed zinc accumulation in mitochondria of penumbral neuronal
cells, as compared with the DMSO control group (Fig. 4B). These data
suggest that ischemia induces mitochondrial zinc accumulation in neurons, which could be rescued by NBO treatment. NBO treatment may
rescue the neuronal cells in the penumbra from ischemic injury by
reducing zinc overload in mitochondria.
NBO treatment improves membrane potential of mitochondria from
penumbral tissues through removing zinc accumulation in mitochondria
Isolated mitochondria from penumbral or non-ischemic tissues
were incubated with JC-1, a ﬂuorescence probe of mitochondrial membrane potential. As is shown in Fig. 5A, healthy mitochondria from nonischemic tissues had high membrane potential and showed high red
ﬂuorescence. In contrast, damaged mitochondria from an ischemic
hemisphere exhibited low potential and showed low red ﬂuorescence.
Statistical analysis in Fig. 5B indicated that JC-1 ﬂuorescence intensity
was drastically decreased in the penumbra of the ischemic hemisphere,
when compared with contralateral tissue in normoxic rats. NBO
treatment signiﬁcantly rescued ischemic-induced mitochondrial membrane potential dissipation in penumbral tissues. Similar effects were
obtained in our positive control experiments. Mitochondria from
TPEN-administrated rats preserved mitochondrial membrane potential
in comparison to the DMSO group (Fig. 5C and D). These results suggest
that NBO treatment plays a positive effect on maintaining the mitochondrial membrane potential through decreasing zinc levels in
mitochondria.
NBO treatment attenuates ischemia-induced cytochrome c release
from penumbral mitochondria through reducing zinc accumulation
in mitochondria
Cytochrome c release from mitochondria is a crucial event that is
associated with the mitochondria-dependent cell death pathway. We
investigated the effect of NBO on the level of cytochrome c in mitochondria fraction in the penumbra of ischemic rats. As shown in Fig. 6A and B,
a signiﬁcant reduction of cytochrome c level in mitochondrial fraction

was observed in penumbral tissues of normoxic rats, when compared
with that in Non-I hemisphere. NBO treatment partially rescued
ischemia-induced cytochrome c loss in mitochondrial fraction. As the
positive control of NBO treatment (Fig. 6C and D), TPEN treatment
noticeably restored the cytochrome c expression in ischemic mitochondria, compared with the DMSO group. These data indicate that NBO
treatment reduces cytochrome c release from mitochondria and thus inhibits the mitochondria-mediated cell death pathway through reducing
zinc accumulation in mitochondria.
Discussion
Normobaric hyperoxia is a potential treatment for ischemic stroke
(Henninger and Fisher, 2006; Deng et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2014).
Excessive zinc released during ischemia is considered to be a critical factor in ischemic brain injury. In this study, we have focused on the investigation of a new mechanism and the signaling pathway that is related
to zinc accumulation in NBO-afforded neuroprotective effect in transient ischemic rats followed by 90 min ischemia and 22.5 h reperfusion.
Our results demonstrate that zinc plays a critical role in mitochondriadependent cell death pathway through accumulation in mitochondria
follow transient ischemic stroke (Fig. 3–6). NBO treatment was found
to reduce cytosolic free zinc accumulation in the penumbra and suppress mitochondrial zinc overload in ischemic stroke rats. Therefore,
NBO might protect against ischemic stroke through regulating mitochondrial zinc levels. Since elevation of intracellular zinc occurs soon
after ischemia onset (Zhao et al., 2014), it would be very interesting to
investigate the time-dependent events at earlier time points. Further
study is warranted.
Zinc is an important mediator of intracellular and intercellular neuronal signaling. Zinc has been found to be stored in speciﬁc synaptic
vesicles in glutamatergic neurons and plays an important role in the
pathological processes of ischemic stroke (Sensi et al., 2009). Recent
studies from our lab and others have shown that high concentrations
of zinc under ischemic conditions contribute to ischemia-induced neuronal death (Zhao et al., 2014; Yin et al., 2002). In the present study,
we observed zinc accumulation in an ischemic hemisphere (both the
penumbra and ischemic core) in 90-min MCAO/22.5-h reperfusion
rats (Fig. 2). NBO reduced the numbers of NG-positive cells and NG ﬂuorescence intensity in these NG-positive cells in the penumbra, which
has been regarded as the ischemic tissue that could be rescued at the
early stage of ischemic stroke. Interestingly, NBO could not reduce
NG-positive cells in the ischemic core. Our previous data showed that
NBO treatment could signiﬁcantly increase pO2 in the penumbra, but
not in the core following ischemia (Liu et al., 2004). Moreover, the

186

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

187

Fig. 5. NBO maintains membrane potential of mitochondria in the penumbra of ischemic rats. (A) JC-1 staining was performed to measure membrane potential of mitochondria, which
were isolated from the penumbra of ischemic hemisphere (I) or non-ischemic hemisphere (Non-I) of NBO/normoxic control rats. (B) Quantitative analysis in NBO or normoxic rats.
(C) JC-1 staining in TPEN or DMSO group. (D) Quantitative analysis in TPEN or DMSO rats. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 4 for each group). *P b 0.05 vs Non-I in normoxic
or DMSO group; #P b 0.05 vs. I in normoxic or DMSO group. Scale bar = 50 μm.

administration of NBO during ischemia increased the penumbral blood
ﬂow but did not affect the blood ﬂow in core region (Liu et al., 2006).
Data in this study showed that the increased pO2 and improved blood
ﬂow in the penumbra may be involved in regulating zinc levels and
contributes to the neuroprotective effect by NBO. Besides, the cerebral
blood ﬂow is associated with vascular remodeling, which can improve
functional recovery in ischemic stroke rats (Liu et al., 2014). However,
the relationship between zinc and vascular remodeling needs to be
further investigated.
TPEN, a membrane-permeable chelator, has been shown to block
both intracellular and extracellular free zinc (Cuajungco and Lees, 1998)
and reduces zinc-mediated cell apoptosis in neurons (Medvedeva et al.,
2009). In this study, TPEN was administrated as a positive control and
as a diagnostic tool to investigate the effect of zinc on NBO neuroprotection. Our ﬁndings showed that NBO presented similar protective effects
as TPEN administration, suggesting that NBO and TPEN may share the
same mechanism in protecting the penumbra by reducing cytosolic zinc
accumulation in the penumbra.
Mitochondria are important in buffering zinc levels in neurons.
However, little is known about how zinc level changes in mitochondria
during transient focal ischemia. In this study, we provide the ﬁrst evidence that ischemia-induced mitochondrial zinc accumulation in the
penumbra (Fig. 3). What's more, the abnormally high zinc levels were
located in neurons in penumbral tissues (Fig. 4). NBO treatment decreased mitochondrial zinc levels both in isolated mitochondria and

neuronal mitochondria in the penumbra (Figs. 3 and 4). Therefore, our
data demonstrates that NBO decreases mitochondrial zinc accumulation
in penumbral neurons following transient focal ischemia.
We next investigated the mechanisms related to zinc levels in NBOafforded neuroprotection. Abnormal zinc accumulation in mitochondria
can affect mitochondrial function and lead to mitochondria-mediated
cell death in oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) and global ischemia
models (Calderone et al., 2004; Bonanni et al., 2006; Medvedeva et al.,
2009). However, the role of mitochondrial zinc in transient ischemic
stroke is still unknown. In the current study, we focused on zinc
accumulation-induced mitochondrial membrane potential dissipation
and cytochrome c release. Abnormal mitochondrial membrane potential causes mitochondrial dysfunction and eventual cell death. Our ﬁndings support this mechanism because mitochondria isolated from the
brain penumbra following ischemia showed membrane potential
disruption and cytochrome c release (Figs. 5 and 6). More importantly,
these events were reversed by NBO and TPEN, suggesting that mitochondrial zinc contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction, resulting in
cell death. These ﬁndings suggest a possible mechanism of NBO in
protecting the penumbra, thus reducing cerebral ischemic injury in
ischemic stroke rats. A Ca2 +uniporterwas reported to be involved in
mediating zinc entry into mitochondria, which contributed to mitochondrial dysfunction in OGD treated neurons (Medvedeva and Weiss,
2014). Further studies are needed to investigate how zinc accumulates
in mitochondria during cerebral ischemia.

Fig. 4. NBO treatment reduces mitochondrial zinc level in neuronal cells from penumbral tissues in brain section. Brain sections were co-stained with RhodZin-3 (red)and neuron-speciﬁc
marker (NeuN, green). (A) Normoxic and NBO groups. (B) DMSO and TPEN groups. Scale bar = 25 μm. Non-I: non-ischemic hemisphere; I: the penumbra in ischemic hemisphere.

188

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189

Fig. 6. NBO reduces cytochrome c release from mitochondria in the penumbra. (A) Representative blots of cytochrome c in isolated mitochondria in normoxic- and NBO-treated rats. The
level of COX-4 in mitochondria was used as loading control. (B) Quantitative analysis of cytochrome c level in mitochondrial fractions in normoxic- and NBO-treated rats. (C) Western Blots
of cytochrome c in mitochondrial fraction in TPEN or DMSO rats. (D) Quantitative analysis of cytochrome c level in TPEN or DMSO group. Data are expressed as means ± SD (n = 4 for each
group). *P b 0.05 vs Non-I in normoxic or DMSO group; #P b 0.05 vs. I in normoxic or DMSO group.

In conclusion, the data from this study suggest a novel mechanism of
NBO treatment in rescuing penumbra through reducing zinc accumulation in penumbral tissues of cerebral ischemic rats. These ﬁndings
provide further evidence that NBO treatment could be a viable neuroprotective treatment to salvage penumbral tissues during acute ischemic
stroke.
Disclosures
None.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by grants from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (81171242, 81200928), the Beijing
Nova Program (Z141107001814045), and the National Institutes of
Health (P30GM103400).
References
An, H., Liu, Q., Chen, Y., Vo, K.D., Ford, A.L., Lee, J.M., Lin, W., 2012. Oxygen metabolism in
ischemic stroke using magnetic resonance imaging. Transl. Stroke Res. 3, 65–75.
Astrup, J., Siesjo, B.K., Symon, L., 1981. Thresholds in cerebral ischemia—the ischemic
penumbra. Stroke 12, 723–725.
Bonanni, L., Chachar, M., Jover-Mengual, T., et al., 2006. Zinc-dependent multi-conductance
channel activity in mitochondria isolated from ischemic brain. J. Neurosci. 26,
6851–6862.
Calderone, A., Jover, T., Mashiko, T., Noh, K.M., Tanaka, H., Bennett, M.V., Zukin, R.S., 2004.
Late calcium EDTA rescues hippocampal CA1 neurons from global ischemia-induced
death. J. Neurosci. 24, 9903–9913.
Chen, F., Qi, Z., Luo, Y., Hinchliffe, T., Ding, G., Xia, Y., Ji, X., 2014. Non-pharmaceutical
therapies for stroke: mechanisms and clinical implications. Prog. Neurobiol. 115,
246–269.
Chiu, E.H., Liu, C.S., Tan, T.Y., Chang, K.C., 2006. Venturi mask adjuvant oxygen therapy in
severe acute ischemic stroke. Arch. Neurol. 63, 741–744.
Cuajungco, M.P., Lees, G.J., 1998. Diverse effects of metal chelating agents on the neuronal
cytotoxicity of zinc in the hippocampus. Brain Res. 799, 97–107.
Deng, J., Lei, C., Chen, Y., et al., 2014. Neuroprotective gases—fantasy or reality for clinical
use? Prog. Neurobiol. 115, 210–245.
Dineley, K.E., Richards, L.L., Votyakova, T.V., Reynolds, I.J., 2005. Zinc causes loss of
membrane potential and elevates reactive oxygen species in rat brain mitochondria.
Mitochondrion 5, 55–65.
Foley, L.M., Hitchens, T.K., Barbe, B., Zhang, F., Ho, C., Rao, G.R., Nemoto, E.M., 2010.
Quantitative temporal proﬁles of penumbra and infarction during permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Transl. Stroke Res. 1, 220–229.

Ford, A.L., An, H., Vo, K.D., Lin, W., Lee, J.M., 2012. Deﬁning the ischemic penumbra using
hyperacute neuroimaging: deriving quantitative ischemic thresholds. Transl. Stroke
Res. 3, 198–204.
Galasso, S.L., Dyck, R.H., 2007. The role of zinc in cerebral ischemia. Mol. Med. 13,
380–387.
Gazaryan, I.G., Krasinskaya, I.P., Kristal, B.S., Brown, A.M., 2007. Zinc irreversibly damages
major enzymes of energy production and antioxidant defense prior to mitochondrial
permeability transition. J. Biol. Chem. 282, 24373–24380.
Henninger, N., Fisher, M., 2006. Normobaric hyperoxia—a promising approach to expand
the time window for acute stroke treatment. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 21, 134–136.
Henninger, N., Bouley, J., Nelligan, J.M., Sicard, K.M., Fisher, M., 2007. Normobaric
hyperoxia delays perfusion/diffusion mismatch evolution, reduces infarct volume,
and differentially affects neuronal cell death pathways after suture middle cerebral
artery occlusion in rats. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 27, 1632–1642.
Jiang, D., Sullivan, P.G., Sensi, S.L., Steward, O., Weiss, J.H., 2001. Zn(2+) induces permeability transition pore opening and release of pro-apoptotic peptides from neuronal
mitochondria. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 47524–47529.
Lai, T.W., Zhang, S., Wang, Y.T., 2014. Excitotoxicity and stroke: identifying novel targets
for neuroprotection. Prog. Neurobiol. 115, 157–188.
Leng, T., Shi, Y., Xiong, Z.G., Sun, D., 2014. Proton-sensitive cation channels and ion
exchangers in ischemic brain injury: new therapeutic targets for stroke? Prog.
Neurobiol. 115, 189–209.
Liu, S., Shi, H., Liu, W., Furuichi, T., Timmins, G.S., Liu, K.J., 2004. Interstitial pO2 in ischemic
penumbra and core are differentially affected following transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 24, 343–349.
Liu, S., Liu, W., Ding, W., Miyake, M., Rosenberg, G.A., Liu, K.J., 2006. Electron paramagnetic
resonance-guided normobaric hyperoxia treatment protects the brain by maintaining penumbral oxygenation in a rat model of transient focal cerebral ischemia.
J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 26, 1274–1284.
Liu, W., Hendren, J., Qin, X.J., Shen, J., Liu, K.J., 2009. Normobaric hyperoxia attenuates
early blood–brain barrier disruption by inhibiting MMP-9-mediated occludin degradation in focal cerebral ischemia. J. Neurochem. 108, 811–820.
Liu, J., Wang, Y., Akamatsu, Y., Lee, C.C., Stetler, R.A., Lawton, M.T., Yang, G.Y., 2014. Vascular
remodeling after ischemic stroke: mechanisms and therapeutic potentials. Prog.
Neurobiol. 115, 138–156.
Medvedeva, Y.V., Weiss, J.H., 2014. Intramitochondrial Zn2+ accumulation via the Ca2+
uniporter contributes to acute ischemic neurodegeneration. Neurobiol. Dis. 68, 137–144.
Medvedeva, Y.V., Lin, B., Shuttleworth, C.W., Weiss, J.H., 2009. Intracellular Zn2+ accumulation contributes to synaptic failure, mitochondrial depolarization, and cell
death in an acute slice oxygen-glucose deprivation model of ischemia. J. Neurosci.
29, 1105–1114.
Pan, R., Chen, C., Liu, W.-L., Liu, K.-J., 2013. Zinc promotes the death of hypoxic astrocytes
by upregulating hypoxia-induced hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha expression via
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1. CNS Neurosci. Ther. 19, 511–520.
Qi, Z., Yan, F., Shi, W., et al., 2014. AKT-related autophagy contributes to the neuroprotective efﬁcacy of hydroxysafﬂor yellow A against ischemic stroke in rats. Transl. Stroke
Res. 5, 501–509.
Sensi, S.L., Yin, H.Z., Weiss, J.H., 2000. AMPA/kainate receptor-triggered Zn2+ entry into
cortical neurons induces mitochondrial Zn2+ uptake and persistent mitochondrial
dysfunction. Eur. J. Neurosci. 12, 3813–3818.
Sensi, S.L., Ton-That, D., Sullivan, P.G., Jonas, E.A., Gee, K.R., Kaczmarek, L.K., Weiss, J.H.,
2003. Modulation of mitochondrial function by endogenous Zn2+ pools. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 100, 6157–6162.

W. Dong et al. / Experimental Neurology 272 (2015) 181–189
Sensi, S.L., Paoletti, P., Bush, A.I., Sekler, I., 2009. Zinc in the physiology and pathology of
the CNS. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 780–791.
Shin, H.K., Dunn, A.K., Jones, P.B., Boas, D.A., Lo, E.H., Moskowitz, M.A., Ayata, C., 2007.
Normobaric hyperoxia improves cerebral blood ﬂow and oxygenation, and inhibits
peri-infarct depolarizations in experimental focal ischaemia. Brain 130, 1631–1642.
Shuttleworth, C.W., Weiss, J.H., 2011. Zinc: new clues to diverse roles in brain ischemia.
Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 32, 480–486.
Singhal, A.B., Dijkhuizen, R.M., Rosen, B.R., Lo, E.H., 2002. Normobaric hyperoxia reduces
MRI diffusion abnormalities and infarct size in experimental stroke. Neurology 58,
945–952.
Singhal, A.B., Benner, T., Roccatagliata, L., Koroshetz, W.J., Schaefer, P.W., Lo, E.H.,
Buonanno, F.S., Gonzalez, R.G., Sorensen, A.G., 2005. A pilot study of normobaric
oxygen therapy in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke 36, 797–802.
Song, M., Yu, S.P., 2014. Ionic regulation of cell volume changes and cell death after ischemic
stroke. Transl. Stroke Res. 5, 17–27.

189

Swanson, R.A., Morton, M.T., Tsao-Wu, G., Savalos, R.A., Davidson, C., Sharp, F.R., 1990. A
semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 10, 290–293.
Tajiri, N., Dailey, T., Metcalf, C., et al., 2013. In vivo animal stroke models: a rationale for
rodent and non-human primate models. Transl. Stroke Res. 4, 308–321.
Yin, H.Z., Sensi, S.L., Ogoshi, F., Weiss, J.H., 2002. Blockade of Ca2 + −permeable AMPA/
kainate channels decreases oxygen-glucose deprivation-induced Zn2+ accumulation
and neuronal loss in hippocampal pyramidal neurons. J. Neurosci. 22, 1273–1279.
Zhao, Y., Pan, R., Li, S., et al., 2014. Chelating intracellularly accumulated zinc decreased
ischemic brain injury through reducing neuronal apoptotic death. Stroke 45,
1139–1147.
Zhou, J., van Zijl, P.C., 2011. Deﬁning an acidosis-based ischemic penumbra from
pH-weighted MRI. Transl. Stroke Res. 3, 76–83.
Zhu, G., Michel, P., Zhang, W., Wintermark, M., 2012. Standardization of stroke perfusion
CT for reperfusion therapy. Transl. Stroke Res. 3, 221–227.

