Building on the pioneering work of Akira Endo, who 
discovered fungal inhibitors of cholesterol biosynthesis1, 
pharmaceutical development of the statin class of medicines
has transformed the primary and secondary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease (CVD).
Statins are potent, specific, competitive inhibitors of 
HMG-CoA reductase, a microsomal enzyme that catalyses
the conversion of HMG-CoA to mevalonate during
the rate-determining step of cholesterol metabolism. 
The resulting reduction in hepatic levels of cholesterol 
initiates a series of coordinated cellular reactions in 
cholesterol homeostasis mediated by SREBPs, a family
of transcription factors that act via the sterol regulatory
element in target genes. An important response 
is the upregulation of the LDL receptor. The activity 
of hepatic LDL receptors, which remove LDL particles 
from the bloodstream, is a major determinant of plasma 
concentrations of LDL2,3.
Statins entered clinical trials in the early 1980s and 
were available for use in the clinic just a few years later. 
They proved to be highly effective in reducing levels of 
LDL cholesterol4,5 and so became the optimal drugs for 
testing the hypothesis that lowering levels of cholesterol
would result not only in a reduction in CVD 
events but also in cardiac-related and overall mortality. 
The landmark trial (4S), which was published in 1994, 
demonstrated that simvastatin reduced overall mortality
by 30% among patients with stable coronary disease6 (TABLE 1). Subsequently, a wealth of outcome data 
from rigorously performed randomly controlled trials 
(RCTs) has become available to guide clinical decision 
making among patients with varying degrees of CVD 
risk and key at-risk groups, including those with diabetes 
mellitus, hypertension and renal impairment7–11.
Statins proved to be generally well-tolerated with a 
low prevalence of adverse effects. Although individual 
efficacy trials are of insufficient size to uncover rare 
adverse effects, when combined in a meta-analysis the 
numbers become substantial and not open to bias12. 
Nevertheless, data have emerged linking extended 
statin therapy to an increased risk of new-onset diabetes
mellitus (NODM). This issue first came to light in 
JUPITER, a large primary prevention trial using rosuvastatin
in individuals with elevated levels of C-reactive 
protein13 (TABLE 1). Subsequent analyses of both RCTs 
and observational studies found a similar but varying 
increased risk of NODM. Consequently, in February 
2012, the FDA published a safety update indicating 
that statins can increase fasting blood glucose and 
HbA
1c
 concentrations14.
1Department of Diabetes 
& Endocrinology, University 
College Hospitals Trust, 
3rd Floor Central, 250 Euston 
Road, London NW1 2PQ, UK.
2Department of Medicine, 
University of Valencia, 
Avenida Blasco Ibañez, 17, 
46010 Valencia, Spain.
Correspondence to D.J.B.
j.betteridge@ucl.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrendo.2015.194
Published online 15 Dec 2015
The diabetogenic action of statins — 
mechanisms and clinical implications
D. John Betteridge1 and Rafael Carmena2
Abstract | Treatment with statins has transformed primary and secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease (CVD), including thrombotic stroke. Evidence-based data demonstrate 
the benefits and safety of statin therapy and help to guide clinicians in the management of 
populations at high risk of CVD. Nevertheless, clinical trials, meta-analyses and observational 
studies highlight a 10–12% increase in new-onset diabetes mellitus (NODM) among patients 
receiving statins. The risk further increases with intensive therapy and among individuals with 
known risk factors for NODM. Mechanisms underpinning this effect are not yet fully understood; 
however, Mendelian randomization studies suggest that they are related to lowered activity of 
HMG-CoA reductase, the target of statin therapy. In vitro research indicates that statins 
potentially impair β-cell function and decrease insulin sensitivity but how these findings relate 
to patients is unknown. In the clinic, statins should be prescribed on the basis of CVD risk and 
individual patient characteristics. In addition, diet and lifestyle interventions should be 
emphasized to help mitigate the risk of NODM. Individuals who develop NODM while taking 
statins do not exhibit increased microvascular disease, which is reassuring. In diabetes mellitus 
of long duration, the effect of statins on glycaemic control is small and unlikely to be 
clinically important.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY VOLUME 12 | FEBRUARY 2016 | 99
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1554983402)
In this Review, the evidence linking statin therapy to 
NODM will be described in detail together with what is 
known about the potential mechanisms underpinning 
this effect. The implications for clinical management of 
individuals at medium-to-high risk of NODM will also 
be discussed.
Statins and NODM
The purpose of the following section is to provide an 
overview of clinical data concerning the diabetogenic 
effects of statins. Relevant factors related to NODM risk 
with statin use, such as statin dose, pre-existing risk factors
for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) or a possible 
class effect will be discussed. However, it should be noted 
that any potential diabetogenic effects should not cast 
doubt on the overwhelming evidence that the benefits of 
statins on cardiovascular outcomes vastly outweigh their 
risks, as shown in the RCTs reviewed in this section.
Clinical trials evidence and meta-analyses
The first study to report on glucose homeostasis associated
with statin use was WOSCOPS, a primary prevention
trial conducted among men aged 45–64 years 
old15 (TABLE 1). After 5 years of treatment, a 30% reduction
in the incidence of NODM was recorded in the 
pravastatin-treated group versus the placebo group. 
However, the upper boundary of the 95% CI for this 
observation was 0.99 and the WOSCOPS investigators 
used non-standardized criteria for diagnosis of NODM. 
Subsequently, a meta-analysis of five prospective RCTs 
of statins suggested that, as a class, these drugs did not 
significantly increase the risk of NODM (risk ratio [RR] 
1.03; 95% CI 0.89–1.03)16. By contrast, subgroup analysis
indicated potential differences between the various 
types of statin: pravastatin exhibited a trend towards risk 
reduction but atorvastatin, rosuvastatin and simvastatin 
all demonstrated a marked increase in risk16.
The results of JUPITER further supported the association
between rosuvastatin and NODM13. After 1.9 years of 
treatment, a 25% increase in the rate of physician-reported 
NODM and a small but statistically significant increase 
(0.3%) in the median HbA
1c
 level were detected. Of note, 
41% of the trial participants (regardless of their treatment 
assignment) met the criteria for diagnosis of the metabolic 
syndrome and prediabetes at baseline13. These findings led 
to a reappraisal of the hypothesis-generating data from 
WOSCOPS and prompted a meta-analysis of 13RCTs 
of statins versus placebo that included 91,140 patients 
without T2DM17. Overall, standard-dose statin therapy 
(10mg of atorvastatin, 40mg of pravastatin, 40mg of 
simvastatin or 20mg of rosuvastatin) was associated with 
a 9% increased risk of NODM over 4 years (OR 1.09; 95% 
CI 1.02–1.17) with little (11%) heterogeneity between the 
trials. Meta-regression indicated that the risk of NODM 
was highest among trials that included participants aged 
>70 years. For example, in PROSPER (TABLE 1), administration
of pravastatin increased the risk by 32% versus 
placebo18. By contrast, neither baseline BMI nor changes 
in LDL cholesterol concentrations accounted for the 
observed variation in risk17.
Further meta-analyses both confirmed these results and 
investigated potential dose-dependent and class effects of 
statins (TABLE 2). A meta-analysis of five RCTs that included 
a total of 32,752 participants without diabetes mellitus 
who were randomly allocated to receive intensive-dose 
versus standard-dose statins was conducted19. This analysis
demonstrated increased risk of developing NODM (OR 
1.12) among individuals who received intensive doses of 
high-potency statins. Furthermore, a wealth of data from 
additional meta-analyses and retrospective studies suggest 
that high-potency statins are more likely to increase the 
risk of NODM than low-potency statins and that these 
effects seem to be related to the dose administered20–26. 
Nevertheless, it should be emphasized that some of the 
trials included in these analyses were of short duration and 
that no data on statin-induced NODM are available from 
trials of >10 years duration.
At-risk groups
Development of NODM during statin therapy seems to 
occur most frequently among individuals with risk factors
for T2DM, the elderly (age >70 years), women and 
those of Asian ethnicity25,27,28. The dose-related diabetogenic
effect of statins is most apparent for individuals 
with pre-existing risk factors, such as components of the 
metabolic syndrome20. Among patients with either one or 
no risk factors for diabetes mellitus at baseline, NODM 
risk during a median 5 years of follow-up in the TNT 
and IDEAL studies (TABLE 1) was similar among patients 
who received high-dose statins (80mg of atorvastatin 
or 40 mg of simvastatin) and moderate-dose statins 
(10mg of atorvastatin or 20mg simvastatin) at 3.22% 
and 3.35%, respectively20. However, among patients with 
two to four risk factors for diabetes mellitus, NODM was 
recorded in 14.3% of the high-dose group and 11.9% 
of the moderate-dose group (P=0.003). In both trials, 
high-dose statin therapy markedly reduced the number 
of major CVD events29.
A post hoc analysis of the SPARCL trial (TABLE 1)
showed that individuals with four risk factors for T2DM 
who received atorvastatin at a dose of 80mg per day 
Key points
• Meta-analyses of clinical trial data reveal a 10–12% increased risk of new-onset 
diabetes mellitus (NODM) associated with statin therapy; the risk is further increased 
with intensive treatment regimens
• Mendelian randomization studies suggest that the effect of statins on glucose 
homeostasis reflect reduced activity of the target of statin therapy (HMG-CoA 
reductase)
•In vitro and in vivo data suggest that statins reduce synthesis of mevalonate pathway 
products and increase cholesterol loading, which leads to impaired β-cell function 
and decreased insulin sensitivity
• The benefits of statins in reducing cardiovascular disease (CVD) events far outweigh 
the harm of NODM; therefore, the use of statin therapy should be governed by 
individual patient risk
• Statin use before a diagnosis of NODM does not increase the prevalence of 
microvascular disease; furthermore, effects on glycaemic control are small among 
individuals with diabetes mellitus
• Statin-treated patients (particularly those with risk factors for NODM) should be 
monitored for the development of dysglycaemia and given appropriate diet and 
lifestyle advice to prevent development of NODM
REVIEWS
100 | FEBRUARY 2016 | VOLUME 12 www.nature.com/nrendo
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
( 8.0.0.2542.590092787 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
Table 1 | Clinical trials of statins
Study Design Participants Statin Outcome measures Key findings
4S6 Randomized, 
double blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial to determine 
the effects of 
statin therapy on 
overall mortality
4,444 men and women 
(19%) aged 35–70 years 
with a history of 
angina pectoris or 
myocardial infarction 
and total cholesterol 
5.5–8.0mmol/l and total 
triglyceride <2.5mmol/l
Simvastatin 
20–40mg per 
day titrated to 
achieve total 
cholesterol of 
3.0–5.2mmol/l
• Primary end point: total 
mortality
• Secondary end 
point: time to first 
major coronary event 
(coronary death, definite 
or probable nonfatal 
myocardial infarction, 
resuscitated cardiac 
arrest and definite silent 
myocardial infarction)
• Simvastatin therapy reduced 
LDL cholesterol by 35% over the 
course of the study
• 256 deaths occurred in the placebo 
group compared with 182 deaths 
in the simvastatin group; RR=0.70 
(95% CI 0.58–0.85, P=0.0003)
• Major coronary events; RR=0.66 
(95% CI 0.59–0.75, P<0.00001)
JUPITER13,30 Randomized 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial to determine 
the effect of statin 
therapy on major 
cardiovascular 
events
• 17,802 healthy men 
and women (38.2%) 
with LDL cholesterol 
concentration 
<3.4mmol/l but 
hsCRP ≥2mg/l
• 41% of participants 
had the metabolic 
syndrome
Rosuvastatin 
20mg per day
Primary end point: 
occurrence of first major 
cardiovascular event 
(nonfatal myocardial 
infarction, nonfatal 
stroke hospitalization 
for unstable angina,  an 
arterial revascularization 
procedure or 
confirmed death from 
cardiovascular causes)
• Median LDL cholesterol reduced by 
50% in the treated group and hsCRP 
by 37%
• Treatment reduced the risk of major 
cardiovascular events
• Trial stopped early because of 
benefit, median follow-up 1.9 years
• 142 first major cardiovascular 
events occurred in the rosuvastatin 
group and 251 occurred in the 
placebo group (HR=0.56, 95% CI 
0.46–0.69, P<0.00001)
PROSPER18 Randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial to determine 
whether statin 
treatment would 
reduce major 
cardiovascular 
events in an 
elderly population
• 5,804 participants 
(3,000 women) with 
either pre-existing 
vascular disease or 
increased risk due to 
smoking, hypertension 
or diabetes mellitus
•Mean age 75 years, 
mean baseline 
cholesterol 5.4mmol/l 
in men and 6.0mmol/l 
in women
• Mean follow-up 
3.2 years
Pravastatin 
40mg per day
Primary end point: 
composite of coronary 
death, nonfatal 
myocardial infarction and 
fatal or nonfatal stroke
• LDL cholesterol was reduced by 
27% by pravastatin
• 408 major cardiovascular 
events occurred in the pravastatin 
group and 473 in the placebo 
group (HR=0.85, 95% CI 0.74–0.97, 
P=0.014)
WOSCOPS15 Randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial to determine 
the effect of 
statin therapy 
on the incidence 
of coronary 
heart disease
• 6,595 men aged 
45–64 years with a 
mean cholesterol level 
of 7mmol/l and no 
history of myocardial 
infarction
• Median follow-up 
4.9 years
Pravastatin 
40mg per day
Primary end point: 
composite of nonfatal 
myocardial infarction 
and death from coronary 
heart disease
• LDL cholesterol was reduced by 
26% compared with pravastatin
• 174 coronary events occurred in the 
pravastatin group and 248 occurred 
in the placebo group, RR reduction, 
31% (95% CI 17–43%, P<0.001)
TNT29 Randomized, 
double-blind trial 
to compare the 
effects of low 
and high doses of 
statin on major 
cardiovascular 
events
• 10,001 patients (81% 
male, mean age 
61 years) with clinically 
evident coronary 
heart disease and LDL 
cholesterol <3.4mmol/l 
taking atorvastatin 
10mg per day
• Median follow-up 
4.9 years
Atorvastatin 
10mg and 
80mg per day
Primary end point: 
composite of coronary 
heart disease death, 
nonfatal, nonprocedure 
related myocardial 
infarction, resuscitation 
after cardiac arrest or 
fatal or nonfatal stroke
• LDL cholesterol achieved in 
atorvastatin 80mg per day group 
2.0mmol/l and 2.6mmol/l in the 
10mg per day group
• 434 primary events occurred in the 
atorvastatin 80mg per day group 
and 548 in the 10mg per day group 
(HR 0.78, 95% CI 0.69–0.89, P<0.001)
• No difference in overall mortality 
with atorvastatin
IDEAL29 Prospective, 
randomized, 
open-label, 
blinded end point 
evaluation trial to 
compare effects 
of usual-dose 
statin to high dose 
intensive statin on 
incidence of major 
coronary events
• 8,888 patients (mean 
age 62 years, 81% 
male) aged <80 years 
with a history of acute 
myocardial infarction
• Median follow-up 
4.8 years
Simvastatin 
20mg per 
day as usual 
care and 
atorvastatin as 
intensive statin 
therapy
• Primary end point: 
composite of 
occurrence of coronary 
death, confirmed 
nonfatal acute 
myocardial infarction 
or cardiac arrest with 
resuscitation
• Composite secondary 
end point: major 
cardiovascular events 
(primary end points 
plus stroke)
• LDL cholesterol achieved in the 
simvastatin group 2.7mmol/l and 
2.1mmol/l in the atorvastatin group
• 411 events occurred in the 
atorvastatin group compared with 
463 in the simvastatin group, a RR 
reduction of 11% (HR=0.89, 95% CI 
0.78–1.01, P=0.07)
• The risk of death from any cause was 
similar in the two groups
• Composite secondary end point was 
reduced in the atorvastatin group 
(HR=0.87, 95% CI 0.78–0.98, P=0.02)
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY VOLUME 12 | FEBRUARY 2016 | 101
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
( 8.0.0.2542.1938684774 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
exhibited a 37% increase in the relative risk of developing 
NODM29. An analysis of the JUPITER trial published in 
2012 reported that rosuvastatin-treated patients with at 
least one risk factor for T2DM had a 28% increased risk 
of developing NODM; however, the risk among patients 
without any risk factors was negligible30. Nevertheless, it 
should be emphasized that the cardiovascular and mortality
benefits of statin therapy in JUPITER exceeded the 
hazard ratio for NODM, including participants at high 
risk of developing this condition.
Class effect
The question of whether statin-induced NODM is a class 
effect has been reviewed previously27,31–33. Atorvastatin, 
rosuvastatin, simvastatin, lovastatin and fluvastatin 
generally influence glycaemic parameters unfavourably
among both patients with T2DM and individuals 
without this condition; by contrast, pravastatin and 
pitavastatin seem to have neutral effects34,35.
The largest risk of NODM reported to date came 
from the 6-year follow-up of the prospective population-based METSIM cohort of 8,749 men who did not 
have diabetes mellitus, 2,142 of whom were receiving 
statin therapy at baseline36 (TABLE 1). METSIM did not 
examine the benefits of statin therapy, only the risk of 
a diagnosis of NODM. Participants receiving statins 
developed NODM more often than those not undergoing
statin treatment (11.2% versus 5.8%; P<0.001). Statin 
therapy increased NODM risk twofold, with an adjusted 
hazard ratio of 1.46 (95% CI 1.22–1.74). At enrolment, 
participants who developed NODM were older, more 
obese, less physically active, and exhibited lower levels 
of HDL cholesterol and higher levels of plasma triglycerides
, fasting plasma glucose, 2-h plasma glucose and 
HbA
1c
 than those who did not develop NODM. Both 
simvastatin and atorvastatin increased NODM risk, 
associations that remained statistically significant after 
adjustment for confounding factors, with hazard ratios 
Table 1 (cont.) | Clinical trials of statins
Study Design Participants Statin Outcome measures Key findings
SPARCL29 Randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 
trial to determine 
the effect of 
intensive statin 
therapy in the 
prevention of 
recurrent stroke
• 4,731 patients (mean 
age 63 years, 60% 
male) with a previous 
stroke or transient 
ischaemic attack 
within 1–6 months 
before study entry 
and LDL cholesterol 
concentrations 
1.9–3.3mmol/l
• Median follow-up 
4.9 years
Atorvastatin 
80mg per day
• Primary end point: first 
nonfatal or fatal stroke
• Secondary end point: 
major coronary events 
(death from cardiac 
causes, nonfatal 
myocardial infarction 
and resuscitation after 
cardiac arrest)
• LDL cholesterol levels were 
1.9mmol/l in the atorvastatin group 
and 3.3mmol/l in the placebo group
• 265 events occurred in the 
atorvastatin group compared with 
311 in the placebo group (HR=0.84, 
95% CI 0.71–0.99, P=0.03)
• No difference in overall mortality
• The secondary end point was 
reduced in the atorvastatin group 
(HR=0.65, 95% CI 0.49–0.87, 
P=0.003)
METSIM36 Prospective 
observational 
cohort study
• 8,749 nondiabetic 
male participants 
aged 45–73 years 
(mean age 57.7 years) 
were followed up for 
5.9 years
• 2,142 participants were 
on statin therapy
Simvastatin 
65.9%, 
atorvastatin 
18.1%, 
rosuvastatin 
8.6%, 
fluvastatin 3.8%, 
lovastatin 2.3%, 
pravastatin 1.3%
The development of 
T2DM and changes in 
insulin sensitivity and 
insulin secretion in those 
on statin therapy
• Participants receiving statin therapy 
had a 46% increased risk of T2DM 
(HR=1.46, 95% CI 1.22–1.74)
• The risk was dose-dependent for 
simvastatin and atorvastatin
• Insulin sensitivity was decreased by 
24% and insulin secretion by 12% in 
statin-treated participants
J-PREDICT39 Open-label, 
randomized 
controlled study 
to evaluate the 
effect of a statin on 
the incidence of 
new T2DM (WHO 
criteria) compared 
with lifestyle 
measures alone
1,269 individuals with 
impaired glucose 
tolerance (62.4% men, 
40.8% age ≥60 years)
Pitavastatin 
1–2mg per day
Primary end point: 
cumulative incidence of 
new-onset T2DM based 
on an oral 75g glucose 
tolerance test
Participants taking pitavastatin had 
an 18% lower incidence of new-onset 
T2DM than those not taking the 
statin (HR=0.82, 95% CI 0.68–0.99, 
P=0.04)
CARDS44 Randomized, 
placebocontrolled
, 
double-blind trial 
to determine 
whether statin 
therapy would 
reduce the 
occurrence of first 
cardiovascular 
events in patients 
with T2DM
2,838 patients aged 
40–75 years (mean age 
62 years, 30% women) 
with T2DM but no 
documented history 
of cardiovascular 
disease, LDL cholesterol 
≤4.14mmol/l and at least 
one other cardiovascular 
risk factor (retinopathy, 
albuminuria, current 
smoking or hypertension)
Atorvastatin 
10mg per day
Primary end point: 
time to first occurrence 
of a composite of 
major cardiovascular 
events, coronary 
heart disease death, 
nonfatal myocardial 
infarction, unstable 
angina, resuscitated 
cardiac arrest, coronary 
revascularization 
or stroke
•Trial terminated 2 years early 
because of benefit
• LDL cholesterol reduced by 40% 
from a baseline of 3mmol/l in the 
atorvastatin group
• Relative risk of a primary end 
point was reduced by 37% with 
atorvastatin (95% CI –52 to –17, 
P=0.001)
• Atorvastatin reduced death rate 
by 27%
hsCRP, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein; RR, relative risk; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus.
REVIEWS
102 | FEBRUARY 2016 | VOLUME 12 www.nature.com/nrendo
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.2036899583)
of 1.49 (95% CI 1.22–1.83) and 1.21 (95% CI 1.04–1.40), 
respectively. The risk for NODM was dose-dependent 
for both of these statins. Other statins investigated in 
METSIM did not seem to increase NODM risk; however
, the number of participants taking these agents was 
too small for reliable estimates, leaving the question of a 
class effect unanswered36.
A postmarketing Japanese surveillance study of 
patients without NODM found that pitavastatin (2mg 
per day) had no appreciable influence on various measures
of glycaemic control when compared with atorvastatin
(10mg per day)37,38. In the J-PREDICT prospective 
study of pitavastatin versus placebo (TABLE 1), treatment 
with pitavastatin was associated with an 18% lower 
incidence of T2DM among 1,269 Japanese patients with 
impaired glucose tolerance39. Conversely, a study of 
3,680 Japanese individuals without T2DM or impaired 
fasting glucose reported a 7.8% incidence of NODM 
among those receiving pitavastatin compared with 6.5% 
and 5.8% among those receiving rosuvastatin or pravastatin
, respectively, after a mean duration of 62 months40. 
Nevertheless, the results of this study should be interpreted
with caution owing to substantial limitations, 
including lack of compliance, dosage data and baseline
characteristics, among others. In 2015, the largest 
meta-analysis of pitavastatin and its effects on glucose 
metabolism and NODM incidence conducted to date 
was published41. This analysis comprised 15 studies 
(equivalent to ~1,600 person-years) and concluded that 
pitavastatin did not adversely affect glucose metabolism 
or NODM development when compared with placebo 
or other statins. However, it should be noted that most 
trials included in this analysis had only a short duration 
of follow-up (12 weeks).
Class effect data are still evolving and there are 
signs that some statins, particularly pitavastatin, could 
exhibit a potentially neutral or even favourable effect on 
glycaemic control29,31. The question of whether pitavastatin
is different from other statins regarding NODM 
remains open for discussion and the results of the studies
mentioned above should be treated with caution. 
Further head-to-head comparison studies are required 
to investigate whether the observed differences reflect 
diabetogenic  capacity per se or are simply due to differences
in study populations, the criteria used to diagnose 
NODM, or pure chance. Therefore, for the time being, it 
seems appropriate to consider NODM risk with statins 
as a class effect. Understanding the mechanisms underlying
the statin effect on glucose homeostasis might help 
to clarify this question and will be discussed later in 
this Review.
Patients with pre-existing diabetes mellitus
Given the impact of statin therapy among individuals
without pre-existing diabetes mellitus, the question
arises as to the potential effects of these drugs 
on glycaemic control among patients with established 
disease.
Such effects were investigated in a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of data collected in nine trials involving
>9,000 patients with pre-existing disease (largely 
T2DM) who were followed up for a mean of 3.6 years42. 
The mean HbA
1c
 level among participants randomly 
assigned to receive statins (various doses of atorvastatin
, pravastatin or simvastatin) was higher than 
that reported for the control groups (mean difference 
0.12%; P=0.003). As acknowledged by the authors, this 
analysis was limited by the small number of studies 
included and sparse reporting on changes in the use of 
glucose-lowering medications. Moreover, the modest 
increase in HbA
1c
 level, although statistically significant
, might have little clinical impact and so would not 
be expected to have a material effect on CVD risk43.
These results are in line with those of CARDS 
(TABLE 1). In this study, 20% of participants with diabetes
mellitus who were randomly assigned to receive 
atorvastatin (10 mg daily) versus 17% of those in the 
control group were switched to insulin or had insulin 
added to their treatment regimen by the end of the 
follow-up period44. The increased HbA
1c
 level reported 
by Erqou et al.42 was smaller than that reported in previous
meta-analyses16,17,19,21 and contrasted with the 
0.3% increase observed in JUPITER13,30 among nondiabetic
individuals receiving rosuvastatin. These 
findings raise the possibility that the effect of statins 
on glucose homeostasis is smaller in patients with 
established diabetes mellitus who are receiving glucoselowering
agents than in nondiabetic individuals. Given 
the overwhelming benefit of statins on cardiovascular
outcomes among patients with T2DM, current 
guidelines recommending statins for primary CVD 
prevention in this population should not change45.
Nondiabetic patients with pre-existing CVD
The relationship between intensive statin therapy 
and NODM among nondiabetic patients with clinically
manifest CVD has been reported46. A 15-year 
follow-up of 1,093 patients with vascular disease (coronary
artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral
artery disease or abdominal aortic aneurysm) 
confirmed an increased risk of NODM with increasing 
intensity of treatment with atorvastatin or rosuvastatin 
(OR 1.63; 95% CI 1.15–2.32). Interestingly, development 
of NODM in this high-risk cohort was independent of 
the number of components of the metabolic syndrome 
identified and was most pronounced among patients 
with low glucose levels at baseline.
Patients with lipid disorders
The impact of intensive statin therapy on NODM 
risk has been reported in small groups of patients 
with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia 
(hFH; n = 205) and familial combined hyperlipidaemia
(n = 147)47. The mean duration of follow-up was 
11 years and 10 years, respectively, and the incidence 
of NODM was 15% in the familial combined hyperlipidaemia
group and 1% in the hFH group. Given that 
patients with hFH are usually intensively treated with 
high-dose statins, this latter finding has clinically relevant
implications by confirming the absence of a statininduced
NODM risk in this group of patients, as has 
been previously reported48,49.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY VOLUME 12 | FEBRUARY 2016 | 103
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-959612293)
Mechanisms
The following section describes what is known about 
the potential mechanisms by which statins adversely 
affect glucose homeostasis. Much of the information 
comes from experiments undertaken in cell lines and 
animal models and so must be interpreted with caution 
in relation to the human situation.
A Mendelian randomization study has indicated that 
the effect of statins on NODM risk is related to a reduction 
in HMG-CoA reductase activity50. Single nucleotide polymorphisms
in the gene encoding this enzyme were chosen 
on the basis of genetic associations with LDL cholesterol 
at a genome-wide level of statistical significance; namely, 
rs17238484-G for the main analysis (as data were available 
for a large number of participants) and rs12916 for a subsidiary
analysis. These single nucleotide polymorphisms 
were measured in a large population and the relationships 
of these genetic variants with body weight, BMI, waist circumference
, plasma concentrations of glucose and insulin, 
and risk of T2DM were determined. The results provided 
evidence that reduced HMG-CoA reductase activity was 
associated with a slight increased risk of T2DM. The OR 
per allele was 1.02 (95% CI 1.00–1.05) for rs17238484-G 
and 1.06 (95% CI 1.03–1.09) for the rs12916 allele. The 
effect was associated with an appreciable increase in body 
weight, a known contributory factor to the development 
of diabetes mellitus; however, it is unlikely that this change 
fully explains the observed increased risk. This association 
suggests that the risk of NODM is related to the degree of 
inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase activity and, therefore, 
to the potency of the statin50.
Statins could potentially increase plasma levels of 
glucose and NODM risk through increased insulin 
resistance (FIG. 1) or impaired β-cell function (FIG. 2) or 
Table 2 | Meta-analysis of statin trials and incidence of NODM
Meta-analysis Studies included 
(n)
Participants 
included (n)
Statin Outcome measurements Key findings
Coleman et al.
(2008)16
5 39,791 Pravastatin, 
simvastatin, 
atorvastatin, 
rosuvastatin
Incidence of NODM • Statins as a class did not demonstrate 
a statistically significant impact on a 
patient’s risk of developing NODM
• Apart from pravastatin, the other 
statins were associated with a 
significantly increased risk of NODM
Rajpathak et al.
(2009)21
6 57,593 Pravastatin, 
simvastatin, 
atorvastatin, 
rosuvastatin
Incidence of NODM • Statin therapy greatly reduces 
cardiovascular risk, including among 
patients with diabetes mellitus and 
those at risk of diabetes mellitus
• Relationship of statin therapy to 
NODM remains uncertain
Sattar et al.
(2010)17
13 91,140 Pravastatin, 
simvastatin, 
atorvastatin, 
rosuvastatin, 
lovastatin
Incidence of NODM Statin therapy was associated with a 
slightly increased risk (11%) of NODM, 
but the risk was low both in absolute 
terms and in relation to the reduction in 
coronary events
Baker et al. (2010)73 16 1,146 Pravastatin, 
atorvastatin, 
rosuvastatin, 
simvastatin
Risk of developing NODM Use of statins as a class was not 
associated with a significant effect on 
insulin sensitivity in patients without 
diabetes mellitus
Preiss et al.
(2011)19
5 32,752 Atorvastatin, 
simvastatin
Incidence of NODM, 
major cardiovascular 
events
• Intensive-dose statin therapy 
was associated with an increased 
risk of NODM compared with 
moderate-dose statin therapy
• Intensive statin therapy was 
associated with fewer major 
cardiovascular events than 
moderate-dose therapy
Erqou et al.
(2014)42
9 9,696 Atorvastatin, 
simvastatin, 
pravastatin
Incidence of NODM, 
cardiovascular disease, 
endothelial dysfunction, 
LDL cholesterol 
concentration
Statin treatment is associated with a 
modest increase in HbA
1c
 in patients 
with established diabetes mellitus
Dormuth et al.
(2014)22
8 
(population-based 
cohort studies)
139,966 • Higher potency 
statins: 
atorvastatin, 
rosuvastatin, 
simvastatin
• Lower potency 
statin: all 
the others
Hospitalization for NODM, 
prescription for insulin or 
an oral antidiabetic drug
Higher potency statin use is associated 
with a moderate increase in the risk of 
NODM compared with lower potency 
statins in patients treated for secondary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease
NODM, new-onset diabetes mellitus.
REVIEWS
104 | FEBRUARY 2016 | VOLUME 12 www.nature.com/nrendo
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.2022717717)
Nature Reviews | Endocrinology
Statins
Glucose Insulin
Rab4
RhoA
P P IRS-1
P P IRS-2
P P IRS-3
P P IRS-4
PKC P
PDK1 PI
p85
p110
P P P
P P
GLUT4
AKT
FOXO1 GSK3β BAD
P
P
P P
NLRP3 IL-1β
a combination of these two processes. The mechanisms 
by which statins affect glucose homeostasis remain to 
be determined fully. Much data derives from in vitro
studies in isolated cell systems or animal models, which 
might or might not be relevant to the in vivo situation 
in humans.
Insulin resistance
In vitro studies. The enlarged adipose cells typically 
found in obesity and T2DM are resistant to the actions 
of insulin51–53. Such resistance is related to a reduction 
in membrane cholesterol levels and increased fluidity as 
nonesterified cholesterol accumulates with triglyceride in 
the cell54,55. Depleted membrane cholesterol is associated 
with activation of SREBP2 and its target genes involved 
in cholesterol homeostasis3. In addition, expression of 
adipocyte-derived mediators (for example, IL-6, tumour 
necrosis factor and angiotensinogen) is increased, as is 
expression of proteins involved in energy metabolism 
(for example, glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4), fatty 
acid synthase and UCP3)56–58.
This situation can be reproduced in adipocytes 
derived from a variety of rodent models and in 
3T3-L1 cells by depleting membrane cholesterol with 
methyl-β-cyclodextrin59. In such studies, 3T3-L1 
fibroblasts (preadipocytes) are grown to confluence 
and then induced to differentiate into adipocytes by the 
addition of methylisobutylxanthine, dexamethasone 
and insulin to the culture medium. Membrane cholesterol
depletion has also been achieved in cells grown in 
cholesterol-free culture medium that contains mevastatin
(also known as compactin; an early form of statin 
that was not developed commercially)59. Cholesterol 
depletion was associated with decreased gene expression 
and protein content of GLUT4 but increased GLUT1 
(REF. 59). In the same cell line (that is, differentiated 
3T3-L1 cells and isolated rat adipocytes), depletion of 
membrane cholesterol resulted in a marked reduction 
in tyrosine-specific phosphorylation of insulin receptor 
substrate 1 (IRS-1) in response to insulin60. One hypothesis
is that membrane caveolae (specialized small lipid 
rafts important in signal transduction and endocytosis), 
where insulin receptors are located, are disrupted by 
cholesterol depletion61.
Incubation with lovastatin downregulated expression
of GLUT4 and inhibited insulin-stimulated glucose 
transport in 3T3-L1 adipocytes62. These effects were 
reversed by addition of mevalonate, the product of the 
reaction catalysed by HMG-CoA reductase. This finding
suggests that reduction in the levels of isoprenoid 
intermediates, such as the farnesyl and geranylgeranyl 
pyrophosphates, in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway
is responsible for insulin resistance62. Studies in 
differentiated 3T3-L1 cells have compared the effects 
of atorvastatin (a hydrophobic statin) and pravastatin 
(a hydrophilic statin)63. Hydrophobic compounds can 
penetrate cell membranes, whereas hydrophilic compounds
can enter cells only via transmembrane transporters.
Atorvastatin, but not pravastatin, reduced 
insulin-mediated glucose uptake owing to impaired 
translocation of GLUT4 to the cell membrane and 
reduced insulin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of 
IRS-1 and serine–threonine phosphorylation of AKT. 
(FIG. 1) This effect was associated with reduced membrane
concentrations of the small GTP-binding proteins
Rab4 and RhoA, which require isoprenylation for 
anchoring to cell membranes when activated. These 
changes were reversed by the addition of mevalonate, 
which suggests that inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase 
reduces the available isoprene residues. Rab4 is important
for facilitating translocation of GLUT4 to the 
cell membrane; this protein also acts with RhoA in 
the insulin signal transduction pathway63.
Isoprene residues are required for the synthesis of 
Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), a molecule in which 10 isoprene
units are attached to the quinone group. CoQ10 has 
a central role in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation 
and the generation of ATP. Co-administration of CoQ10 
prevented reduced GLUT4 expression by simvastatin in 
3T3-L1 adipocytes64,65.
Considerable evidence exists to implicate activation
of the innate immune system in the pathogenesis 
of insulin resistance65,66. IL-1β causes insulin resistance 
in murine and human adipocytes by downregulation 
of IRS-1 expression67,68. Maturation and secretion of 
IL-1β depends on the activation of NLRP3 (REFS 69,70). 
Figure 1 | Potential sites of action of statins on cellular insulin action identified 
from in vitro studies. Insulin receptor tyrosine kinase is activated by insulin, which 
results in the tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1). The serine–
threonine kinase AKT is subsequently activated, which facilitates the movement of 
storage vesicles containing glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) to the cell membrane. 
The transmembrane protein, GLUT4, enables glucose to enter the cell. Tyrosine 
phosphorylated IRS-1 has binding sites for key signalling proteins, including the p85 
and p110 subunits of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, which through activation of the 
AKT and protein kinase 3 (PKC) cascades has a major role in insulin function. 
Activated AKT induces glycogen synthesis through inhibition of glycogen synthase 
kinase 3β (GSK3β), protein synthesis and cell survival by inhibiting Bcl-2-associated 
death promoter (BAD; a proapoptotic factor), forkhead box protein O1 (FOXO1; 
a transcription factor) and GSK3β. P, phosphate group; PI, phosphatidylinositol. 
Reprinted from Banach, M. et al. Statin therapy and new-onset diabetes: molecular 
mechanisms and clinical relevance. Curr. Pharm. Des.19, 4904–4912 (2013) © with 
permission from Bentham Science.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY VOLUME 12 | FEBRUARY 2016 | 105
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1729081968)
Increased expression of NLRP3 has been detected in 
monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) isolated from 
patients with T2DM at both the mRNA and protein 
level71. NLRP3 and mitochondrial reactive oxygen species 
were required for IL-1β synthesis in these cells.
The effects of statins on the activation of NLRP3 in 
MDMs were extensively investigated in one study72. 
When administered at concentrations similar to 
those achieved in vivo, lovastatin, simvastatin, atorvastatin
and fluvastatin increased the secretion of IL-1β 
(a surrogate marker for NLRP3 activation; FIG. 1). These 
effects were not observed in tissue from mice lacking
NLRP3. Co-incubation with geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate
blocked the effect of statins. Furthermore, 
glyburide—which had previously been shown to inhibit 
the NLRP3 inflammasome—blocked the statin-mediated 
increase in 1L-1β secretion. Long-term oral administration
of fluvastatin to leptin-deficient ob/ob mice reduced 
in vivo insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in white adipose 
tissue. In addition, insulin resistance was demonstrated 
in explants of adipose tissue following activation of the 
NLRP3–caspase pathway and this was blocked by glyburide.
Fluvastatin impaired insulin signalling in adipocytes 
primed with lipopolysaccharide. In this model, IL-1β 
secretion was not increased but the effect was associated 
with increased activity of caspase 1 (REF. 72). These results 
suggest that statins cause insulin resistance by activating 
NLRP3; however, whether this effect is relevant to the 
in vivo human situation remains to be confirmed.
In vivo studies. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
studies in which statins were compared to controls either 
in parallel or in a cross-over design was undertaken to 
assess effects on insulin action in vivo73. This approach 
has the advantage of pooling results from small studies 
to increase statistical power but the disadvantage of including
groups of patients that differ in NODM risk, statin 
dose and treatment duration. Overall, when compared 
with the control groups, no statistically significant effect 
of statins on insulin sensitivity was found. However, 
when the pravastatin studies were pooled, an improvement
in insulin sensitivity was observed (standardized 
mean difference 0.342, 95% CI 0.032–0.621; P=0.03). By 
contrast, when the simvastatin studies were pooled, a significant
decrease in insulin sensitivity was found (standardized
mean difference –0.321, 95% CI –0.526 to –0.112; 
P=0.03). No significant effect on insulin sensitivity was 
observed with rosuvastatin or atorvastatin. The investigators
concluded that there did seem to be differences 
between statins (particularly pravastatin and simvastatin) 
on insulin sensitivity73.
Alterations in the concentration of adiponectin (an 
adipokine) could link statin therapy to insulin resistance
and NODM32. Levels of adiponectin are inversely 
related to visceral obesity and insulin resistance74, with 
high levels associated with a substantially reduced risk 
of T2DM in a large systematic review75, irrespective of 
ethnic background. Specific single nucleotide polymorphisms
of the gene encoding adiponectin predict low 
levels of this protein and increased risk of T2DM76–78. 
Given this background, potential effects of statins on 
adiponectin levels have been systematically reviewed31. 
Contradictory findings were observed with the same 
drug. For example, 10 of 23 studies of simvastatin showed 
a decrease in adiponectin levels, 11 found no change and 
two reported an increase. Taking the individual studies 
together, pravastatin and rosuvastatin were more effective
in increasing adiponectin than atorvastatin, whereas 
simvastatin seemed to decrease adiponectin levels. The 
most consistent findings were with pitavastatin: nine of 
10 studies reported an increase in adiponectin levels.
β-cell function
In vitro studies. Over the past decade, it has become clear 
that cholesterol-rich lipoproteins have important roles in 
β-cell function. Cellular cholesterol loading impairs β-cell 
function, proliferation and survival, whereas cholesterol 
efflux restores both biological function and survival. 
These effects depend on the function of the LDL receptor 
for cholesterol entry and the ATP-binding cassette transporters
for cholesterol exit79–86. Furthermore, given that 
isoprenoids are crucial for the post-translational modification
of Rab4 and RhoA, statins could potentially affect 
β-cell function, at least in vitro.
Glucose-induced insulin secretion from intact rat 
pancreatic islets was decreased by ~50% by lovastatin 
(15–30μM)87. This effect was abolished by co-incubation 
with mevalonate. The observed reduction in insulin 
release was paralleled by accumulation of G proteins in 
the cytosol, which is indicative of a reduced association 
with the cell membrane (where G proteins are important 
for trafficking secretory granules)87. Similar results with 
lovastatin were reported in an insulin-secreting cell line88.
Simvastatin (0.1–3.0μg/ml) inhibited the glucoseinduced
first phase increase and oscillation of cytosolic 
calcium concentration in β cells isolated from rat pancreatic
islets in a dose-dependent manner89. The hydrophilic
statin pravastatin (100μg/ml) had no effect89. These 
results are not surprising given the crucial role of cytosolic
calcium in insulin secretion. The use of patch–clamp 
techniques suggested that simvastatin, but not pravastatin
, reversibly inhibited the β-cell L-type calcium channel 
(FIG. 2) and inhibited the rise in cytosolic calcium induced 
by L-arginine and potassium chloride, which exert their 
effects by opening L-type calcium channels89.
A further study investigated the mechanisms by 
which simvastatin inhibits glucose-stimulated insulin 
release in a mouse β-cell line90. Simvastatin reduced 
ATP production in a dose-dependent manner. ATP is an 
essential regulator of insulin secretion through effects on 
the K
ATP
 channel, membrane depolarization and subsequent
opening of calcium channels (FIG. 2). Reductions in 
mRNA and protein expression of GLUT2 and the voltage-dependent calcium channel were also found, as well 
as an increase in the expression of the Kir6.2 potassium 
channel90. These findings indicate that simvastatin can 
affect insulin secretion indirectly by reducing glucose 
uptake via GLUT2 and directly by inhibiting membrane 
depolarization and calcium influx (FIG. 2).
Conflicting data exist regarding the effects of 
statins on β cells in animal models. Atorvastatin 
(30mg/kg daily) preserved β-cell function (measured by 
REVIEWS
106 | FEBRUARY 2016 | VOLUME 12 www.nature.com/nrendo
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
↑
↑
Nature Reviews | Endocrinology
HMG-CoA Cholesterol
1
3
4
5
2
Plasma LDL cholesterol Glucose
Ca2+
GLUT2
Glucokinase
Mitochondria
CoQ10
isoprenoids
Acetyl
CoA
ATP
LDL
receptor
LDL
cholesterol 
Small
G proteins
↓
↓
↓
Statins
K+
Ca2+
channel
K
ATP
channel
Insulin
the hyperglycaemic clamp) in C57BL/6J mice fed a highfat
diet91.Histological analysis revealed that statin-treated 
animals had a larger insulin-positive β-cell area than animals
not treated with statin. Statin treatment seemed to 
exert a positive effect by reducing measures of endoplasmic
reticulum stress91. The endoplasmic reticulum is the 
intracellular site of insulin protein folding. In addition, 
evidence of β-cell proliferation and reduced apoptosis 
was found.
Why such marked differences in the effects of statins
have been observed in experimental studies is not 
straightforward to explain but could relate to the dose 
and specific animal system used. Perhaps in the case of 
C57BL/6J mice with diet-induced obesity, the beneficial 
effects of atorvastatin on plasma levels of lipids and endoplasmic
reticulum stress compensated for other potentially
deleterious effects, as seen in other experimental 
systems (discussed in a previous section).
In vivo studies. Mita et al.92 used the insulinogenic index93
to compare the effects of a 10mg daily dose of either 
pravastatin (hydrophilic) or atorvastatin (lipophilic) on 
β-cell function among patients with T2DM of short duration
in an open 12-week crossover study with a 4-week 
washout period. The insulinogenic index is derived from 
glucose and insulin measurements during an oral glucose 
tolerance test. The disposition index evaluates β-cell function
in relation to insulin sensitivity and is derived as the 
product of the insulinogenic index and the whole-body 
insulin sensitivity index94. Pravastatin therapy resulted 
in a higher disposition index than atorvastatin therapy, 
which is indicative of a beneficial effect on β-cell function
; however, it should be noted that the study lacked a 
placebo control group.
The follow-up study of the METSIM cohort provided
important prospective data on the effect of different
statins on NODM, as well as measures of β-cell 
function and insulin sensitivity36. Various parameters 
were used to assess β-cell function in this analysis. After 
a mean follow-up of 5.9 years, participants receiving statins
showed a marked increase in 2h glucose levels and 
the area under the curve of the oral glucose tolerance 
test. Insulin sensitivity and secretion decreased by 24% 
and 12%, respectively, among statin-treated individuals 
at a fasting glucose level <5.0 mmol/l compared with 
the participants who did not receive statins (P<0.01). 
The most marked effect on these parameters was seen 
with simvastatin and atorvastatin.
Indirect support for a potential role of statins in 
upregulating LDL receptors, leading to cholesterol accumulation
and β-cell dysfunction, came from a study of 
patients with hFH50. A total of 63,320 individuals with 
a first degree relative who had a confirmed mutation in 
either the gene encoding the LDL receptor or the gene 
encoding apolipoprotein B were screened and 25,137 new 
cases were identified. Degrees of severity in terms of LDL 
receptor activity were defined by grouping patients with 
receptor-defective mutations and receptor-null mutations.
In addition, individuals with apolipoprotein B 
mutations were considered least severe in terms of LDL-
receptor function. The hypothesis tested in the study 
was whether transmembrane cholesterol transport via 
the LDL receptor was a possible explanation for the 
link between statins and NODM; in other words, would 
patients with hFH who had genetically reduced LDL 
receptor activity exhibit a reduced likelihood of developing
T2DM? The prevalence of T2DM was indeed reduced 
among these patients; an apparent gradient of risk was 
observed, with individuals who had receptor-negative 
mutations being at the lowest risk.
Reduced levels of CoQ10 are likely to influence β-cell 
function. Impaired glucose tolerance, decreased insulin
sensitivity index, reduced muscle levels of CoQ10 
and decreased oxidative phosphorylation capacity were 
detected in skeletal muscle biopsy samples taken from 
individuals treated with simvastatin95. These observations
support the hypothesis that the effects of statins on 
CoQ10 translate into reduced mitochondrial function; 
however, whether a similar situation occurs in β cells 
remains to be determined.
Figure 2 | Potential sites of action of statins on β-cell function identified from 
in vitro studies. (1) Statins reduce mRNA and protein expression of GLUT2, limiting 
glucose uptake. (2) Statins upregulate LDL receptors and cholesterol uptake. Cholesterol 
loading impairs β-cell function, proliferation and survival. (3) Statins reduce Coenzyme 
Q10 (CoQ10) levels secondary to inhibition of the mevalonate pathway impairing 
mitochondrial electron transport and ATP production. ATP is an essential regulator of 
insulin secretion through effects on K
ATP
 channels, membrane depolarization and 
subsequent calcium channel opening. (4) Statins inhibit L-type calcium channels and the 
rise in cytosolic calcium levels that is required for insulin secretion. (5) Statins reduce 
isoprene synthesis impairing the post-translational modification of small G proteins, 
which are important in insulin-containing granule exocytosis. Reprinted from Sattar, N. 
& Taskinen, M. R. Statins are diabetogenic—myth or reality? Atheroscler. Suppl. 13, 1–10 
(2012) © with permission from Elsevier.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY VOLUME 12 | FEBRUARY 2016 | 107
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Clinical implications
The in vitro and in vivo data indicate that statins cause 
a small but statistically significant increase in NODM 
risk, particularly when used as intensive therapy. 
Unfortunately, however, no strong evidence base exists 
to provide practical guidance for clinicians. As this topic 
has been reviewed elsewhere27,96–98, the authors’ personal 
views will be presented here.
The availability of the statin class of drugs has 
transformed not only secondary prevention of CVD 
but also primary prevention among individuals at 
moderate-to-high risk. Nevertheless, it is possible 
that statins have been victims of their own success 
in that their use has been discussed for individuals at 
rather low absolute risk, leading to some controversy 
among scientific journals and the lay media given the 
potential risk of NODM. These discussions and controversies
should not, however, distract physicians 
from pursuing statin therapy as part of the overall 
risk management of individuals considered to be at 
medium-to-high risk of CVD.
Overall, the numbers are compelling in relation to 
statin benefit in prevention of CVD events versus the 
potential harm of NODM. One study estimated that 
4 years’ treatment with a standard dose of statins would 
lead to one additional case of T2DM but prevent nine 
major CVD events17. The effect of intensive statin therapy
versus standard therapy can be expressed as a number
needed-to-harm for NODM of 498 and a number 
needed-to-treat for CVD benefit of 155 (REF. 17). These 
estimates equate in absolute terms to three additional 
T2DM cases and ~6.5 fewer first major CVD events per 
1,000 patient-years of treatment.
The effect of statins on NODM is most pronounced 
among individuals with risk factors for T2DM, as was 
seen in JUPITER13. No NODM cases occurred and 
86 CVD events were prevented among those lacking 
T2DM risk factors. By contrast, the numbers of NODM 
cases and CVD events prevented were 54 and 134, 
respectively, among participants with T2DM risk factors.
The JUPITER investigators calculated that statin 
therapy brought forward the diagnosis of NODM by 
5.4 weeks on average, indicating that CVD benefit outweighs
NODM harm even among individuals at high 
risk of T2DM13.
The possibility of NODM should clearly form part 
of the management discussion with individual patients. 
However, in our opinion, the initiation of statin therapy 
among individuals at moderate-to-high CVD risk should 
be driven by the evidence base from RCTs, individual 
patient characteristics, comorbidities, co-medications 
and the lipid profile. The issue of NODM should not 
influence this approach. Nevertheless, what might have 
been lost from the clinic given the success of statins is 
the importance of diet and lifestyle management, which 
should remain centre stage for all patients. The extent to 
which these factors could protect against NODM related 
to statins is unknown but the robust data on benefit in 
reduction of T2DM development seen in prospective 
trials of diet and lifestyle among those at risk of NODM 
should encourage physicians to be optimistic99–103.
T2DM brings the risk of microvascular disease as 
well as of CVD. In this regard, the findings of a Danish 
report are reassuring about the impact of statin therapy104. A total of 15,679 statin users were randomly 
selected from a database and matched at a ratio of 1:3 
with 47,037 individuals who did not receive statins 
before a diagnosis of T2DM. The investigators tested 
whether statin use amplified the risk of microvascular 
complications in the general population with T2DM. 
During 215,725 person-years of follow-up, participants
who used statins before a diagnosis of T2DM 
had lower incidences of retinopathy, neuropathy and 
foot gangrene than patients who did not use statins 
before being diagnosed with T2DM (P ≤0.01 for all 
measures). The investigators concluded that statin use 
before T2DM diagnosis was not associated with an 
increased risk of microvascular disease during longterm
follow-up104. Indeed, their observations raised the 
possibility of a protective effect associated with statin 
use; however, this hypothesis would have to be tested 
in additional studies.
The issue of potential exacerbation of microvascular
disease among patients with diabetes mellitus who 
are treated with statins is also a possibility if glycaemic 
control is adversely affected. This effect seems unlikely, 
however, given that the impact of statins on glycaemia 
seems to be less pronounced among individuals with 
diabetes mellitus. In general, microvascular events 
were not well-recorded in RCTs as the emphasis of the 
study design was on macrovascular events. However, 
there does seem to be a positive effect on the progression
of renal disease among patients with diabetes 
mellitus who were treated with statins105.
Other lipid-regulating drugs could influence glucose
homeostasis. Cumulative data have demonstrated
that nicotinic acid therapy is associated with 
an increased risk of impaired glucose tolerance and 
NODM, whereas the bile-acid sequestrant colesevelam
reduces blood levels of glucose. Fibrates seem to 
have a neutral effect on the development of NODM 
and might exert slight beneficial effects on glucose 
metabolism106,107.
Conclusions
No drug class can be entirely free of adverse effects 
and the statin–dysglycaemia effect has come to attention
through robustly performed RCTs. However, this 
potential effect should not cast any doubt on the overwhelming
evidence that the benefits of statins vastly 
outweigh their risks. The demonstrated benefits of 
statins in reducing the development of cardiovascular 
diseases in individuals with or without diabetes mellitus
should remain foremost in our consideration to 
prescribe these drugs. Statin-treated patients at high 
risk of developing T2DM should be monitored regularly
for changes in blood glucose and HbA
1c
 levels. 
The risk of conversion from prediabetes to T2DM 
should be reduced by intensifying lifestyle modifications.
If a patient develops NODM while receiving statins
, therapy should be continued and NODM managed 
in accordance with the appropriate national guidelines.
REVIEWS
108 | FEBRUARY 2016 | VOLUME 12 www.nature.com/nrendo
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
( 8.0.0.2542.1162074591 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004816.pub5
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004816.pub5
[Link]
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm293101.htm
[Link]
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm293101.htm
1. Endo, A. The discovery and development of HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors. J. Lipid Res. 33, 1569–1582 
(1992).
2. Goldstein, J. L. & Brown, M. S. The LDL receptor. 
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 29, 431–438 (2009).
3. Brown, M. S. & Goldstein, J. L. The SREBP pathway: 
regulation of cholesterol metabolism by proteolysis 
of a membrane-bound transcription factor. Cell 89, 
331–340 (1997).
4. Hunninghake, D. B. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. 
Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 3, 22–28 (1992).
5. Slater, E. E. & MacDonald, J. S. Mechanism of 
action and biological profile of HMG CoA reductase 
inhibitors. A new therapeutic alternative. Drugs
36 (Suppl. 3), 72–82 (1988).
6. [No authors listed] Randomised trial of cholesterol 
lowering in 4444 patients with coronary heart disease: 
the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). 
Lancet 344, 1383–1389 (1994).
7. Baigent, C. et al. Efficacy and safety of cholesterollowering
treatment; prospective meta-analysis of data 
from 90,056 participants in 14 randomized trials of 
statins. Lancet 366, 1276–1278 (2005).
8. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaborators. 
Efficacy of cholesterol lowering therapy in 18,686 
people with diabetes in 14 randomised trials of statins: 
a meta-analysis. Lancet 371, 117–125 (2008).
9. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration. 
Efficacy and safety of more intensive lowering of LDL 
cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 170,000 
participants in 26 randomized trials. Lancet 376, 
1670–1681 (2010).
10. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ (CTT) Collaboration. 
The effects of lowering LDL-cholesterol with statin 
therapy in people at low risk of vascular disease: 
meta-analysis of individual data from 27 randomized 
trials. Lancet 380, 581–590 (2012).
11. Taylor, F. et al. Statins for the primary prevention 
of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, Issue 1. Art. No.: CD004816. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004816.
pub5.
12. Armitage, J. The safety of statins in clinical practice. 
Lancet 370, 1781–1790 (2007).
13. Ridker, P. M. et al. Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular 
events in men and women with elevated C-reactive 
protein. N. Engl. J. Med. 359, 2195–2207 (2008).
14. FDA. FDA drug safety communication: important 
safety label changes to cholesterol-lowering statin 
drugs. FDA [online], http://www.fda.gov/drugs/
drugsafety/ucm293101.htm (2012).
15. Freeman, D. J. et al. Pravastatin and the 
development of diabetes mellitus: evidence for a 
protective treatment effect in the West of Scotland 
Coronary Prevention Study. Circulation 103, 357–362 
(2001).
16. Coleman, C. I., Reinhart, K., Kluger, J. & White, C.M. 
The effect of statins on the development of new-onset 
type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Curr. Med. Res. Opin. 24, 1359–1362 
(2008).
17. Sattar, N. et al. Statins and risk of incident diabetes: 
a collaborative meta-analysis of randomised statin 
trials. Lancet 375, 735–742 (2010).
18. Shepherd, J. et al. Pravastatin in elderly individuals 
at risk of vascular disease (PROSPER): a randomized 
controlled trial. Lancet 360, 1623–1630 (2002).
19. Preiss, D. et al. Risk of incident diabetes with intensivedose
compared with moderate-dose statin therapy: 
a meta-analysis. JAMA 305, 2556–2564 (2011).
20. Waters, D. D. et al. Cardiovascular event reduction 
versus new-onset diabetes during atorvastatin 
therapy: effect of baseline risk factors for diabetes. 
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 61, 148–152 (2013).
21. Rajpathak, S. N. et al. Statin therapy and risk of 
developing type 2 diabetes: a meta-analysis. 
Diabetes Care 32, 1924–1929 (2009).
22. Dormuth, C. R. et al. Higher potency statins and the 
risk of new diabetes: multicentre, observational study 
of administrative databases. BMJ 348, g3244 
(2014).
23. Mora, S. et al. Statins for the primary prevention of 
cardiovascular events in women with elevated highsensitivity
C-reactive protein or dyslipidemia: results 
from the Justification for the Use of Statins in 
Prevention: An Intervention Trial Evaluating 
Rosuvastatin (JUPITER) and meta-analysis of women 
from primary prevention trials. Circulation 121, 
1069–1077 (2010).
24. Chan, D. C. & Watts, G. F. Dyslipidemia in the 
metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes: 
pathogenesis, priorities, pharmacotherapies. 
Expert Opin. Pharmacother. 12, 13–30 (2011).
25. Culver, A. L. et al. Statin use and risk of diabetes 
mellitus in postmenopausal women in the Women’s 
Health Initiative. Arch. Intern. Med. 172, 144–152 
(2012).
26. Ruscica, M., Macchi, C., Morlotti, B., Sirtori, C.R. 
& Magni, P. Statin therapy and related risk of newonset
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Eur. J. Intern. Med. 25, 
401–406 (2014).
27. Sattar, N. A. et al. The use of statins in people at risk 
of developing diabetes mellitus: evidence and 
guidance for clinical practice. Atheroscler. Suppl. 15, 
1–15 (2014).
28. Sekhar, M. S. & Unnikrishnan, M. K. South-Asian 
population has a higher likelihood for diabetes risk 
for statins regardless of potency. Med. Hypotheses
84, 283–284 (2015).
29. Waters, D. D. et al. Predictors of new-onset diabetes in 
patients treated with atorvastatin: results from 3 large 
randomized trials. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 57, 
1535–1545 (2011).
30. Ridker, P. M. et al. Cardiovascular benefits and 
diabetes risk of statin therapy in primary prevention: 
an analysis from the JUPITER trial. Lancet 380, 
565–571 (2012).
31. Arnaboldi, L. & Corsini, A. Could changes in 
adiponectin drive the effect of statins on the risk 
of new-onset diabetes? The case of pitavastatin. 
Atheroscler. Suppl. 16, 1–27 (2015).
32. Chan, D. C., Pang, J. & Watts, G. F. Pathogenesis 
and management of the diabetogenic effect of 
statins: a role for adiponectin and coenzyme Q10. 
Curr. Atheroscler. Rep. 17, 472 (2015).
33. Sabatine, M. S. et al. High-dose atorvastatin 
associated with worse glycemic control: a PROVE-IT 
TIMI 22 sub study [abstract]. Circulation 110, S834 
(2004).
34. Sasaki, J., Iwashita, M. & Kono, M. Statins: beneficial 
or adverse for glucose metabolism. J. Atheroscler.
Thromb. 13, 123–129 (2006).
35. Chapman, M. J. et al. Effect of high-dose pitavastatin 
on glucose homeostasis in patients at elevated risk of 
new-onset diabetes: insights from the CAPTAIN and 
PREVAIL-US studies. Curr. Med. Res. Opin. 30, 
775–784 (2014).
36. Cederberg, H. et al. Increased risk of diabetes with 
statin treatment is associated with impaired insulin 
sensitivity and insulin secretion: a 6 year follow-up 
study of the METSIM cohort. Diabetologia 58, 
1109–1117 (2015).
37. Yamakawa, T. et al. Influence of pitavastatin on 
glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. J. Atheroscler. Thromb. 15, 269–275 (2008).
38. Teramoto, T. et al. New evidence on pitavastatin: 
efficacy and safety in clinical studies. Expert Opin. 
Pharmacother. 11, 817–828 (2010).
39. Odawara, M. et al. Pitavastatin for the delay or 
prevention of diabetes development in individuals 
with impaired glucose tolerance. American Diabetes 
Association [online], http://www.abstractsonline.com/
plan/ViewAbstract.aspx?mID=3217&sKey=
0687e7c8-c97d-442b-92ec-ae505e051854&cKey=
b4ea3c2f-884e-44d3-b9b1-86846eadbd1d&mKey=
89918d6d-3018-4ea9-9d4f-711f98a7ae5d (2013).
40. Cho, Y. et al. Risk of diabetes in patients treated with 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. Metabolism 64, 
482–488 (2015).
41. Vallejo-Vaz, A. J. et al. Effect of pitavastatin on glucose, 
HbA1c and incident diabetes: a meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled clinical trials in individuals 
without diabetes. Atherosclerosis 241, 409–418 
(2015).
42. Erqou, S., Lee, C. C. & Adler, A. I. Statins and glycemic 
control in individuals with diabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Diabetologia 57, 2444–2452 
(2014).
43. Ray, K. K. et al. Effect of intensive control of glucose on 
cardiovascular outcomes and death in patients with 
diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Lancet 373, 1765–1772 (2009).
44. Colhoun, H. M. et al. Primary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease with atorvastatin in type 2 
diabetes in the Collaborative Atorvastatin Diabetes 
Study (CARDS): multicenter randomized placebocontrolled
trial. Lancet 364, 685–696 (2004).
45. Swerdlow, D. I. & Sattar, N. A dysglycaemic effect of 
statins in diabetes: relevance to clinical practice? 
Diabetologia 57, 2433–2435 (2014).
46. van de Woestijne, A. P., van der Graaf, Y., Westerink, J., 
Nathoe, H. M. & Visseren, F. L. Effect of statin therapy 
on incident type 2 diabetes mellitus in patients with 
clinically manifest vascular disease. Am. J. Cardiol.
115, 441–446 (2015).
47. Skoumas, J. et al. Statin therapy and risk of 
diabetes in patients with heterozygous familial 
hypercholesterolemia or familial combined 
hyperlipidemia. Atherosclerosis 237, 140–145 
(2014).
48. Panz, V., Immelman, A., Paiker, J., Pilcher, G. & Raal, F. 
High-dose statin therapy does not induce insulin 
resistance in patients with familial 
hypercholesterolemia. Metab. Syndr. Relat. Disord. 10, 
351–357 (2012).
49. Besseling, J., Kastelein, J. J., Defesche, J. C., 
Hutton, B. A. & Hovingh, G. K. Association between 
familial hypercholesterolaemia and prevalence of 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA 313, 1029–1036 
(2015).
50. Swerdlow, D. J. et al. HMG-coenzyme A reductase 
inhibition, type 2 diabetes, and bodyweight: evidence 
from genetic analysis and randomised trials. Lancet
385, 351–361 (2015).
51. Czech, M. P. Cellular basis of insulin insensitivity in 
large rat adipocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 57, 1523–1532 
(1976).
52. Olefsky, J. M. Mechanisms of decreased insulin 
responsiveness of large adipocytes. Endocrinology
100, 1169–1177 (1977).
53. Friedman, J. M. Obesity in the new millennium. 
Nature 404, 632–634 (2000).
54. Kovanen, P. T., Nikkila, E. A. & Miettinen, T. A. 
Regulation of cholesterol synthesis and storage in 
fat cells. J. Lipid Res. 16, 211–223 (1975).
55. Krause, B. R. & Hartman, A. D. Adipose tissue and 
cholesterol metabolism. J. Lipid Res. 25, 97–110 
(1984).
56. Van Harmelen, V. et al. Increased adipose 
angiotensinogen gene expression in human obesity. 
Obes. Res. 8, 337–341 (2000).
57. Hotamisligil, G. S., Shargill, N. S. & Spiegelman, B. M. 
Adipose expression of tumour necrosis factor-α: 
a direct role in obesity-linked insulin resistance. 
Science 259, 87–91 (1993).
58. Fried, S. K., Bunkin, D. A. & Greenberg, S. A. Omental 
and subcutaneous adipose tissues of obese subjects 
release interleukin-6, depot difference and regulation 
by glucocorticoid. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 83, 
847–850 (1998).
59. Le Lay, S. et al. Cholesterol, a cell size-dependent 
signal that regulates glucose metabolism and gene 
expression in adipocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 
16904–16910 (2001).
60. Parpal, S., Karlsson, M., Thorn, H. & Strålfors, P. 
Cholesterol depletion disrupts caveolae and insulin 
receptor signalling for metabolic control via insulin 
receptor substrate-1 but not for mitogen-activated 
protein kinase control. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 
9670–9678 (2001).
61. Gustavasson, J. et al. Localization of the insulin 
receptor in caveolae of adipocyte plasma membrane. 
FASEB J. 13, 1961–1971 (1999).
62. Chamberlain, L. H. Inhibition of isoprenoid 
biosynthesis causes insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 
adipocytes. FEBS Lett. 507, 357–361 (2001).
63. Takaguri, A., Sotoh, K., Itagaki, M., Tokumitsu, Y. 
& Ichihara, K. Effects of atorvastatin and pravastatin 
on signal transduction related to glucose uptake in 
3T3L-1 adipocytes. J. Pharmacol. Sci. 107, 80–89 
(2008).
64. Ganesan, S. & Ito, M. K. Coenzyme Q10 ameliorates 
the reduction in GLUT4 transporter expression 
induced by simvastatin in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. 
Metab. Syndr. Relat. Disord. 11, 251–255 (2013).
65. Donath, M. Y. & Shoelson, S. E. Type 2 diabetes as an 
inflammatory disease. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 11, 98–107 
(2011).
66. Shoelson, S. E., Lee, J. & Goldfine, A. B. Inflammation 
and insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 
1793–1801 (2006).
67. Jager, J., Grémeaux, T., Cormont, M., 
Le Marchand-Brustel, Y. & Tanti, J. F. Interleukin-βinduced
insulin resistance in adipocytes through downregulation
of insulin receptor substrate-1 expression. 
Endocrinology 148, 241–251 (2007).
68. Lagathu, C. Long term treatment with 
interleukin-1β induces insulin resistance in murine 
and human adipocytes. Diabetologia 49, 2162–2173 
(2006).
69. Vandanmagsar, B. et al. The NLRP3 inflammasone 
instigates obesity-induced inflammation and insulin 
resistance. Nat. Med. 17, 179–188 (2011).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | ENDOCRINOLOGY VOLUME 12 | FEBRUARY 2016 | 109
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1761411449)
70. Stienstra, R. et al. The inflammasone-mediated 
caspase-1 activation controls adipocyte differentiation 
and insulin sensitivity. Cell Metab. 12, 593–605 
(2010).
71. Lee H-M. et al. Upregulated NLRP3 inflammasome in 
patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 62, 194–204 
(2013).
72. Henriskbo, B. D. et al. Fluvastatin causes NLRP3 
inflammasome-mediated adipose insulin resistance. 
Diabetes 63, 3742–3747 (2014).
73. Baker, W. L., Talati, R., White, C. M. & Coleman, C. I. 
Differing effects on insulin sensitivity in non-diabetics: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetes Res.
Clin. Pract. 87, 98–107 (2010).
74. Kadowaki, T. et al. Adiponectin and adiponectin 
receptors in insulin resistance, diabetes and the 
metabolic syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 116, 1784–1792 
(2006).
75. Li, S., Shin, H. J., Ding, E. L. & van Dam, R. M. 
Adiponectin levels and risk of type 2 diabetes: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 302, 
179–188 (2009).
76. Hara, K. et al. Genetic variation in the gene encoding 
adiponectin is associated with an increased risk of 
type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population. Diabetes
51, 536–540 (2002).
77. Kondo, H. et al. Association of adiponectin mutation 
with type 2 diabetes: a candidate gene for the insulin 
resistance syndrome. Diabetes 51, 2325–2328 
(2002).
78. Strumvoll, M. et al. Association of the T-G 
polymorphism in adiponectin (exon 20 with obesity 
and insulin sensitivity: interaction with family history of 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 51,37–41 (2002).
79. Roehrich, M. E. et al. Insulin-secreting β-cell 
dysfunction induced by human lipoproteins. J. Biol.
Chem. 278, 18368–18375 (2003).
80. Hao, M., Head, W. S., Gunawardeana, S. C., 
Hasty, A. H. & Piston, D. W. Direct effect of cholesterol 
on insulin secretion: a novel mechanism for pancreatic 
β-cell dysfunction. Diabetes 56, 2328–2338 (2007).
81. Rütti, S. et al. Low and high density lipoproteins 
modulate function, apoptosis and proliferation of 
primary human and murine pancreatic β-cells. 
Endocrinology 150, 4521–4530 (2009).
82. Kruit, J. K., Brunham, L. R., Verchere, C. B. 
& Hayden, M. R. HDL and LDL cholesterol significantly 
influence β-cell function in type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Curr. Opin. Lipidol. 21, 178–185 (2010).
83. Brunham, L. R. et al. β-cell ABCA1 influences insulin 
secretion, glucose homeostasis and response to 
thiazolidinedione treatment. Nat. Med. 13, 340–347 
(2007).
84. Fryirs, M. A. et al. Effects of high-density lipoproteins on 
pancreatic β-cell insulin secretion. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 30, 1642–1648 (2010).
85. Sturek, J. M. et al. An intracellular role for 
ABCG1-mediated cholesterol transport in the 
regulated secretory pathway of mouse pancreatic β
cells. J. Clin. Invest. 120, 2575–2589 (2010).
86. Bogan, J. S., Xu, Y. & Hao, M. Cholesterol 
accumulation increases insulin granule size and impairs 
membrane trafficking. Traffic 13, 1466–1480 (2012).
87. Metz, S. A., Rabaglia, M. E., Stock, J. B. & Kowluru, A. 
Modulation of insulin secretion from normal rat islets 
by inhibitors of the post-translational modifications of 
GTP-binding proteins. Biochem. J. 295, 31–40 
(1993).
88. Li, G., Regazzi, R., Roche, E. & Wollheim, C. B. 
Blockade of mevalonate production by lovastatin 
attenuates bombesin and vasopressin potentiation 
of nutrient-induced insulin secretion in HIT-T15 cells. 
Biochem. J. 289, 379–385 (1993).
89. Yada, T., Nakata, M., Shiraishi, T. & Kakei, M. Inhibition 
by simvastatin, but not pravastatin, of glucose-induced 
cytosolic Ca2+ signalling and insulin secretion due to 
blockade of L-type Ca2+ channels in rat islet β-cells. 
Br. J. Pharmacol. 126, 1205–1213 (1999).
90. Zhou, J. et al. Effect of glucose metabolism in mouse 
MIN6 cells. J. Diabetes Res. 2014, 376570 (2014).
91. Chen, Z. et al. Atorvastatin helps preserve pancreatic 
β cell function in obese C57BL/6J mice and the effect is 
related to increased pancreas proliferation and 
amelioration of endoplasmic-reticulum stress. Lipids 
Health Dis. 13, 98 (2014).
92. Mita, T. et al. Preferable effect of pravastatin 
compared to atorvastatin on β cell function in Japanese 
early-state type 2 diabetes with hypercholesterolemia. 
Endocr. J. 54, 441–447 (2007).
93. Stumvoll, M. et al. Use of the oral glucose tolerance 
test to assess insulin release and insulin sensitivity. 
Diabetes Care 23, 295–301 (2000).
94. Matsuda, M. & DeFronzo, R. A. Insulin sensitivity 
indices obtained from oral glucose tolerance testing: 
comparison with the euglycaemic insulin clamp. 
Diabetes Care 22, 1462–1470 (1999).
95. Larsen, S. et al. Simvastatin effects on skeletal muscle: 
relation to decreased mitochondrial function and 
glucose intolerance. JAMA 61, 44–53 (2013).
96. Banach, M. et al. Statin therapy and new-onset 
diabetes: molecular mechanisms and clinical relevance. 
Curr. Pharm. Des. 19, 4904–4912 (2013).
97. Barylski, M. et al. Statins and new-onset diabetes. 
Curr. Pharm. Des. 20, 3657–3664 (2014).
98. Sattar, N. & Taskinen, M. R. Statins are 
diabetogenic—myth or reality? Atheroscler. Suppl.
13, 1–10 (2012).
99. Lindström, J. et al. The Finnish Diabetes Prevention 
Study (DPS): lifestyle intervention and 3 year results 
on diet and physical activity. Diabetes Care 26, 
3230–3236 (2003).
100. Lindström, J. et al. Sustained reduction in the 
incidence of type 2 diabetes by lifestyle intervention: 
follow-up of the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. 
Lancet 368, 1673–1679 (2006).
101. Knowler, W. C. et al. Reduction in the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or 
metformin. N. Engl. J. Med. 346, 393–403 
(2002).
102. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. The 
10 year cost-effectiveness of lifestyle and metformin 
for diabetes prevention: an intent-to-treat analysis of 
the DPP/DPPOS. Diabetes Care 35, 723–730 
(2012).
103. Fradkin, J. E., Roberts, B. T. & Rodgers, G. P. What’s 
preventing us from preventing type 2 diabetes? 
N. Engl. J. Med. 367, 1177–1179 (2012).
104. Nielsen, S. F. & Nordestgaard, B. G. Statin 
use before diabetes diagnosis and risk of 
microvascular disease: a nationwide nested matched 
study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2, 894–900 
(2014).
105. Chen, S. C & Tseng, C. H. Dyslipidaemia, kidney 
disease and cardiovascular disease in diabetic patients. 
Rev. Diabet. Stud. 10, 88–100 (2013).
106. Zafrir, B. & Jain, M. Lipid-lowering therapies, glucose 
control and incident diabetes: evidence, mechanisms 
and clinical implications. Cardiovasc. Drugs Ther. 28, 
361–377 (2014).
107. Tennebaum, A. & Fisman, E. Z. Balanced pan-PPAR 
activator bezafibrate in combination with statin: 
comprehensive lipids control and diabetes prevention? 
Cardiovasc. Diabetol. 11, 140–149 (2012).
Author contributions
D.J.B. and R.C. contributed equally to researching the 
data for the article, discussion of the content, writing 
the article and to reviewing and/or editing of the manuscript 
before submission.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing interests.
REVIEWS
110 | FEBRUARY 2016 | VOLUME 12 www.nature.com/nrendo
© 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-684124159)
