Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods 69 (2014) 217–222

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jpharmtox

Original article

Ellagic acid-induced thrombotic focal cerebral ischemic model in rats
Xiaoming Pang 1, Tianxia Li 1, Liuxin Feng, Jingjing Zhao, Xiaolu Zhang, Juntian Liu ⁎
Department of Pharmacology, Xi'an Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Xi'an, China

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 18 August 2013
Accepted 2 January 2014
Available online 10 January 2014
Keywords:
Animal model
Ellagic acid
Focal cerebral ischemia
Stroke

a b s t r a c t
Introduction: Ischemic stroke is a common cause of human disability and death. Animal models of focal cerebral ischemia are widely utilized to mimic human ischemic stroke. Although models of focal cerebral ischemia
have been well established, very few evidence is based on triggering the intrinsic coagulation system to induce
focal cerebral ischemia. Ellagic acid (EA) has been identiﬁed to trigger the intrinsic coagulation system via activating coagulation factor XII. However, it remains unknown whether EA can serve as a novel pharmacological approach to induce a new model of focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Methods: EA was used for inducing focal cerebral
ischemia in adult rats. The dose- and time-dependent effects of EA were characterized. The cerebral infarction
ratio was determined with triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining, and the histopathological analysis of the
brain tissue was performed under light microscopy. The neurological deﬁcit score was evaluated by a modiﬁed
method of Bederson. Malondialdehyde (MDA) level and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and superoxide dismutase
(SOD) activities in serum were determined by spectrophotometry. Results: Injection of EA into the middle cerebral artery of rats was able to generate focal cerebral infarction and increased the neurological deﬁcit score and
the brain weight to body weight ratio in dose- and time-dependent manners. Furthermore, EA raised serum LDH
activity and MDA level and decreased serum SOD activity in a dose-related fashion. Discussion: This is the ﬁrst
evidence to show that EA induces focal cerebral ischemia in rats, which is similar to human ischemia stroke in
pathogenesis. This model holds promise for pathological, pharmacological and clinical studies of ischemic stroke.
© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Stroke is a heterogeneous disease with a complex pathophysiology and causes death and disability of patients as well as a signiﬁcantly economic burden. With the fact that life expectancy increases,
stroke is projected to be a more challenging disease in the future
(Mukherjee & Patil, 2011). Ischemic stroke which is caused by an
embolic or thrombotic occlusion of an artery supplying a speciﬁc territory of brain accounts for 80% of all strokes. Animal models of focal
cerebral ischemia have been developed to mimic human stroke and
play a major role in the experimental study of stroke (Durukan &
Tatlisumak, 2007). Over the past years, animal models have largely
advanced our knowledge on the pathophysiology and etiology of
ischemic stroke (Mergenthaler, Dirnagl, & Meisel, 2004). However,
due to the heterogeneity of human stroke, most translational stroke
trials that aim to introduce basic experimental ﬁndings into clinical
therapeutic strategies have failed, which is mainly attributed
to ischemic stroke models not simulating pathogenesis of human
stroke.
Abbreviations: MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; EA, ellagic acid; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; MDA, malondialdehyde; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; SOD,
superoxide dismutase; MCA, middle cerebral artery; BBB, blood brain barrier.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Postbox 58, Xi'an Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 76
West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061, China. Tel./fax: +86 29 82655188.
E-mail address: ljt@mail.xjtu.edu.cn (J. Liu).
1
Co-ﬁrst author.
1056-8719/$ – see front matter © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.vascn.2014.01.001

The focal cerebral ischemia model commonly used in the animal
experiment is the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model via
intraluminal suture, which is developed in rats by Koizumi et al. and,
is subsequently modiﬁed (Belayev, Alonso, Busto, Zhao, & Ginsberg,
1996; Longa, Weinstein, Carlson, & Cummins, 1989). By controlling
the suture, both transient ischemia and permanent ischemia are performed using this model. However, the intraluminal suture in MCAO
model varies largely from most human focal cerebral ischemia because
it is actually a mechanical occlusion model. Thromboembolism is one
of the most frequent causes of ischemic stroke in humans. Therefore,
development of thromboembolic focal cerebral ischemia models will
serve as a unique approach to mimic human stroke, which exhibits an
advantage over other stroke models. Although thromboembolic models
have previously been reported (Kudo, Aoyama, Ichimori, & Fukunaga,
1982; Zhang et al., 1997), few models are developed based on triggering
the intrinsic coagulation system to induce thrombosis in vivo.
Ellagic acid (EA), 2,3,7,8-tetrahydroxy-chromeno [5,4,3-cde]
chromene-5, 10-dione, is a plant phenol found in various fruits. It has
been conﬁrmed that EA triggers the intrinsic coagulation via activating
coagulation factor XII, and promotes platelet aggregation by thrombin
(Damas, Remacle-Volon, & Adam, 1989; Ratnoff & Crum, 1964), which
have been applied in inducing the hypercoagulable state (Botti, 1966;
Girolami, Cella, Burul, & Zucchetto, 1976; Iomhair & Lavelle, 1996;
Ratnoff & Saito, 1982; Shiozaki et al., 1994). Hara et al. ﬁrst established
the global cerebral ischemia by injection of EA suspension into the
common carotid artery of rats, and conducted a primary evaluation

218

X. Pang et al. / Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods 69 (2014) 217–222

(Hara, Iwamoto, Ishihara, & Tomikawa, 1994). However, there is no
study to identify whether EA induces focal cerebral ischemia and the
comprehensive evaluation. The aim of the present study was to develop
a stable EA-induced focal cerebral ischemia model similar to human
thrombotic ischemia stroke in rats.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemical reagents
EA was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA), and dissolved in
1 M NaOH, and then pH in the solution was adjusted to 7.4 with 1 M
HCl. 2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) was obtained from
Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China). Assay kits
for detecting malondialdehyde (MDA), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were provided by Nanjing Jiancheng
Bioengineering Institute (Nanjing, China).
2.2. Animals
Male Sprague–Dawley rats weighing 280–320 g were purchased
from the Experimental Animal Center of Xi'an Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Xi'an, China. Animals were housed at 20–25 °C
with a relative humidity of 50%–60% and a 12 h light/dark cycle.
Food and water were provided ad libitum. Rats were fasted for 24 h
before the experiment. All the experimental procedures carried out in
this study were performed in accordance with the Guidelines for the
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of Xi'an Jiaotong University, and
approved by the Institutional Animal Care Committee of Xi'an Jiaotong
University.
2.3. Establishment of the focal cerebral ischemia model in rats
The surgical process of the focal cerebral ischemia model induced by
EA was modiﬁed according to Zhang's thrombotic focal cerebral ischemia model (Zhang et al., 1997) and Longa's MCAO model (Longa et al.,
1989). Rats were anesthetized with intraperitoneal injection of chloral
hydrate (300 mg/kg). The left common carotid artery was exposed at
the level of the external and internal carotid artery bifurcation under
the sterile condition. Catheter (0.3 mm, O.D.) ﬁlled with EA or saline
was inserted into the left common carotid artery and gently advanced
into the internal carotid artery for a length of about 20–21 mm until a
slight resistance was felt. Such resistance indicated that the catheter
just passed over the proximal segment of the anterior cerebral artery.
Then, the catheter was pulled back 2 mm and at this point, the
intraluminal catheter was about 2 mm to the origin of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). Next, 0.1 mL EA was slowly injected into MCA of rats
through the catheter in the model group (EA-treated group), while
0.1 mL normal saline was given to rats in the sham group in an identical
fashion to the EA-treated group instead. Finally, the catheter was pulled
out 5 min after the injection. During the whole process of animal
surgery, the rat rectal temperature was maintained at 37.0 °C with a
heat lamp.
2.4. Experimental protocol
In order to present a comprehensive evaluation on the model, we
examined dose- and time-dependent characteristics of EA-induced
focal cerebral ischemia. In the dose–effect experiment, rats were randomly divided into the sham group and three EA-treated groups (0.5,
1.0, 1.5 mg/mL; n = 8–10). The neurological deﬁcit score, the cerebral
infarction size, the brain weight to body weight ratio, LDH, SOD, MDA
in serum and morphological changes were evaluated at 24 h after
the injection of EA or saline. In the time-effect experiment, rats
were randomly divided into the sham group and EA-treated group

(1.5 mg/mL; n = 8–10). The above-described measurements were
analyzed 3, 6, 12, 24 h after the injection of EA or saline.
2.5. Evaluation of neurological deﬁcit
The neurological deﬁcit score was recorded 6 h after the injection of
EA in the dose-effect experiment, and at the indicated time after the injection of EA in the time-effect experiment. The neurological status of
each rat was carefully evaluated by an observer who was blinded to
the experimental procedure following a modiﬁed method of Bederson
(Bederson et al., 1986). ① Rats were gently held by the tail, suspended
one meter above the ﬂoor, and observed for forelimb ﬂexion. Normal
rats extended both forelimbs toward the ﬂoor. Rats that consistently
ﬂexed the forelimb contralateral to the injured hemisphere were scored
as 4, otherwise scored as 0. ② Rats were pushed in the contralateral direction and scored as: 0 (resistance to lateral push), 1 (initially reduced
but progressive resistance), 2 (reduced resistance), or 3 (lateral down
fall). ③ Rats were then allowed to move freely to observe circling behavior. The movement was scored as: 0 (straight movement), 1 (movement to the right), 2 (circling movement), or 3 (no movement). The
scores of three tests were summed and represented the neurological
deﬁcit score (0 to 10).
2.6. Assessment of the brain weight to body weight ratio
In the end of each experiment, rats were sacriﬁced by decapitation
under the deep anesthesia with chloral hydrate. Brains were removed,
and weighed immediately. The brain weight to body weight ratio was
calculated according to the following formula:
Brain weight to body weight ratio ð%Þ
¼ ðbrain weight=body weightÞ  100

2.7. Detection of cerebral infarction size
Brains were removed and sliced into six 2-mm-thick coronal slices
(ﬁrst to sixth from rostral to caudal). The brain slices were incubated
in 2% phosphate buffer solution of TTC for 30 min at 37 ºC, and immersed in 10% formalin overnight. The unstained area (pale) was the infarcted area, while the stained area (red) was the normal area. The slices
were photographed with a digital camera and the infarction volume
was calculated by summing the infarction volume of sequential sections
with a commercial image processing software program (Photoshop,
Adobe Systems; Mountain View, CA, USA). The investigator who analyzed the image was blinded to the experimental groups. The cerebral
infarction size was presented as the infarction ratio, which was calculated
according to the following formula:
Infarction ratio ð%Þ ¼ ðinfarction volume=whole brain volumeÞ  100

2.8. Determination of MDA, LDH and SOD
Blood was collected via the abdominal aorta in the end of the experiment. Then, the separated serum was used to spectrophotometrically
determine LDH activity at 450 nm, SOD activity at 550 nm and MDA
concentration at 532 nm following the manufacturer's instructions.
2.9. Histopathological analysis
Brains were removed and ﬁxed in 10% formalin in the end of the
experiment. Then, the brain tissue was embedded in parafﬁn and sectioned at 4 μm thickness in the coronal plane. The sections were stained
with haematoxylin and eosin, and examined under light microscopy.

X. Pang et al. / Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods 69 (2014) 217–222

2.10. Statistical analysis
Data were expressed as mean ± S.D. and statistical tests were performed with one-way ANOVOA followed by Tukey's test to determine
differences among groups. P b 0.05 was considered to be signiﬁcant.

219

and necrosis of neurons, focal cerebral edema, inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells as well as dilated capillaries in comparison with the sham
group (Fig. 5).
3.5. Changes of LDH, SOD and MDA in serum of rats with focal cerebral
ischemia induced by EA

3. Results
3.1. Neurological deﬁcit of rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA
The result in Fig. 1A showed that the neurological deﬁcit score of rats
was increased in a dose-dependent manner 24 h after the injection of
EA. Compared with the sham group, there is a signiﬁcant difference
in the neurological deﬁcit score in rats treated with 1 mg/mL and
1.5 mg/mL EA (P b 0.05). Fig. 1B displayed that the neurological deﬁcit
score of rats was signiﬁcantly increased 3 h after the injection
of 1.5 mg/mL EA, reached a maximum at 6 h and sustained for 24 h
(P b 0.05).
3.2. Brain weight to body weight ratio of rats with focal cerebral ischemia
induced by EA
Fig. 2A exhibited that the brain weight to body weight ratio was
dose-dependently raised after rats were treated with EA for 24 h as
compared to the sham group (P b 0.05). Fig. 2B indicated that the
brain weight to body weight ratio of rats was raised 3 h after the injection of 1.5 mg/mL EA, and sustained for more than 24 h (P b 0.05).
3.3. Cerebral infarction ratio of rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced
by EA
As shown in Fig. 3, the cerebral infarction ratio was enlarged in a
dose-dependent manner 24 h after injecting EA to rats (P b 0.05). At
0.5 mg/mL EA, infarction foci were sporadic and spotty. At 1.0 mg/mL
EA, the cerebral hemisphere showed patchy necrosis and the cerebral
infarction ratio reached 18%. At 1.5 mg/mL EA, most of the cerebral
hemisphere exhibited severe infarction and the cerebral infarction
ratio reached 29.9 ± 1.9%. Likewise, EA time-dependently enlarged
the cerebral infarction ratio of rats (P b 0.05). The cerebral infarction
ratio was obviously raised 3 h after injecting 1.5 mg/mL EA (P b 0.05),
and slowly increased after 12 h (P b 0.05) (Fig. 4).
3.4. Morphological changes of brain in rats with focal cerebral ischemia
induced by EA
The histopathological analysis showed that MCA injection of EA to
rats caused the morphological abnormalities, including degeneration

As seen from Figs. 6–8, all the concentrations of EA increased
LDH activity and decreased SOD activity in serum (P b 0.05), whereas
middle and high concentrations of EA increased MDA level (P b 0.05).
4. Discussion
In the clinical condition, coagulation factor XII is activated by collagen in the vessel wall once endothelium is injured by the pathological
factors, such as hypertension and ox-LDL. The activated coagulation factor XII is able to trigger the intrinsic coagulation system to form ﬁbrin.
Meanwhile, platelets are also activated by thrombin from the activated
coagulation system. Finally, combination of ﬁbrin and activated platelets participates in formation of the mixed thrombosis. Many studies
demonstrate that EA is an effective activator of coagulation factor XII.
Therefore, we attempted to use EA to induce thrombosis in MCA and
to develop a new model of focal cerebral ischemia in rats.
The present study showed that injection of EA into MCA was able
to produce focal cerebral infarction in rats, increased the neurological
deﬁcit score and the brain weight to body weight ratio in dose- and
time-dependent manners. EA also raised LDH activity and MDA level,
but decreased SOD activity in serum in a dose-related fashion.
The cerebral infarction size has widely been accepted as the most
precise and objective indicator in study of the animal ischemic stroke
(Durukan & Tatlisumak, 2007). In this study, treatment of rats with injection of EA via MCA was able to generate focal cerebral infarction in
both dose-dependent manner and time-dependent way. The cerebral
infarction ratio reached 29.9% after the injection of 1.5 mg/mL EA for
24 h, which is comparable to the infarction size from MCAO model by
intraluminal suture (Xiao, Liu, Hu, Li, & Zhang, 2007). The results from
the histopathological examination provided further evidence in support
of the cerebral damage in focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA. In
terms of the infarction position and pattern, the cerebral ischemia exists
in the territory supplied by MCA, suggesting that EA is likely to occlude
large branch of MCA, and spontaneous reperfusion and collateral
perfusion do not exist possibly at 24 h after injection of EA.
Cerebral ischemia may cause neurological abnormalities, the
severity of which is correlated with the cerebral infarction size. Therefore,
the neurological deﬁcit was used for reﬂecting formation and severity of
focal cerebral infarction. The present results showed that the injection
of EA to rats signiﬁcantly increased the neurological deﬁcit score.

Fig. 1. Neurological deﬁcit of rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA. The neurological deﬁcit score was evaluated 6 h after injecting the different doses of EA to rats (A) or at
the indicated time after injecting 1.5 mg/mL EA to rats (B) according to a modiﬁed Bederson's method with a scale of 0–10. Data was expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05,
compared with sham group.

220

X. Pang et al. / Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods 69 (2014) 217–222

Fig. 2. Brain weight to body weight ratio of rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA. After injecting the different doses of EA to rats for 24 h (A) or at the indicated time after injecting
1.5 mg/mL EA to rats (B), brains were removed and weighed immediately. The brain weight to body weight ratio was calculated according to the formula [brain weight to body weight
ratio (%) = (brain weight/body weight) × 100]. Data was expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05, compared with sham group.

Moreover, all rats with the cerebral infarction ratio greater than 20%
revealed a signiﬁcant neurological deﬁcit, which is consistent with
Bederson's report (Bederson et al., 1986).
Blood brain barrier (BBB) is a separation of circulating blood from
brain and cerebrospinal ﬂuid in the central nervous system. Focal cerebral ischemia disrupts BBB, which results in cerebral edema. In the
study, the brain weight to body weight ratio was assessed to represent
the degree of BBB damage and cerebral edema in focal cerebral ischemia
induced by EA. The results indicated that the brain weight to body
weight ratio was increased 3 h after the injection of EA and sustained
for 24 h, suggesting the existence of BBB damage and cerebral edema
in focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA.
LDH is one of intracellular enzymes. When neurons are injured, LDH
is released into blood. Therefore, serum LDH activity is often used as a
marker of the cell injury. The present experiment revealed that serum
LDH activity was signiﬁcantly increased in a dose-related fashion after
injection of EA into MCA, which was due to the neuron injury secondary
to focal cerebral ischemia caused by EA.
It is well known that serum SOD activity decreases and MDA production increases in patient with acute ischemic stroke. It is conﬁrmed that
lipid peroxides produced in focal cerebral ischemia cause the cerebral
damage and play a crucial role in pathogenesis of focal cerebral ischemia
(Aygul, Kotan, Demirbas, Ulvi, & Deniz, 2006; Chen et al., 2011; Hall &
Braughler, 1989; Tomizawa et al., 2005). Therefore, MDA level and
SOD activity are used as the biomarkers of oxidative stress under the
status of focal cerebral ischemia. Our study illustrated that SOD activity
decreased and MDA level increased in serum of rats with focal cerebral

ischemia induced by EA, implying the involvement of lipid peroxidation
in EA-induced focal cerebral ischemia.
At present, the majority of studies on stroke are conducted in
small animals due to lower cost and greater acceptability from ethical
viewpoints. The rat is an ideal subject in study of stroke because of
its similarity to human in cerebrovascular anatomy and physiology
(Mhairi Macrae, 1992; Tamura, Graham, McCulloch, & Teasdale, 1981).
In order to avoid the variability caused by female hormone cycling
and weight differences, we chose male SD rats weighing 280 to 320 g
as study subjects in the present study.
Body temperature and blood glucose are two important factors
inﬂuencing focal cerebral ischemia. It is documented that body temperature is able to affect stroke severity, infarct size, mortality, and outcome
(Castillo, Davalos, Marrugat, & Noya, 1998; MacLellan, Davies, Fingas, &
Colbourne, 2006; Reith et al., 1996). During the process of the animal
surgery, the rat rectal temperature was maintained with a heat
lamp at 37.0 °C. The majority of studies had shown that hyperglycemia worsens the ischemic damage (Huang, Wei, & Quast, 1996;
Nedergaard, 1987). Therefore, rats were fasted for 24 h before the
surgery in order to minimize variability resulted from blood glucose
levels in this study.
Many animal models of focal cerebral ischemia have been developed, and current translational models do not adequately simulate the
pathogenesis of human cerebral ischemia. At present, focal cerebral
ischemia model most commonly used is the MCAO model using an
intraluminal suture. However, this is a mechanical occlusion model,
which may differ from the human cerebral ischemia in its pathogenesis.

Fig. 3. Dose–effect relationship of the cerebral infarction size of focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA. After injecting the different doses of EA to rats for 24 h, brains were removed and
sliced. Then, the slices were stained with TTC. The unstained area (pale) was the infarcted area, while the stained area (red) was the normal area. The cerebral infarction size was presented
as the infarction ratio, which was calculated according to the formula [infarction ratio (%) = (infarction volume/whole brain volume) × 100]. (A) the representative brain slices, (B) the
statistical results. Data was expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05, compared with sham group.

X. Pang et al. / Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods 69 (2014) 217–222

Fig. 4. Time-effect relationship of the cerebral infarction size of focal cerebral ischemia
induced by EA. After injecting 1.5 mg/mL EA to rats for the indicated time, brains were
removed and sliced. Then, the slices were stained with TTC. The cerebral infarction size
was presented as the infarction ratio, which was calculated according to the formula
[infarction ratio (%) = (infarction volume/whole brain volume) × 100]. Data was
expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05, compared with sham group.

This model is not also suitable for the study of thrombolytic and antithrombotic drugs. Hara et al. previously injected EA into the common
carotid artery of rats to induce the cerebral ischemia for observing effect
of thrombin inhibitor (Hara et al., 1994). They do not systematically
evaluate the model. Moreover, this is a global ischemic model, which
is different from the focal cerebral ischemic model established in the

Fig. 5. Morphological changes of brain in rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA.
After injecting 1.5 mg/mL EA to rats for 24 h, brains were removed and ﬁxed in 10%
formalin. Then, the brain tissue was embedded in parafﬁn and sectioned at 4 μm thickness
in the coronal plane. The sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin, and
examined under light microscopy (×400).

221

Fig. 6. Changes of serum LDH activity in rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA.
After injecting the different doses of EA to rats for 24 h, blood were collected for preparation of serum. Then, LDH activity was determined at 450 nm by spectrophotometry. Data
was expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05, compared with sham group.

present experiment. Zhang et al. injected thrombin plus blood clot
into MCA to induce focal cerebral ischemia (Zhang et al., 1997). They
use the expensive and complicated methods in the model, e.g. MRI,
laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry etc. In fact, this model is a merged model of
thrombosis and embolism. Moreover, performance for focal cerebral ischemia is more complicated than our model. Therefore, the model is not
suitable for the experimental study of the cerebral ischemia in animals.
Since the model is induced by thrombin plus blood clot, it is more suitable for scanning of thrombin inhibitor, and not suitable for evaluation
of inhibitor of other coagulation factors over thrombin in coagulation
process, such as coagulation factor X inhibitor. In the present model,
we injected EA into MCA to induce focal cerebral ischemia in rats. This
model is similar to human cerebral ischemia in pathogenesis. It may
be used both for pathological study of ischemic stroke and for pharmacological evaluation of drugs against the thromboembolic cerebrovascular diseases, including anti-thrombotic drug and thrombolytic drug.
Moreover, this model exhibits good reproducibility and relatively low
death rate of rats. But, the model is not suitable for study of the cerebral
ischemia and reperfusion in comparison with MCAO model.
Collectively, it is recommended that 1.5 mg/mL EA is injected into
MCA of rats and all the parameters were examined 24 h after the injection. In addition, adult male SD rats were fasted for 24 h before the

Fig. 7. Changes of serum SOD activity in rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by EA.
After injecting the different doses of EA to rats for 24 h, blood were collected for preparation of serum. Then, SOD activity was determined at 550 nm by spectrophotometry. Data
was expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05, compared with sham group.

222

X. Pang et al. / Journal of Pharmacological and Toxicological Methods 69 (2014) 217–222

Fig. 8. Changes of serum MDA concentration in rats with focal cerebral ischemia induced by
EA. After injecting the different doses of EA to rats for 24 h, blood were collected for preparation of serum. Then, MDA concentration was determined at 532 nm by spectrophotometry.
Data was expressed as mean ± S.D. (n = 8–10). *P b 0.05, compared with sham group.

experiment and body temperature of rats was maintained at 37.0 °C
during the surgery.
Conﬂict of interest statement
None.
References
Aygul, R., Kotan, D., Demirbas, F., Ulvi, H., & Deniz, O. (2006). Plasma oxidants and
antioxidants in acute ischaemic stroke. The Journal of International Medical Research,
34, 413–418.
Bederson, J. B., Pitts, L. H., Tsuji, M., Nishimura, M. C., Davis, R. L., & Bartkowski, H. (1986).
Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: Evaluation of the model and development of a
neurologic examination. Stroke, 17, 472–476.
Belayev, L., Alonso, O. F., Busto, R., Zhao, W., & Ginsberg, M.D. (1996). Middle cerebral
artery occlusion in the rat by intraluminal suture. Neurological and pathological
evaluation of an improved model. Stroke, 27, 1616–1622.
Botti, R. E. (1966). Assessment of the hypercoagulable state and ellagic acid. Thrombosis
et Diathesis Haemorrhagica. Supplementum, 20, 49–52.
Castillo, J., Davalos, A., Marrugat, J., & Noya, M. (1998). Timing for fever-related brain
damage in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke, 29, 2455–2460.
Chen, H., Yoshioka, H., Kim, G. S., Jung, J. E., Okami, N., Sakata, H., et al. (2011). Oxidative
stress in ischemic brain damage: Mechanisms of cell death and potential molecular
targets for neuroprotection. Antioxidants & Redox Signaling, 14, 1505–1517.
Damas, J., Remacle-Volon, G., & Adam, A. (1989). Some cardiovascular and hematological
changes induced in the rat by activation of Hageman factor with ellagic acid.
Advances in Experimental Medicine and Biology, 247A, 461–465.

Durukan, A., & Tatlisumak, T. (2007). Acute ischemic stroke: Overview of major experimental rodent models, pathophysiology, and therapy of focal cerebral ischemia.
Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior, 87, 179–197.
Girolami, A., Cella, G., Burul, A., & Zucchetto, M. (1976). Failure of tranexamic acid
to inﬂuence the ellagic acid-induced hypercoagulable state. Folia Haematologica
(Leipzig, Germany: 1928), 103, 261–270.
Hall, E. D., & Braughler, J. M. (1989). Central nervous system trauma and stroke. II.
Physiological and pharmacological evidence for involvement of oxygen radicals and
lipid peroxidation. Free Radical Biology & Medicine, 6, 303–313.
Hara, T., Iwamoto, M., Ishihara, M., & Tomikawa, M. (1994). Preventive effect of
argatroban on ellagic acid-induced cerebral thromboembolism in rats. Haemostasis,
24, 351–357.
Huang, N. C., Wei, J., & Quast, M. J. (1996). A comparison of the early development
of ischemic brain damage in normoglycemic and hyperglycemic rats using magnetic
resonance imaging. Experimental Brain Research, 109, 33–42.
Iomhair, M. M., & Lavelle, S. M. (1996). Effect of aspirin-dipyridamole and heparin and
their combination on venous thrombosis in hypercoagulable or thrombotic animals.
Thrombosis Research, 82, 479–483.
Kudo, M., Aoyama, A., Ichimori, S., & Fukunaga, N. (1982). An animal model of cerebral
infarction. Homologous blood clot emboli in rats. Stroke, 13, 505–508.
Longa, E. Z., Weinstein, P. R., Carlson, S., & Cummins, R. (1989). Reversible middle cerebral
artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke, 20, 84–91.
MacLellan, C. L., Davies, L. M., Fingas, M. S., & Colbourne, F. (2006). The inﬂuence of hypothermia on outcome after intracerebral hemorrhage in rats. Stroke, 37, 1266–1270.
Mergenthaler, P., Dirnagl, U., & Meisel, A. (2004). Pathophysiology of stroke: Lessons from
animal models. Metabolic Brain Disease, 19, 151–167.
Mhairi Macrae, I. (1992). New models of focal cerebral ischaemia. British Journal of Clinical
Pharmacology, 34, 302–308.
Mukherjee, D., & Patil, C. G. (2011). Epidemiology and the global burden of stroke.
World Neurosurgery, 76, S85–S90.
Nedergaard, M. (1987). Transient focal ischemia in hyperglycemic rats is associated with
increased cerebral infarction. Brain Research, 408, 79–85.
Ratnoff, O. D., & Crum, J.D. (1964). Activation of Hageman factor by solutions of ellagic
acid. The Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine, 63, 359–377.
Ratnoff, O. D., & Saito, H. (1982). The evolution of clot-promoting and amidolytic activities
in mixtures of Hageman factor (factor XII) and ellagic acid. The Journal of Laboratory
and Clinical Medicine, 100, 248–260.
Reith, J., Jorgensen, H. S., Pedersen, P.M., Nakayama, H., Raaschou, H. O., Jeppesen, L. L.,
et al. (1996). Body temperature in acute stroke: Relation to stroke severity, infarct
size, mortality, and outcome. Lancet, 347, 422–425.
Shiozaki, A., Niiya, K., Higuchi, F., Tashiro, S., Arai, T., Izumi, R., et al. (1994). Ellagic
acid/phospholipid-induced coagulation and dextran sulfate-induced ﬁbrinolytic activities in beta 2-glycoprotein I-depleted plasma. Thrombosis Research,
76, 199–210.
Tamura, A., Graham, D. I., McCulloch, J., & Teasdale, G. M. (1981). Focal cerebral ischaemia
in the rat: 1. Description of technique and early neuropathological consequences
following middle cerebral artery occlusion. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism, 1, 53–60.
Tomizawa, S., Imai, H., Tsukada, S., Simizu, T., Honda, F., Nakamura, M., et al. (2005). The
detection and quantiﬁcation of highly reactive oxygen species using the novel HPF
ﬂuorescence probe in a rat model of focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience Research,
53, 304–313.
Xiao, X., Liu, J., Hu, J., Li, T., & Zhang, Y. (2007). Protective effect of protopine on the focal
cerebral ischaemic injury in rats. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology, 101,
85–89.
Zhang, Z., Zhang, R. L., Jiang, Q., Raman, S. B., Cantwell, L., & Chopp, M. (1997). A new
rat model of thrombotic focal cerebral ischemia. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism, 17, 123–135.

