Journal of Neuroscience Methods 240 (2015) 22–27

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Neuroscience Methods
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jneumeth

Basic Neuroscience

Selective intra-arterial drug administration in a model of large vessel
ischemia
Michael Maniskas a,c , Gregory Bix a,c,d,∗ , Justin Fraser a,b,d,e,∗∗
a

Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
Department of Neurosurgery, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
Sanders Brown Center on Aging, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
d
Department of Neurology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
e
Department of Radiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States
b
c

h i g h l i g h t s
• Demonstrate reliable and reproducible mouse stroke model similar to human condition.
• Retro-engineered intra-arterial drug delivery model for mice from human condition.
• Optimized drug injection volume and ﬂow rate for intra-arterial delivery model.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 11 September 2014
Received in revised form 21 October 2014
Accepted 22 October 2014
Available online 8 November 2014
Keywords:
Stroke
Recanalization
Intra-arterial
Endovascular thrombectomy

a b s t r a c t
With continuing disconnect between laboratory stroke treatment models and clinical stroke therapy, we
propose a novel experimental model to study stroke and vessel recanalization that mirrors acute management of large vessel stroke, with concomitant directed pharmacotherapy. Using the tandem transient
ipsilateral common carotid/middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model to induce stroke in mice we
then added selective intra-arterial (IA) drug administration for directed pharmacotherapy. The IA model
uses micro-angio tubing placed at the bifurcation of the CCA to selectively administer the drug to the
internal carotid distribution. We have shown that delivery of pharmacotherapy agents selectively through
an IA injection is feasible in a mouse model, which will permit studies involving pharmacotherapy, transgenic modiﬁcation, and/or a combination. Our IA model has similarities to previously published models
of IA injection but differs in that we do not leave an indwelling micro-port or catheter in our animals,
which is not clinically relevant as it does not reﬂect the human condition or current clinical management.
Furthermore, we optimized our model to selectively direct therapy to the ipsilateral, stroke affected hemisphere. By developing an IA drug delivery model that mirrors clinical conditions, we are bridging the gap
between basic stroke research and what is standard practice in acute ischemic stroke intervention. The
IA model of drug delivery can target agents directly to the site of injury while blunting systemic effects,
dose penetration issues, and administration delay that have plagued the intraperitoneal and oral drug
administration models.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author at: Associate Professor of Anatomy and Neurobiology, and
Neurology, Paul G. Blazer, Jr. Professor of Stroke Research, University of Kentucky,
Sanders Brown Center on Aging, Room 430, 800 South Limestone Street, Lexington,
KY 40536, United States. Tel.: +1 859 218 3859; fax: +1 859 218 2866.
∗∗ Corresponding author at: Assistant Professor of Cerebrovascular, Endovascular,
and Skull Base Surgery, Director, Cerebrovascular Surgery, Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Kentucky, 800 Rose Street Room MS108A, Lexington,
KY 40536, United States. Tel.: +1 859 323 0616; fax: +1 859 257 8902.
E-mail addresses: gregorybix@uky.edu (G. Bix), jfr235@uky.edu (J. Fraser).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.10.015
0165-0270/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Large vessel ischemic stroke, which affects the vital arteries of
the brain, is a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the United
States. At present, the only FDA-approved pharmacotherapy for
thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke is administration of tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA), which acts to dissolve the clot, allowing blood ﬂow to resume. The therapeutic window for intravenous
administration of tPA is 4.5 h after onset, and when combined with
additional exclusion criteria, a large number of individuals are eliminated from receiving treatment. Results from a multicenter study

M. Maniskas et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 240 (2015) 22–27

between 2001 and 2004 evaluating the rate of tPA administration
demonstrated an increase in tPA use from 14.0% to 37.5% (Lichtman
et al., 2009). While these results are positive it shows a need for
alternative therapies that can be administered when an individual is not eligible for tPA. One such alternative is intra-arterial
(IA) endovascular thrombectomy or mechanical removal of a clot
using a retrieval device threaded through the patient’s vasculature
(Investigators, 2007; Saver et al., 2012). Both forms of thrombolysis have the potential to restore blood ﬂow to the affected area but
show poor correlations with clinical outcomes (Investigators, 2007;
Broderick et al., 2013; Fargen et al., 2013). Currently there is no therapy, thrombolysis included, that provides direct neuroprotective or
neuroreparative effects.
The practice of endovascular thrombectomy utilized by a neurointerventionalist to remove a clot begins with the advancing
of a catheter within the femoral artery in the leg. From there
the catheter is threaded through the arterial vasculature of the
body until it reaches the common carotid artery (CCA) which
leads to the occluded middle cerebral artery (MCA) via the internal carotid artery (ICA). Navigating the catheter into the occluded
internal carotid, basilar, or middle cerebral arteries provides
access to not only remove the clot but to also deliver potential neuroprotective/neuroreparative compounds. Such a stroke
treatment paradigm has many potential advantages over systemic
routes of administration including better affected brain penetration/targeting and less systemic side-effects.
There has been a failure to bring neuroprotective agents successfully to the bedside in the treatment of acute ischemic stroke.
The cause is multifactorial, but is best summarized as a failure of
translation from the bench to clinic. Our approach to this topic
was to retro-engineer a mouse model to mirror the clinical condition of intra-arterial (IA) thrombectomy with the opportunity
for direct selective IA pharmacotherapy immediately following
recanalization. In our method, a catheter is advanced through the
vasculature of the mouse neck into the ICA so the potential drug
delivery can be selective. Our model is different in that we initiate
a stroke, recanalize and then inject IA therapeutics without leaving
an indwelling microport or catheter (Chen et al., 2009; Van Winkle
et al., 2013). Direct IA administration of neuroprotective agents
represents a novel method of drug delivery for acute stroke. Coupled with recanalization and restoration of blood ﬂow, this method
mimics clinical practice.
Furthermore, because our mouse model is based on the clinical
treatment of stroke, it was also essential to verify that our model
could be effectively utilized to deliver compounds directly and
speciﬁcally to the site of ischemia. The efﬁcacy of selective delivery of potential pharmacotherapies is dependent upon optimized
ﬂow rate and injection volume. The study of ﬂow rate and injection
volume through carbon black injection allowed us to demonstrate
that a compound administered in such a fashion could reach the
affected area and its injection rate and volume could be optimized
for our model. Through this retro-engineered model, ﬂow rate and
injection volume study we hope to overcome many of the hurdles
that have long plagued potential pharmacologic agents in acute
ischemic stroke.

23

the micro-angio tubing. Metal wire (Small Parts, Logansport, IN)
0.0127 cm in diameter were cut to a length of 0.1–0.15 cm. Using
micro forceps under a dissecting microscope, a 34 gauge needle
(Hamilton Syringe Co., Reno, NV) was ﬁtted with a 10 cm length of
micro-angio tubing (MRE 010-Braintree Scientiﬁc, Braintree, MA),
the combined needle and tubing were then attached to a 100 ␮l
Hamilton Gas Tight syringe (Fig. 1C).
2.2. Animal preparation for surgery
In accordance with University of Kentucky guidelines, 3 month
old C57/Bl6 (Jackson Laboratory) mice were anesthetized via
intraperitoneal injection with a combination Ketamine/Xylazine
mixture (1:1.33) in a saline solution using a weight based dosing
scale. The mice were shaved on the left temporal region of the head
from the lateral corner of the left eye to the medial region of the
left ear with the resultant shaved region being 0.75 cm by 0.75 cm
(Fig. 1A). The shaved area of the cervical and thoracic region started
at the angle of the mandible and extended to the apex of the ribcage
with a width spanning from forelimb axillary region to the opposite
forelimb axillary region (Fig. 1B). The shaved areas were cleaned 3
times with alcohol prep pads followed by a cotton tipped applicator
moistened with betadine.
2.3. Surgical preparation
Once the mouse was fully anesthetized it was placed on a heated
(to control body temperature) elevated platform. With the mouse in
the supine position, the head was secured using teeth restraints and
the forelimbs and tail were secured to the platform using surgical
tape (Fig. 1A and B).
2.4. MCAO stroke surgery
To induce focal cerebral ischemia, we used the previously
described transient tandem ipsilateral CCA/MCA occlusion stroke
model (MCAO) (Aronowski et al., 1999; Lee et al., 2011). With the
mouse in the supine position a midline incision was made allowing
us to isolate and elevate the CCA to place a 2-0 suture underneath.
It is important to note that the vagus nerve runs parallel to the
CCA and should be separated so that it is not clamped with the
CCA. We then removed the surgical tape and rotated the mouse
so that it was in a pronated position and re-secured. Another incision was made in the left temporal region for the lateral corner
of the left eye to the medial region of the left ear exposing the
temporal region. The temporalis muscle was reﬂected, the MCA
veriﬁed and a small burr hole drilled to allow the metal wire to be
placed under the MCA. The mouse was repositioned to the supine
position for temporary clamping of the CCA, (the occlusion time of
the CCA/MCA can be varied; our lab occludes for 60 min). Before
the head was sutured, blood ﬂow measurements using the Laser
Doppler and Speckle were taken using the process detailed in the
following section. All surgical sites were temporarily sutured with
4-0 pre-needled nylon suture.
2.5. Laser Doppler and Laser Speckle for blood ﬂow measurement

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Nylon suture, metal wire, micro-angio tubing and syringe
preparation
Two different sized sutures were used: one 2-0 nylon monoﬁlament suture cut 2 cm in length for occlusion of the CCA and
three 6-0 nylon braided silk sutures cut 1 cm in length for permanent occlusion of the external carotid artery (ECA) and securing of

To measure blood ﬂow in the ipsilateral MCA, a Perimed Laser
Doppler ﬂow meter (Periﬂux System 5000, Perimed) probe was
placed directly over the MCA touching the skull, a reading was
taken pre-occlusion and the probe was placed in the same spot to
take the post-occlusion measurements after insertion of the metal
wire under the MCA to conﬁrm a decrease in blood ﬂow. The ipsilateral hemisphere total blood ﬂow was measured using a Laser
Speckle (Pericam PSI HR, Perimed) which was positioned 15 cm
above the exposed skull of the mouse. The laser sighting system

24

M. Maniskas et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 240 (2015) 22–27

Fig. 1. (A) Mouse in pronated position with box outlining shaved temporal region, temporal incision from lateral corner of left eye to medial region of left ear. (B) Mouse
in supine position with box outlining shaved thoracic region. A midline incision is made from apex of ribcage to angle of mandible. (C) 100 ␮l syringe with 34 gauge and
micro-angio tubing attached. (D) Outline of CCA/ECA/ICA with trachea and sternocleidomastoid (SCM) as landmarks. (E) Sutures 1–3 placement and white line marking CCA
bifurcation, region framed by trachea, SCM and posterior belly of the digastric (PBD). (F) Micro-angio tubing inserted into ECA toward the CCA bifurcation and secured with
suture 2. (G) ECA suture ligated.

was employed to ensure consistent measurements, a permanent
marker was used to make a landmark dot along the sagittal suture
to ensure centering of the sighting system to conﬁrm pre and post
occlusion measurements were consistent. Post-occlusion measurements were taken at 5, 10 and 15 min post occlusion.
2.6. Placement of micro-angio tubing into the ECA
2.6.1. ECA suture placement
With the anesthetized mouse in the supine position the temporary sutures were removed and the previously isolated CCA was
exposed, moving rostrally along the CCA (lateral to the trachea) to
the bifurcation of the ECA and ICA. With the bifurcation located, it is
next necessary to further expose the ECA and ICA by 0.50–0.75 cm
using angled or straight ﬁne tipped micro forceps for suture placement and clamp insertion (Fig. 1D). Using a pair of ﬁne tipped
curved forceps, the ECA was gently lifted allowing three 1.0 cm
lengths of 6-0 suture to be threaded underneath, the sutures were
transferred to the ﬁne tipped curved forceps from a pair of ﬁne
straight tipped forceps. The sutures were then separated so that
the ﬁrst suture was at the bifurcation of the CCA, the second suture
was placed midway between the bifurcation and the superior most
exposed portion of the ECA and the third suture was placed at the

superior most exposed area of the ECA near the muscle (Posterior Belly of the Digastric-PBD) (Fig. 1E). Once all the sutures were
placed, the superior most suture was tied to permanently occlude
the ECA. The superior thyroid artery should be identiﬁed, if it arises
proximal to the distal permanent ECA suture (Fig. 1F), then a fourth
suture should be threaded underneath to achieve permanent occlusion.
2.6.2. Nicking the ECA and micro-angio tubing placement
With the ECA (and superior thyroid) artery permanently
occluded, a curved removable clamp (Micro Serreﬁnes-Fine Science, Foster City, CA) was attached to the ICA forming a closed
system between the clamped CCA, the suture ligated ECA and the
clamped ICA. The ECA was then nicked just above the second suture
with a pair of micro-scissors (Vannas Spring Scissors-Fine Science, Foster City, CA) to allow for the micro-angio tubing (MRE010
Braintree, Braintree, MA) attached to the Hamilton Syringe to be
inserted using a pair of angled forceps (for easier tubing insertion it is recommended to cut the tip of the inserted tubing at
a 45◦ angle) (Fig. 1F). A pair of angled micro forceps were used
to grasp the tubing 0.5 cm from the tip and a pair of curved forceps to grasp the tied suture of the ECA, which helped prevent
the ECA from rolling and gave better stability for tubing insertion.

M. Maniskas et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 240 (2015) 22–27

Once the tubing was inserted and the tip placed at the bifurcation of the CCA, the second suture was tied securing the tubing
and forming a tight seal between the tubing and ECA vessel wall
(Fig. 1I and G). Removal of the clamped ICA occurred after ensuring a tight seal around the suture tubing. Given the small blood
volume of a mouse, care must be taken to minimize blood loss
during these steps, as a signiﬁcant blood loss could signiﬁcantly
reduce cerebral perfusion and confound our results of evaluating
infarct volume of ischemic stroke in the brain and study outcomes.
2.6.3. CCA clamp and MCA metal wire removal
At the end of the predetermined occlusion time, the CCA clamp
and the metal wire were removed with the mouse in the supine
position to restore blood ﬂow to the previously occluded area. To
better visualize and remove the temporary sutures and MCA metal
wire, the tape securing the left forelimb was removed and the body
angled to the contralateral side.
2.6.4. Carbon black ink ﬂow rate and injection volume
After a 5 min waiting period for reperfusion, the 100 ␮l Hamilton syringe with a 34 gauge needle and micro-angio tubing was
loaded with a mixture of fountain inks (Pelikan-Fount India & Higgins Fountain Pen India) in a 1:9 ratio (Hasan et al., 2012). The
syringe was attached to a syringe pump (BS-8000, Braintree Scientiﬁc, Braintree, MA) with ﬂow rate settings of 1 ␮l, 2.5 ␮l, 5 ␮l
and 10 ␮l per minute at volumes of 10 ␮l, 25 ␮l, 50 ␮l and 100 ␮l
for each ﬂow rate.
2.6.5. Removal of micro-angio tubing and permanent ECA
occlusion
To remove the micro-angio tubing, the suture on the proximal
ECA was ﬁrst secured at the bifurcation of the CCA ensuring that
the ECA was permanently occluded for the remainder of the experiment. With the ﬁrst suture tied, the tubing was gently removed
from the vessel with a pair of ﬁne tipped forceps holding the second suture acting as an anchor to better assist in tubing removal.
When the tubing was fully removed from the ECA, the suture was
rechecked to ensure no blood leakage and the incision in the neck
and head were permanently closed using pre-needled 4-0 nylon
monoﬁlament suture (Fig. 1G).
2.7. Reperfusion
Reperfusion of the MCA was conﬁrmed using the Laser Doppler
ﬂow meter at 15 min post occlusion and Laser Speckle imaging at
5 min intervals starting at reperfusion to 15 min post occlusion.

25

a pair of ﬁne tipped scissors were inserted at the base of the
skull and used to cut the calvarium and thereby expose the brain.
The brain was lifted from the skull base using a pair of blunted
curved forceps and placed in a 1X PBS solution for a quick 10–15 s
wash.
2.9.3. Brain slicing and staining
The removed brain was transferred to a brain mold and sliced
into 2 mm sections with a surgical blade. The brain sections were
then transferred to a petri dish and stained using a 1% solution of
2,3,5-triphenlytetrazolium chloride (TTC) for 10 min to visualize
ischemic infarct (Lee et al., 2011).
2.9.4. Infarct measurement
TTC stained brain sections were placed horizontally from frontal
to occipital in a 3 cm wide petri dish and were scanned using a HP
Scanjet G4050. The scanned images were input into NIH Image J for
infarct analysis (Lee et al., 2011).
3. Results
3.1. Surgical outcome
The animals tolerated the procedure well with surgical effects
(lethargy, decreased grooming and eating) subsiding within 24 h
and resumption of normal behavior and eating habits. There was
a decrease in body weight over 2 days averaging 2–3 g (if stoke is
carried out to post stroke day 7, weight is regained). The MCAO
and IA injection model has a low mortality rate of less than 5% with
death being attributed to ruptured MCA or CCA. Exclusions from the
IA study occurred when the clamp perforated the CCA upon clamp
removal or when the metal wire pierced the MCA as it was being
inserted or removed from underneath the MCA. These animals were
excluded based on failure to guarantee recanalization and targeted
drug delivery.
3.2. Laser Speckle and Laser Doppler
Laser Speckle imaging (n = 7) showed a signiﬁcant (P = 0.017)
25.26% decrease in hemisphere blood ﬂow from baseline to occlusion and an increase of 5.23% from occlusion to 15 min reperfusion
(Fig. 2A). Laser Doppler (n = 22) showed a signiﬁcant (P < 0.001)
83.81% decrease in MCA ﬂow from baseline to occlusion and an
increase of 59.15% from occlusion to 15 min reperfusion when compared to baseline (Fig. 2B).
3.3. Infarct volume

2.8. Animal recovery
The mouse was allowed to recover in a heated recovery cage
to regulate body temperature until it met or exceeded the guidelines set forth in our university approved IUCAC protocol. Once the
mouse was fully recovered it was returned to its home cage with
its littermates in standard laboratory housing at the University of
Kentucky.
2.9. Stroke volume assessment
2.9.1. Euthanasia
On post stroke day 3 the mice were euthanized via cervical dislocation and decapitated for removal of brain (Lee et al., 2011).
2.9.2. Removal of brain
A midline incision was made using a pair of blunted scissors
on the scalp of the decapitated head exposing the calvarium. Next

Using NIH Image J software, the sectioned and stained brains had
an average infarct measurement of 19.89 mm3 , which was significantly (P = <0.001) different from the sham measurements (n = 10
and 8, respectively, Fig. 2C).
3.4. Flow rate and injection volume
Flow rate and injection volume studies (n = 3) were performed
to optimize selectivity of infusion to the ipsilateral hemispheric
cerebral circulation (Table 1). Injection volumes were 100 ␮l, 50 ␮l,
25 ␮l and 10 ␮l with ﬂow rates of 1.0 ␮l, 2.5 ␮l, 5.0 ␮l, 7.5 ␮l and
10 ␮l/min. The 100 ␮l volume showed contralateral staining at all
ﬂow rates except the 1 ␮l/min ﬂow rate which did not provide
enough force to overcome the opposing blood pressure of the
CCA to begin ink injection immediately. A time lapse of around
1 min was observed resulting in its exclusion from further testing. The 50 ␮l volume showed contralateral staining for the 5.0,

26

M. Maniskas et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 240 (2015) 22–27

Fig. 2. (A) Laser Speckle (n = 7): blood ﬂow measurements of the ipsilateral hemisphere at time points baseline (before occlusion), post occlusion (immediately after occlusion),
10 min reperfusion (Rp) and 15 min Rp. * indicates P = 0.017. (B) Laser Doppler (n = 22) MCA blood ﬂow measurement at time points baseline (before occlusion), occlusion
(immediately after occlusion) and reperfusion (5 min reperfusion). * indicates P = <0.001. (C) Infarct volume measurements vehicle (n = 10) versus sham (n = 8) after MCAO
surgery PSD 3. * indicates P = <0.001.

Table 1
Injection rates at 10, 7.5, 5.0, 2.5 and 1.0 ␮l/min at Injection Volumes 100, 50, 25 and 10 ␮l. Ipsilateral and Contralateral staining of the Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) at
speciﬁc injection rates and volumes, no staining at the 1.0 ␮l/min injection rate(*) due to opposing pressure from the CCA. No further testing of injection rate 1.0 ␮l/min
due to inability to overcome opposing pressure. Little to no contralateral staining was seen at the injection rate 2.5 ␮l/min at volumes 10 and 25 ␮l. Slight staining (**) was
seen in the frontal region of both hemispheres due to mice having an azygous Anterior Cerebral Artery. Carbon black ink was found throughout the liver and vasculature at
injection rates 10, 7.5 and 5.0 ␮l/min and injection volumes 100 and 50 ␮l with slight staining at 25 ␮l and no staining at 10 ␮l.
Hemispheric staining

Systemic staining

Injection rate (␮l/min)

Injection volume (␮l)

MCA staining
Ipsilateral

Contralateral

Ipsilateral

Contralateral

Liver

10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
1.0*
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
2.5
2.5

100
100
100
100
100
50
50
50
50
25
10

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Slight
No

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Slight
Slight**

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N/A
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Slight
No

7.5 and 10 ␮l/min infusion rates but little contralateral staining at
2.5 ␮l/min. The 25 ␮l volume showed contralateral staining for the
5.0, 7.5 and 10 ␮l/min ﬂow rates but little to no contralateral staining at 2.5 ␮l/min. The 10 ␮l volume at ﬂow rate 2.5 ␮l/min showed
no contralateral staining, leading us to determine the optimal ﬂow

rate as 2.5 ␮l/min at a volume between 10 and 25 ␮l. Cross sectional
liver images of ﬂow rate 2.5 ␮l/min at volumes listed above show
carbon black in the 25 and 50 ␮l but not in the 10 ␮l (Fig. 3A–H).
It is of note that with a different gauge needle and micro-angio
tubing the opposing blood pressure of the CCA could be overcome

Fig. 3. Red arrows signify carbon black ink staining in cerebral and liver vasculature. (A)–(D) Dorsal view of brain at injection rate 2.5 ␮L/min at volumes 10 ␮L, 25 ␮L, 50 ␮L
and 100 ␮L. (E)–(H) Circle of Willis at injection rate 2.5 ␮L/min at volumes 10 ␮L, 25 ␮L, 50 ␮L and 100 ␮L. (I)–(K) Cross section of liver at injection rate 2.5 ␮L/min at volumes
10 ␮L, 25 ␮L and 50 ␮L. (For interpretation of the references to color in this text, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

M. Maniskas et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 240 (2015) 22–27

by varying the above measurements (Lees et al., 2006; Savitz,
2007).
4. Discussion
The advancement of neuroprotective pharmacotherapy for
ischemic stroke has been complicated by failures in translation
from the laboratory to the clinic. Many promising neuroprotective agents have failed in both basic research and clinical trials
due to multiple factors, including failure to combine pharmacotherapy with vessel reperfusion, and failure to direct therapy
to the affected tissue in a timely fashion. With our modiﬁed
version of the MCAO model and potential for selective delivery of agents that could be neuroprotective, neuroreparative,
barrier-protective, or vasculo-protective, each of these issues are
addressed.
Imitating a thrombus in a large vessel occlusion by kinking
the MCA and clamping the CCA mimics the large vessel occlusion that is observed clinically. Removing the MCA metal wire and
CCA clamp restores blood ﬂow to the occluded vessel as would
be seen clinically with the mechanical retrieval of the thrombus.
Rapid recanalization of an occluded vessel in acute ischemic stroke
is paramount. Indeed, speed of recanalization is required by Comprehensive Stroke Centers to be reported as a ‘core measure’ to
the Joint Commission (JCAHO 07-22-2014). Retro-engineering our
mouse model from the clinical condition while incorporating ﬂow
rate and injection volume optimization allows us to mimic current neurosurgical practices. By bringing our mouse model one
step closer to what is seen clinically through the addition of intraarterial drug delivery, we are demonstrating current practices for
stroke treatment. The ﬂow rate and injection volume studies further mimic what is seen clinically with superselective drug delivery
but through optimization of ﬂow rate and injection volume we also
demonstrated that potential therapeutic compounds could selectively reach the site of ischemia for maximal effect and potentially
mitigate systemic side effects.
In this study, we employed an easily visible carbon black ink
mixture to optimize volume and ﬂow rates to maximally target
ipsilateral stroke brain tissue. One potential limitation of this study
is that this ink is more dense than typical pharmacologic agents in
solution. While this may confound the applicability of rate/volume
studies, lower density solutions would be expected to travel farther with a wider potential distribution (contralateral/systemic);
thus, the validated 2.5 ␮l/min ﬂow rate and 10–25 ␮l volume would
serve as an absolute maximum using this technique. However,
additional localization experiments for each target drug should be
conducted.

27

5. Conclusion
By modifying an already well-established mouse stroke model
and adapting it to mimic current clinical stroke treatment, we
have developed a novel method of intra-arterial drug delivery
for potential therapeutic compounds that may limit systemic side
effects, enable early pharmacotherapy, and provide methodology
for testing the role of acutely administered compounds for neuroprotection and neuro-repair in acute ischemic stroke.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Jill Roberts PhD for her guidance on
the MCAO procedure, Leon de Hoog for his technical assistance
with the Flow Rate and Injection Volume studies and Adam Bachstetter PhD for his insight. Funding was provided through the
Department of Neurosurgery at the University of Kentucky Medical
Center.
References
Aronowski J, Cho KH, Strong R, Grotta JC. Neuroﬁlament proteolysis after focal
ischemia; when do cells die after experimental stroke? J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab: Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 1999;19:652–60.
Broderick JP, Palesch YY, Demchuk AM, Yeatts SD, Khatri P, Hill MD, et al. Interventional management of stroke IIII (2013) endovascular therapy after intravenous
t-PA versus t-PA alone for stroke. N Engl J Med 2013;368:893–903.
Chen L, Swartz KR, Toborek M. Vessel microport technique for applications in cerebrovascular research. J Neurosci Res 2009;87:1718–27.
Fargen KM, Meyers PM, Khatri P, Mocco J. Improvements in recanalization with
modern stroke therapy: a review of prospective ischemic stroke trials during
the last two decades. J Neurointerv Surg 2013;5:506–11.
Hasan MR, Herz J, Hermann DM, Doeppner TR. Visualization of macroscopic cerebral
vessel anatomy – a new and reliable technique in mice. J Neurosci Methods
2012;204:249–53.
Investigators IIT. The interventional management of stroke (IMS) II study. Stroke: J
Cereb Circ 2007;38:2127–35.
Lee B, Clarke D, Al Ahmad A, Kahle M, Parham C, Auckland L, et al. Perlecan domain
V is neuroprotective and proangiogenic following ischemic stroke in rodents. J
Clin Invest 2011;121:3005–23.
Lees KR, Zivin JA, Ashwood T, Davalos A, Davis SM, Diener HC, et al. Stroke-acute
ischemic NXYTTI (2006) NXY-059 for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med
2006;354:588–600.
Lichtman JH, Watanabe E, Allen NB, Jones SB, Dostal J, Goldstein LB. Hospital arrival
time and intravenous t-PA use in US Academic Medical Centers, 2001–2004.
Stroke: J Cereb Circ 2009;40:3845–50.
Saver JL, Jahan R, Levy EI, Jovin TG, Baxter B, Nogueira RG, et al. Solitaire ﬂow
restoration device versus the Merci Retriever in patients with acute ischaemic
stroke (SWIFT): a randomised, parallel-group, non-inferiority trial. Lancet
2012;380:1241–9.
Savitz SI. A critical appraisal of the NXY-059 neuroprotection studies for acute
stroke: a need for more rigorous testing of neuroprotective agents in animal
models of stroke. Exp Neurol 2007;205:20–5.
Van Winkle JA, Chen B, Lei IF, Pereira B, Rajput PS, Lyden PD. Concurrent middle
cerebral artery occlusion and intra-arterial drug infusion via ipsilateral common
carotid artery catheter in the rat. J Neurosci Methods 2013;213:63–9.

