J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58
DOI 10.1007/s12031-013-0196-0

Ischemic Postconditioning Protects the Neurovascular Unit
after Focal Cerebral Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury
Dong Han & Shuo Zhang & Bin Fan & Lu-lu Wen &
Miao Sun & Hong Zhang & Juan Feng

Received: 21 October 2013 / Accepted: 26 November 2013 / Published online: 12 December 2013
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2013

Abstract Recently, cerebral ischemic postconditioning
(Postcond) has been shown to reduce infarction volume in
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. However, it is unclear if ischemic Postcond offers more extensive neuroprotection than current therapies. The aim of this study was to
investigate the neuroprotective effects of ischemic Postcond
on the neurovascular unit (NVU). A middle cerebral artery
occlusion rat model was used; cerebral infarct volumes, neurologic scores, and transmission electron microscopy were
evaluated 24 h after reperfusion. We used Evans blue extravasation, immunohistochemistry, and Western blot analyses to
evaluate the integrity of the blood brain barrier (BBB) and the
distribution and expression of the tight junction (TJ)-associated proteins of claudin-5 and occludin in brain microvessel
endothelium. The Postcond group showed significantly reduced infarct volumes and decreased neurologic impairment
scores compared to the I/R group. Also, injuries to the cerebral
microvascular endothelial cells, astrocytes, and neurons were
minimized in the Postcond group. The permeability of the
BBB increased in both the I/R and Postcond groups, but the
Postcond group showed a significant decrease in permeability
than the I/R group. Expression of both claudin-5 and occludin
were higher in the Postcond groups compared to the I/R
group, but expression of both proteins decreased in the I/R
and Postcond groups compared to the sham group. The results
of our study suggest that ischemic Postcond is an effective
way to reduce injury to neurons, astrocytes, and endothelial
cells, to increase protein expressions of TJ-associated proteins, and to improve BBB intergrity affected by focal I/R.
Ischemic Postcond could protect the NVU from I/R injury.
D. Han : S. Zhang : B. Fan : L.<l. Wen : M. Sun : H. Zhang :
J. Feng (*)
Department of Neurology, The Affiliated Shengjing Hospital of
China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110004, China
e-mail: handonghawk@163.com

Keywords Ischemic postconditioning . Neurovascular unit .
Ischemia/reperfusion . Neuroprotect . Blood–brain barrier

Introduction
Ischemic stroke is a leading cause of death and disability
worldwide, and its prevalence is increasing as the population
ages. Cerebral ischemic stroke is initiated by an occlusion of a
cerebral blood vessel. Survival and functional preservation of
the neurons in the ischemic penumbra are the ultimate goals of
clinical treatment. There are two primary classes of therapeutic options. First, cerebral blood flow can be restored by the
application of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), which can
salvage the peripheral ischemic penumbra if it is administered
within a specific treatment window. However, only 5 % of
stroke patients are eligible for tPA due to this narrow therapeutic time window (Wardlaw et al. 2009). Second, cell-based
therapies, which may protect viable neurons by interrupting
the cascade reaction of neuronal death initiated by an ischemic
stroke, have shown promise in animal test. However, cellbased therapies have failed in clinical trials (Richard Green
et al. 2003). Agents with demonstrated ability to reduce neuronal injury in either isolated cell cultures or in small animal
models of focal cerebral ischemia are ineffective in reducing
brain injury in ischemic stroke. The interventions that depend
solely upon “neuron protection” are likely insufficient to
achieve clinical benefits. Neurons account for less than 5 %
of cerebral tissue: the remaining tissue includes glia,
microvessels, and other tissues that support and modulate
the function of neurons. Therefore, salvaging neurons alone
may not be sufficient to prevent brain injury. Glial and vascular elements, as wells as other cells, must be protected. Lo
et al. (2003) introduced the concept of the “neurovascular
unit” (NVU), which consists of the blood–brain barrier
(BBB), astrocytes, neurons and their axons, and other

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

supporting cells such as microglia and oligodendroglia. The
NVU provides an integrated framework for investigating normal cerebral function as well as the pathogenesis of stroke and
potential therapies. During development, each component in
the NVU intercommunicates or interacts to form a structural
and functional barrier to modulate regional cerebral blood flow
and respond to injury (Hurwitz et al. 1993; Mabuchi et al.
2005). After ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), microvessel responses,
astrocyte injury, and neuron injury occur simultaneously (del
Zoppo 2009). An ordered relationship exists between
microvessels and neighboring neurons within the susceptible
territory, and rapid and significant alterations in the matrix of
the vascular and nonvascular compartments of the ischemic
territory occur (Mabuchi et al. 2005). Injury to any part of the
NVU could influence the other components. Thus, effective
therapies for ischemic stroke should protect the entire NVU
(del Zoppo 2006). Owing to the development of the concept of
the NVU, the focus of research attention in ischemic brain
injury has gradually shifted to the whole structure and function
of the NVU instead of the single neuron (Lin et al. 2005).
Ischemic postconditioning (Postcond) is a series of brief
nonfatal ischemia and reperfusion cycles applied in the early
phase of reperfusion of an ischemic organ,which induces tolerance of organ against long-term ischemic injury. Zhao et al.
(2006) first indicated that the neuroprotective effect of ischemic
Postcond alleviated I/R injury. Other studies have reported similar findings (Wang et al. 2008; Xing et al. 2008a, b; Pignataro
et al. 2008; Taskapilioglu et al. 2009; Rybnikova et al. 2012), and
its therapeutic feasibility in acute myocardial injury has been
proved by clinical trials (Staat et al. 2005). Recently, it was
reported that ischemic Postcond reduced neuronal cell death after
it was induced by transient global cerebral I/R (Wang et al. 2008)
and reduced neuronal injury after spinal cord ischemia (Jiang
et al. 2006). It is unclear if ischemic Postcond protects the entire
NVU against cerebral ischemia. Therefore, we investigated the
structural and functional changes in the NVU after ischemic
Postcond in a model of middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO). We also examined the protective effects of ischemic
Postcond on the BBB. We hypothesized that ischemic Postcond
would reduce injury to the NVU after focal cerebral I/R.

Materials and Methods
Experimental Animals and MCAO Model
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee of China Medical
University and were performed in accordance with the principles outlined in the National Institutes of Health Guide for
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Temporary focal
ischemia was induced in adult male Sprague–Dawley rats
weighing 250–280 g using the intraluminal vascular occlusion

51

method as previously described, with minor modifications
(Longa et al. 1989). Rats were anesthetized with 10 % chloral
hydrate (350 mg/kg, i.p.). Briefly, we surgically exposed the
right common carotid artery, internal carotid artery, and external carotid artery. A 4–0 monofilament nylon suture (Beijing
Sunbio Biotech Co. Ltd.) with a rounded tip was inserted into
the internal carotid artery through the external carotid artery
stump and gently advanced to occlude the middle cerebral
artery (MCA). After 120 min of MCAO, the suture was
removed to restore blood flow (reperfusion, confirmed by
laser Doppler). Sham-operated rats were manipulated in the
same way, but the MCA was not occluded. Animals were then
placed in a cage to recover from anesthesia at room temperature and were allowed food and drink. Core body temperatures
were monitored with a rectal probe and maintained at 37±
0.5 °C with a heating pad and lamp throughout the entire
procedure. All surgical procedures were performed under an
operating stereomicroscope.
Ischemic Postcond
Rats were randomly divided into three groups: (1) a shamoperated control group, (2) an I/R group, which included
120 min of MCAO followed by 24 h of reperfusion, and (3)
an ischemic Postcond group. The rats in both the I/R and the
ischemic Postcond groups were subjected to 2 h of focal
cerebral ischemia, as described previously. Following the
ischemia, the rats in the I/R group were subjected to 24 h of
reperfusion and the rats in the ischemic Postcond group were
subjected to three cycles of 30 s reperfusion/30 s occlusion
(Robin et al. 2011) (Fig. 1) at the beginning of reperfusion.
Rats were killed after 24 h of reperfusion. If there was evidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage on extraction of brain
tissue, the animal was excluded from the study.
Neurologic Scoring
The neurological deficit scores of the rats were measured 24 h
after reperfusion. Neurological scores were assessed on a
scale: 0, normal neurological function; 1, forelegs were bent
when the rat was hung up by its tail; 2, gripping force of
forelegs was reduced; 3, the rat could move in any direction,
but when it was pulled up by the tail, it turned to the opposite
side; and 4, the rat turned to the opposite side even when it
remained quiet with no interference (Bederson et al. 1986).
Infarct Size Measurement
Twenty-four hours after reperfusion, the rats were killed and
the brains were removed. Infarct volumes were measured, as
described previously. Briefly, brains (n =6 for each group)
were cut into 2-mm-thick coronal sections in a cutting block
and stained with 2 % 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride

52

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

Fig. 1 Experimental protocol
used to determine the effect of
ischemic Postcond after I/R. Sham
sham-operated rats, I/R rats
subjected to 120 min of MCAO
followed by reperfusion, Postcond
rats subjected to 120 min of
MCAO followed by ischemic
Postcond at the beginning of
reperfusion (ischemic Postcond
consisted of 3 cycles of 30 s
reperfusion/30 s occlusion)

(Sigma) for 30 min at 37 °C followed by overnight immersion
in 10 % formalin. The infarct tissue remained unstained
(white) and normal tissue was stained red. The lesion volume
was calculated by multiplying the infarct tissue area by the
thickness of slices. We adopted a previously described method
to eliminate the contribution of edema to the ischemic lesion,
which is described by the following formula: corrected infarct
volume=contralateral hemisphere volume −(ipsilateral hemisphere volume−measured infarct volume) (Tsubokawa et al.
2007). The infarct volume was presented as the percentage of
infarct as part of the total brain area.
Analysis of Transmission Electron Microscopy
The ultrastructure of NVU was detected by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) at 24 h after ischemia. The rat
brains were perfused with approximately 100 ml heparinized
saline and fixed with approximately 200 ml 4 % paraformaldehyde. The brains were dissected out, and the frontal and
parietal ischemic brain tissues were chosen as samples. The
samples were divided into 1×1×1-mm pieces, which were
successively fixed with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde and 4 % paraformaldehyde for several days at 4 °C. After gradient alcohol
dehydration and epoxy 618 embedding, semi-thin and ultrathin sections were made and stained with urany1 acetate and
lead citrate. Next, changes of the pinocytotic vesicles were
examined by TEM (JEM-1200EX). All experimental procedures for examination by TEM were assigned using the
double-blind method.
Sample Processing
Rats were killed 24 h after reperfusion and the brains were
quickly removed to collect the cerebral cortex for measurement of BBB permeability, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry assay. A 3-mm coronal section was taken from
the area perfused by the MCA starting 5 mm from the frontal
pole (Williams et al. 2004). Fresh cortical tissue was collected

from the MCA territory of the ischemic right hemisphere,
frozen immediately in LN2, and stored at −70 °C until needed
for further processing.
Evaluation of BBB Permeability
Two percent Evans blue (EB) dye (4 ml/kg, Sigma-Aldrich)
was slowly administered intravenously to the femoral vein
23 h after MCAO. After circulating for 60 min, the rat was
perfused with 300 ml saline and decapitated in order to harvest
the brain (n =8 in each group). The brain hemispheres were
separated along the sagittal suture. Both hemispheres were
weighed and incubated in 3 ml formamide at 60 °C for 24 h.
The solution was centrifuged for 20 min at 4,000 rpm. The
absorption of the supernatant was measured at 632 nm with a
spectrophotometer. The content of EB was calculated as μg/g
of brain tissue using a standardized curve.
Immunohistochemistry Assay
We used substance-P immunohistochemistry to evaluate the
distribution and expression of claudin-5 and occludin in brain
tissues of cerebral I/R, ischemic Postcond-treated, and shamoperated rats. Rats were deeply anesthetized and perfused
with heparinzed saline and 4 % paraformaldehyde. The brains
were post-fixed for 24 h and then immersed in 30 % sucrose
solution with phosphate-buffered salin (PBS) for 24 h.
Coronal sections at the level of the anterior commissure in
the region of the infarct tissue were cut into 10-μm-thick
sections on a cryostat at −25 °C. The sections were stained
with hematoxylin and eosin to confirm neuronal damage after
I/R. Serial sections were obtained for further immunohistochemistry analyses. The samples were rehydrated in PBS
before immunostaining, and then endogenous peroxidase activity was inactivated by incubation with 3 % H2O2 solution
for 10 min at room temperature. After blocking the sections
with normal goat serum for 30 min, the sections were incubated with goat serum for an additional 30 min. The sections

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

were incubated with rabbit polyclonal anti-claudin-5 antibody
(diluted 1:150; Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or rabbit polyclonal anti-occludin antibody (diluted 1:150; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology) overnight at 4 °C. Negative controls were
established by exchanging the primary antibody for PBS
during the incubation. The remaining procedures conformed
to the standard procedures. For semi-quantitative measurements of claudin-5 and occludin density, the slides were
photographed and analyzed using a computer-aided image
analysis system (Motic Images Advanced 3.2).
Western Blot Analysis
We used Western blot analysis to quantify the expression of
the proteins claudin-5 and occludin. The procedure was performed as described by Jiao et al. (2011). The rats were killed
by decapitation, and we immediately obtained microvessel
fragments containing 20 μg of protein from rat brain tissues
in each experimental group. The proteins were size-separated
by 7 to 10 % SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis at
120 V for 90 min and then transferred to nitrocellulose using
a Bio-Rad Trans-Blot apparatus at 100 V for 2 h. The membrane was blocked with 5 % nonfat milk/TBST (pH 7.6) for
2 h. Next, the membrane was incubated with polyclonal rabbit
anti-claudin-5 (diluted 1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology),
rabbit anti-o ccludin (diluted 1:50 0; Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), or mouse anti-β-actin (diluted 1:5,000;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology) diluted in 1 % BSA/TBST buffer
overnight at 4 °C. The membrane was washed three times for
10 min each with TBST buffer and incubated with horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (1:10,000) for 1 h
at room temperature. Immunoreactive bands were visualized
by chemiluminescence (ECL kit; Santa Cruz Biotechnology).
Protein bands were scanned with Chemi Imager 5500 V2.03
software. The integrated density value (IDV) was calculated
with a computer-aided image analysis system (Fluor Chen
2.0) and normalized with the IDV of β-actin.
Statistical Analyses
All data are expressed as means±SD. Student’s t-test was
applied to test for a normal distribution. The EB data were
analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and posthoc Student–Newman–Keuls test. Results were considered
statistically significant at P-values <0.05.

Results
Infarct Volumes and Neurological Scores
Ischemic Postcond treatment significantly decreased infarct volumes 24 h after reperfusion. Three reperfusion/occlusion cycles

53

of 30 s each performed at the onset of reperfusion decreased the
cerebral infarct volumes by 43 % (Fig. 2a and b). There was a
significant improvement in neurologic function 24 h after reperfusion in the Postcond group compared to the I/R group. Shamoperated rats did not have any deficits (Fig. 2c).
Ultrastructure Changes of the NVU
In the sham group, the neurons (Fig. 3a) and astrocytes
(Fig. 3d) showed a smooth nuclear membrane, clear nucleoli,
homogeneously distributed chromatin, and abundant mitochondria, ribosomes, golgi complexes, and lysosomes. The
sham group (Fig. 3g) had normal microvascular endothelial
cells and intact tight junctions (TJs) and basal lamina. In the I/
R group, the neurons (Fig. 3b) and astrocytes (Fig. 3e) showed
structural changes, including an indistinct nuclear membrane
and destroyed intracellular organelles such as decreased mitochondrial ridges, ruptured mitochondrial outer membranes,
and vacuolar degeneration of mitochondria. In the I/R group,
the microvascular endothelial layer and basal lamina were
damaged, evidenced by an enlarged endothelial cell gap,
opened TJ, and edema of the cytoplasm and matrix
(Fig. 3h). In the Postcond group, the structure of neurons
(Fig. 3c), astrocytes (Fig. 3f), and microvessels (Fig. 3i)
showed some changes, but none was as severe as the I/R
group. TJs and basal laminas were intact in the Postcond
group.
BBB Leakage
EB extravasation provided evidence for BBB integrity. The
results showed that the EB content was lower in the Postcond
group (4.37±0.83 μg/g) than in the I/R group (6.65±1.23 μg/g,
P <0.05) but significantly higher than in the sham group (2.41±
0.46 μg/g, P <0.01) (Fig. 4). The results indicate that ischemic
Postcond could inhibit BBB disruption by I/R injury.
Protein Distribution and Expression of Claudin-5
and Occludin
We included immunohistochemistry and Western blot analyses of claudin-5 and occludin in our study to characterize the
specific role of TJs in MCAO-induced BBB damage. The
immunohistochemistry analysis revealed that claudin-5 and
occludin were both located continuously on cerebral
microvessels in the sham group. However, in the I/R and
Postcond groups, the results showed a lack of continuity in
the distribution of the proteins as well as decreased expression
levels (Fig. 5a). We observed significant decreases in the mean
optical density values of claudin-5 and occludin in the I/R and
Postcond groups compared to the sham group (P <0.01;
Fig 5b and c). Also, the expressions of claudin-5 and occludin
were significantly increased in the Postcond group, and the

54

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

Fig. 2 Effect of ischemic
Postcond on infarct volume
percentages and neurological
outcomes 24 h after reperfusion.
a Infarct areas were visualized by
TTC staining. Representative
coronal sections indicate the
following groups: sham group, I/R
group, and Postcond group. b
Infarct volume percentages of the
rats. c Quantification of
neurologic scores 24 h after focal
ischemia. Values represent the
means±SD (n =6, each).
**P<0.01 vs. sham group

distributions of claudin-5 and occludin showed more continuity along the microvessels compared to the I/R group (Fig. 5a).
The protein expression levels of claudin-5 and occludin in
I/R rats shown by Western blot analyses confirmed the effects
of ischemic Postcond. As shown in Fig. 6, the expression of
the proteins in cerebral microvessels was significantly decreased in the I/R and Postcond groups compared to the sham
group (P <0.01). However, the expressions of claudin-5 and
occludin were significantly higher in the Postcond group
compared to the I/R group (P <0.01).

Discussion
In our study, ischemic Postcond decreased infarct volumes
and decreased neurologic impairment 24 h after reperfusion.
We observed distinct ultrastructural changes in neurons, astrocytes, and microvessels, as well as significantly discontinuous distribution and decreased expression levels of claudin-5
and occludin in cerebral microvessels. Our results also
showed that BBB leakage in the penumbra induced by I/R
injury was alleviated by ischemic Postcond. Treatment with
ischemic Postcond significantly up-regulated the expression
levels of claudin-5 and occludin, which, at least in part,
improved the TJ integrity between brain microvessel endothelial cells during cerebral I/R. This is the first study

demonstrating that ischemic Postcond can reduce the I/R
injury to the cellular structures of neurons, astrocytes, and
microvessels and mitigate BBB leakage by up-regulating the
expressions of claudin-5 and occludin to recover TJ integrity.
Recent studies have demonstrated that the protective effects of ischemic Postcond depend on the onset time of
Postcond (Gao et al. 2008), the number of cycles of occluding
and releasing the blood vessels (Pignataro et al. 2008; Gao
et al. 2008), and the degree of ischemia (Zhao et al. 2006). In
the present study, 3 I/R cycles of 30 s each performed at the
onset of reperfusion decreased the cerebral infarct volume by
43 %. This result is similar to the neuroprotection observed
following ischemic Postcond in the same model of transient
MCAO (Robin et al. 2011; Li et al. 2012). The present study
supports the findings of previous studies that reported that
3 cycles of 30 s reperfusion/30 s occlusion was an effective
ischemic Postcond procedure to reduce infarction volume and
alleviate neurological deficits in rats (Robin et al. 2011; Xing
et al. 2008a, b; Li et al. 2012). Occlusion that leads to brain
ischemia commonly occurs in the MCA, and the MCAO
model closely represents clinical events. Therefore , we tested
our hypothesis in a rat model of MCAO.
The NVU is a structural and functional unit of the nervous
system that consists of the BBB, astrocytes, neurons and their
axons, and other supporting cells. Neurons, astrocytes, and
microvessels are the most important components in the NVU,

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

55

Fig 3 Effect of ischemic Postcond on the ultrastructure of the NVU,
evaluated by TEM 24 h after MCAO (n =4/group). a Neuron in the sham
group. b Neuron in the I/R group. c Neuron in the Postcond group. d
Astrocyte in the sham group. e Astrocyte in the I/R group. f Astrocyte in

the Postcond group. g Microvessel in the sham group. h Microvessel in
the I/R group. i Microvessel in the Postcond group. One arrow TJ, three
arrows basal lamina. Scale bar: a–f 1 μm; g–i 0.5 μm

so in our study, these cells were the focus of experimental
observations. In previous studies, observations focused only
on neurons after cerebral ischemia. Ischemia affects not only
neurons but also astrocytes and other cells that support the

neurons. Neurons and microvessels respond equally rapidly to
the ischemic insult (Mabuchi et al. 2005). Therefore, attention
should shift from neurons alone to the complex of neurons, the
microvessels that supply them, astrocytes, and other supportive cells. Ischemic Postcond could reduce neuronal loss
(Wang et al. 2008) and the expression of cytochrome c and
heat-shock protein 70 in neurons (Xing et al. 2008a). Our
study showed that ischemic Postcond significantly reduced
not only the structural injury of neurons but also astrocytes
and microvascular endothelial cells. Following cerebral I/R,
the neurons and astrocytes were injured; this was evidenced
by changes in their cellular structures and intracellular organelles. In addition, the microvessels were destroyed, evidenced
by enlarged endothelial cell gaps, opened TJs, and discontinuous endothelial layers and basal laminas. Ischemic Postcond
could reduce these injuries. Our results demonstrate that ischemic Postcond could protect the structure of the NVU from
I/R injury. Meanwhile, ischemic Postcond could improve

Fig. 4 BBB permeability following focal cerebral ischemia was detected
by extravasation of Evans blue (EB). Experiment groups are sham, I/R,
and Postcond. EB content is reported as the means±SD (n =8/group).
*P<0.01 vs. sham group; #P<0.05 vs. I/R group

56

Fig. 5 The distribution and expression of claudin-5 and occludin in
ischemic cerebral microvessels 24 h after I/R were analyzed by immunohistochemistry. a Representative immunohistochemical staining graphs
of claudin-5 and occludin in the sham, I/R, and Postcond groups. b, c

Fig. 6 The protein levels of TJassociated proteins in ischemic
cerebral microvessels were detected
by Western blot analysis 24 h after
cerebral I/R. a Representative
protein expression bands of
claudin-5 and occludin in the sham,
I/R, and Postcond groups. b The
ratio of claudin-5 IDV to β-actin
IVD 24 h after cerebral I/R. c The
ratio of occludin IDV to β-actin
IVD 24 h after cerebral I/R. Data
are presented as the means±SD
(n =6/group). **P<0.01 vs. sham
group; #P<0.05 and ##P<0.01
vs. I/R group

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

Mean optical densities of claudin-5 and occludin. Data are presented the
means±SD (n =6/group). Arrows point to brain capillaries. **P<0.01 vs.
sham group; ##P<0.01 vs. I/R group. Scale bar =10 μm

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58

neurological function, as reported in our study. Xing et al.
(2008a) also reported that ischemic Postcond attenuated neurologic deficits in a model of focal cerebral ischemia. Wang
et al. (2008) showed that ischemic Postcond improved learning and memory in rats subjected to global cerebral ischemia.
The BBB, which includes endothelial cells, the basal lamina matrix, astrocyte end-feet and pericytes, is the core structure of the NVU, and its permeability affects the stability of
the internal environment of the central nervous system. BBB
properties are primarily determined by endothelial TJs.
Cerebral I/R injury weakens the structure and function of the
BBB, which results in increased permeability of the BBB
(Petty and Lo 2002; Witt et al. 2003; Weiss et al. 2009).
Alterations in microvessel integrity may have subsequent
effects within the NVU that could affect neuronal function
(del Zoppo and Milner 2006). Injury to the BBB could lead to
an extravasation of high molecular weight molecules, followed by water, which would result in brain edema and hemorrhagic transformation. Increased BBB permeability after reperfusion is an underlying cause of brain I/R injury; furthermore, increased permeability facilitates the exudation of inflammatory cells and proteins, which trigger an inflammatory
cascade reaction that damages the NVU (del Zoppo 2009). In
our study, the permeability of the BBB increased after reperfusion, but ischemic Postcond prevented the increased BBB
permeability. Ren’s work demonstrated that delayed Postcond
reduced BBB leakage in the penumbra after 24 h of reperfusion (Ren et al. 2008). I/R injury induces TJ opening and
cellular redistribution and alters TJ protein expression
(Cipolla et al. 2004). Dramatic changes in the distribution
and structure of TJs are necessary to increase BBB permeability following reperfusion (Kago et al. 2006; Yang et al. 2007).
Using TEM, we observed that the TJ between cerebral
microvessel endothelial cells was open after 24 h of reperfusion, and ischemic Postcond treatment partly alleviated I/Rinduced damage to TJ integrity. Transmembrane proteins,
including claudins and occludin, form the TJs and provide
the BBB’s structure and function (Hawkins and Davis 2005).
Occludin, the most important TJ protein, seals the TJ.
Degradation of occludin alone increases BBB permeability
(Tavelin et al. 2003; Lochhead et al. 2010). Claudin-5 actively
regulates small molecule paracellular permeability. Yang et al.
(2007) demonstrated that a significant reduction of claudin-5
disrupted the BBB at 3 and 24 h of reperfusion following
cerebral ischemia. We observed that the expression levels of
claudin-5 and occludin were significantly decreased compared
with the sham group after 24 h of reperfusion. We also
observed altered distribution and loss of continuity of
claudin-5 and occludin along cerebral microvessel following
MCAO. We demonstrated that ischemic Poscond significantly
ameliorated the distribution and up-regulated the expression
of claudin-5 and occludin following cerebral I/R injury compared to the I/R group. Yang et al. (2013) also reported that

57

ischemic Postcond improved the discontinuous distribution of
claudin-5 and occludin. These results support the protective
effect of ischemic Postcond against BBB damage primarily
through a paracelluar pathway.
The mechanism by which ischemic Postcond protects the
BBB after I/R is not yet clear. Previous studies reported that
ischemic Postcond alleviated I/R injury by reducing the inflammatory response (Xing et al. 2008b), cell apoptosis (Xing et al.
2008a), and oxidative stress (Li et al. 2012). Inflammatory and
oxidative stresses could injure the BBB and increase its permeability. A recent study showed that ischemic Postcond reduced
brain edema and infarct volume and improved neurological
function, which may involve decreased MMP9 expression
and attenuation of ischemia-induced degradation of laminin
and fibronectin (Liu et al. 2012).
There are some limitations in our study. First, we conducted our observations 24 h after reperfusion. Ideally, the NVU
should be observed at different times to assess the long-term
protective effects of ischemic Postcond. It is possible that
ischemic Postcond treatment only leads to transient protection
of the NVU. Second, we used three cycles of brief
reperfusion/occlusion (30 s each) in the ischemic Postcond
procedure, which proved effective in our study and other
research (Robin et al. 2011; Li et al. 2012). However, Zhao
(2007) proposed that the protective effects of ischemic
Postcond depended on the number and duration of cycles of
reperfusion/occlusion and the onset time of Postcond. More
tests are needed to clarify whether our method is the most
effective. Third, the complete mechanism of I/R injury and the
relationship between neurons, astrocytes, and microvascular
endothelium in cerebral I/R injury are still not clear. More
work is needed to explain these relationships.
In conclusion, our results suggest that ischemic Postcond
may be a neuroprotective therapeutic method for treating
cerebral I/R injury. Ischemic Postcond may reduce structural
and functional damage caused by I/R to the NVU and decrease damage to TJ integrity and the permeability of the
BBB, which would ultimately protect the NVU from injury.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Doctor Start-up
Fund of Liaoning Province (20121131) and Fundamental Research Funds
of Shengjing Hospital (M995).

References
Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski H
(1986) Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model
and development of a neurologic examination. Stroke 17:472–476
Cipolla MJ, Crete R, Vitullo L, Rix RD (2004) Transcellular transport as
mechanism of blood–brain barrier disruption during stroke. Front
Biosci 9:777–785
del Zoppo GJ (2006) Stroke and neurovascular protection. N Engl J Med
354:553–555

58
del Zoppo GJ (2009) Inflammation and the neurovascular unit in the
setting of focal cerebral ischemia. Neuroscience 158:972–982
del Zoppo GJ, Milner R (2006) Integrin–matrix interactions in the cerebral
microvasculature. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:1966–1975
Gao X, Ren C, Zhao H (2008) Protective effects of ischemic
postconditioning compared with gradual reperfusion or preconditioning. J Neurosci Res 86:2505–2511
Hawkins BT, Davis TP (2005) The blood–brain barrier/neurovascular
unit in health and disease. Pharmacol Rev 57:173–185
Hurwitz AA, Berman JW, Rashbaum WK, Lyman WD (1993) Human
fetal astrocytes induce the expression of blood–brain barrier specific
proteins by autologous endothelial cells. Brain Res 625:238–243
Jiang X, Shi E, Nakajima Y, Sato S (2006) Postconditioning, a series of
brief interruptions of early reperfusion, prevents neurologic injury
after spinal cord ischemia. Ann Surg 244:148–153
Jiao H, Wang Z, Liu Y, Wang P, Xue Y (2011) Specific role of tight junction
proteins claudin-5, occludin, and ZO-1 of the blood–brain barrier in a
focal cerebral ischemic insult. J Mol Neurosci 44:130–139
Kago T, Takagi N, Date I, Takenaga Y, Takagi K, Takeo S (2006)
Cerebral ischemia enhance tyrosine phosphorylation of occludin in
brain capillaries. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 339:1197–1203
Li ZY, Liu B, YU J, Yang FW, Luo YN, Ge PF (2012) Ischaemic
postconditioning rescues brain injury caused by focal ischaemia/
reperfusion via attenuation of protein oxidization. J Int Med Res 40:
954–966
Lin G, Bjornsson CS, Smith KL, Abdul-Karim MA, Turner JN, Shain W
et al (2005) Automated image analysis methods for 3-D quantification of the neurovascular unit from multichannel confocal microscope images. Cytometry A 66:9–23
Liu XR, Luo M, Yan F, Zhang CC, Li SJ, Zhao HP et al (2012) Ischemic
postconditioning diminishes matrix metalloproteinase 9 expression
and attenuates loss of the extracellular matrix proteins in rats following middle cerebral artery occlusion and reperfusion. CNS
Neurosci Ther 18:855–863
Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA (2003) Mechanisms, challenges and
opportunities in stroke. Nat Rev Neurosci 4:399–415
Lochhead JJ, McCaffrey G, Quigley CE, Flinch J, DeMarco KM, Nametz
N et al (2010) Oxidative stress increases blood–brain barrier permeability and induces alterations in occludin during hypoxia–reoxygenation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30:1625–1636
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R (1989) Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20:84–91
Mabuchi T, Lucero J, Feng A, Koziol JA, del Zoppo GJ (2005) Focal
cerebral ischemia preferentially affects neurons distant from their
neighboring microvessels. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 25:257–266
Petty MA, Lo EH (2002) Junctional complexes of the blood–brain
barrier: permeability changes in neuroinflammation. Prog
Neurobiol 68:311–323
Pignataro G, Meller R, Inoue K, Ordonez AN, Ashley MD, Xiong Z et al
(2008) In vivo and in vitro characterization of a novel neuroprotective strategy for stroke: ischemic postconditioning. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 28:232–241
Ren C, Gao X, Niu G, Yan Z, Chen X, Zhao H (2008) Delayed
postconditioning protects against focal ischemic brain injury in rats.
PloS One 3:e3851
Richard Green A, Odergren T, Ashwood T (2003) Animal models of
stroke: do they have value for discovering neuroprotective agents?
Trends Pharmacol Sci 24:402–408

J Mol Neurosci (2014) 53:50–58
Robin E, Simerabet M, Hassoun SM, Adamczyk S, Tavernier B, Vallet B
et al (2011) Postconditioning in focal cerebral ischemia: role of the
mitochondrial ATP-dependent potassium channel. Brain Res 1375:
137–146
Rybnikova E, Vorobyev M, Pivina S, Samoilov M (2012)
Postconditioning by mild hypoxic exposures reduces rat brain injury
caused by severe hypoxia. Neurosci Lett 513:100–105
Staat P, Rioufol G, Piot C, Cottin Y, Cung TT, L'Huillier I et al (2005)
Postconditioning the human heart. Circulation 112:2143–2148
Taskapilioglu MO, Alkan T, Goren B, Tureyen K, Sahin S, Taskapilioglu
O et al (2009) Neuronal protective effects of focal ischemic pre- and/
or postconditioning on the model of transient focal cerebral ischemia
in rats. J Clin Neurosci 16:693–697
Tavelin S, Hashimoto K, Malkinson J, Lazorova L, Toth I, Artursson P
(2003) A new principle for tight junction modulation based on
occludin peptides. Mol Pharmacol 64:1530–1540
Tsubokawa T, Jadhav V, Solaroglu I, Shiokawa Y, Konishi Y, Zhang JH
(2007) Lecithinized superoxide dismutase improves outcomes and
attenuates focal cerebral ischemic injury via antiapoptotic mechanisms in rats. Stroke 38:1057–1062
Wang JY, Shen J, Gao Q, Ye ZG, Yang SY, Liang HW et al (2008)
Ischemic postconditioning protects against global cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion-induced injury in rats. Stroke 39:983–990
Wardlaw JM, Murray V, Berge E, del Zoppo GJ (2009) Thrombolysis for
acute ischaemic stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, CD000213
Weiss N, Miller F, Cazaubon S, Couraud PO (2009) The blood–brain
barrier in brain homeostasis and neurological diseases. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1788:842–857
Williams AJ, Berti R, Dave JR, Elliot PJ, Adams J, Tortella FC (2004)
Delayed treatment of ischemia/reperfusion brain injury: extended
therapeutic window with the proteosome inhibitor MLN519. Stroke
35:1186–1191
Witt KA, Mark KS, Hom S, Davis TP (2003) Effects of hypoxia–
reoxygenation on rat blood–brain barrier permeability and tight
junctional protein expression. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
285:H2820–H2831
Xing B, Chen H, Zhang M, Zhao D, Jiang R, Liu X et al (2008a) Ischemic
postconditioning inhibits apoptosis after focal cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion injury in the rat. Stroke 39:2362–2369
Xing B, Chen H, Zhang M, Zhao D, Jiang R, Liu X et al (2008b) Ischemic
postco.nditioning protects brain and reduces inflammation in a rat
model of focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion. J Neurochem 105:
1737–1745
Yang Y, Estrada EY, Ehompson JF, Liu W, Rosenberg GA (2007) Matrix
metalloproteinase-mediated disruption of tight junction proteins in
cerebral vessels is reversed by synthetic matrix metalloproteinase
inhibitor in focal ischemia in rat. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27:
697–709
Yang F, Zhang X, Sun Y, Wang B, Zhou C, Luo Y et al (2013) Ischemic
postconditioning decreases cerebral edema and brain blood barrier
disruption caused by relief of carotid stenosis in a rat model of
cerebral hypoperfusion. PloS One 8:e57869
Zhao H (2007) The protective effect of ischemic postconditioning against
ischemic injury: from the heart to the brain. J Neuroimmune Pharm
2:313–318
Zhao H, Sapolsky RM, Steinberg GK (2006) Interrupting reperfusion as a stroke therapy: ischemic postconditioning reduces
infarct size after focal ischemia in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 26:1114–1121

