ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Convergent and Divergent Pathways Decoding Hierarchical
Additive Mechanisms in Treating Cerebral Ischemia–Reperfusion
Injury
Ying-Ying Zhang,1 Hai-Xia Li,2 Yin-Ying Chen,1 Hong Fang,3 Ya-Nan Yu,1 Jun Liu,1 Zhi-Wei Jing,1 Zhong Wang1
& Yong-Yan Wang1
1 Institute of Basic Research in Clinical Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China
2 Guang’anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing, China
3 Z-Tech Corp, an ICE International Company at National Center for Toxicological Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, AR, USA

Keywords
Additive effect; Cerebral ischemia; Drug
combination; Ingenuity Pathway Analysis;
Pharmacological mechanism.
Correspondence
Z. Wang, Institute of Basic Research in Clinical
Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical
Sciences, Dongzhimen, Beijing 100700, China.
Tel.: +86-10-6401-4411-3308;
Fax: +86-10-8403-2881;
E-mail: zhonw@vip.sina.com
Received 25 August 2013; revision 14
October 2013; accepted 15 October 2013

SUMMARY
Introduction: Cerebral ischemia is considered to be a highly complex disease resulting
from the complicated interplay of multiple pathways. Disappointedly, most of the previous
studies were limited to a single gene or a single pathway. The extent to which all involved
pathways are translated into fusing mechanisms of a combination therapy is of fundamental
importance. Aims: We report an integrative strategy to reveal the additive mechanism that
a combination (BJ) of compound baicalin (BA) and jasminoidin (JA) fights against cerebral
ischemia based on variation of pathways and functional communities. Results: We identified six pathways of BJ group that shared diverse additive index from 0.09 to 1, which
assembled broad cross talks from seven pathways of BA and 16 pathways of JA both at horizontal and vertical levels. Besides a total of 60 overlapping functions as a robust integration
background among the three groups based on significantly differential subnetworks, additive mechanism with strong confidence by networks altered functions. Conclusions: These
results provide strong evidence that the additive mechanism is more complex than previously appreciated, and an integrative analysis of pathways may suggest an important paradigm for revealing pharmacological mechanisms underlying drug combinations.

doi: 10.1111/cns.12205

Introduction
Cerebral ischemia is one of the leading causes of death and disability in the world [1], which is considered to be a highly complex
disease resulting from the complicated interplay of multiple pathways including excitotoxicity, acidotoxicity, and ionic imbalance
induced by membrane depolarization, release of the pathological
excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, and intracellular calcium
overload; peri-infarct depolarizations caused by cortical spreading
depression; deleterious levels of reactive oxygen species produced
by mitochondria due to high levels of intracellular Ca2+, Na+, and
ADP; the responsibilities of cellular response, cytokine response,
and response to Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation for inflammation; apoptosis triggered by oxygen free radicals, death receptor
ligation, DNA damage, protease activation, and ionic imbalance
[2]; and of course other unknown mechanisms of necroptosis [3].
These processes share overlapping and redundant features and
cause injury to neurons, glia, and endothelial cells. Hence, it may
be unrealistic to expect that a single drug will demonstrate sufficient benefit in cerebral ischemia. Two or more drugs in combination have the potential for improved efficacy through a variety of

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

synergistic or additive mechanisms [4–7]. Disappointedly, most of
the previous studies were limited to a single gene or a single pathway. Encouragingly, it has been shown recently that compound/
drug for certain complex diseases could act on multiple genes,
pathways, and targets [8,9]. Furthermore, based on the theory of
systems biology, network pharmacology, mapping the polypharmacology network onto the human disease-gene network, reveals
that drugs often act on multiple targets and these drug targets are
often involved with multiple diseases, which may provide us a
new approach of drug discovery for complex diseases [10,11].
Scutellaria and Gardenia have been used to treat stroke patients
in China for thousands of years. Baicalin (BA, effective component of Scutellaria) and jasminoidin (JA, effective component of
Gardenia) were extracted from Qingkailing injection that could
significantly reduce the ischemic infarct volume in our previous
studies [8,9]. Additionally, a study found that in the view of pharmacodynamics, the combination of BA and JA based on a new
model of compatibility was superior to BA or JA monotherapy in
the treatment for cerebral ischemia in rats [12]. We have a great
interest in investigating the pharmacological mechanism of combination therapies through the methodology of network pharma-

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

253

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

cology, so the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) system was
applied for further analyses. IPA can provide us a knowledge base,
and a powerful data support about the omics was used to analyze
the differentially expressed genes, which may help us identify statistically significant signaling pathways and network functions.
The results of our study will present a network-based analysis of
the additive mechanism of compound/drug combination therapy
against cerebral ischemia.

ment, but the filament was not inserted. During the experimental
process, blood pressure, blood gas, and glucose levels were monitored, rectal temperature was maintained at 37.0–37.5°C with a
heating pad, body temperature was maintained at 37°C with a
thermostatically controlled infrared lamp, and brain temperature
(monitored with a 29-gauge thermocouple in the right corpus striatum) was maintained at 36–37°C with a temperature-regulating
lamp. EEGs were monitored to ensure isoelectricity during ischemia. Based on the infarction volume or behaviors of these mice,
we could determine whether the operations were successful.

Materials and methods
Animals

Drug Administration

Animal use protocols were reviewed and approved by the Ethics
Review Committee for Animal Experimentation, China Academy
of Chinese Medical Sciences, and all animal experiments were
conducted in accordance with the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 1986 and the National Institute of Health guidelines on
the care and use of laboratory animals for experimental procedures. The process of animal experiment and data analysis is
showed in Figure 1. A total of 240 healthy, specific pathogen-free,
adult male Kunming mice, 12 weeks of age, weighted 38–48 g,
kept at 25°C with a 12 h light/dark cycle, were randomly divided
into five groups, with 48 mice in each group.

The experimental animals were randomly divided into five
groups: vehicle group, sham-operated group, BA-treated group
(5 mg/mL), JA-treated group (25 mg/mL), and BJ-treated group
(combination of BA and JA, a mixture of equal volumes of BA
and JA). The herbal preparations were chemically standardized
products obtained from China Natural Institute for the Control of
Pharmaceutical and Biological Product or Beijing University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, and their compositions had been
validated using fingerprint chromatographic methodologies. All
treatment drugs in the form of injection, dissolved in 0.9% NaCl
just before use, were into the tail vein 1.5 h after the induction of
focal cerebral ischemia. The animals in the vehicle group and the
sham-operated group received an injection of saline (2 mL/kg
body weight) from the tail vein at the same time point.

Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
After being anesthetized with 2% napental (4 mg/kg, i.p.), the
mice were subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO),
ligated with an intraluminal filament for 1.5 h, and then reperfused for 24 h. In the sham-operated mice, the external carotid
artery (ECA) was surgically prepared for the insertion of the fila-

Combination Effect Analysis
One hundred and fifty mice were employed to analyze the combined effect of BA and JA (chemical structures shown in Figure 1A).

(A)

(B)

(C)
Figure 1 Validation of additive
pharmacological effect between baicalin (BA)
and jasminoidin (JA). Combination of BA and JA
exerted an additive effect on the infarction
volume according to the median-effect
method. (A) The chemical structure of BA and
JA. (B) BA, JA, and BJ all had dose-dependent
effects in reducing the infarction volume. (C)
The concentrations of JA and BA ranging from
1 to 16 mg/mL had CI values close to 1.0,
suggesting an additive effect between JA and
BA.

254

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

BA, JA, and their combination at five concentrations ranging
among 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 mg/mL were combined (1:1) to analyze
the synergistic or additive effect using the CompuSyn software
(ComboSyn, Inc., Paramus, NJ, USA). To determine the style of
combination effect on infarction volume, the dose–effect curves of
single or combined drug treatment were analyzed based on the
median-effect method. In the median-effect method, a combination index (CI) value of less than, equal to, or more than 1
indicated synergy, additivity, or antagonism, respectively. The
median-effect equation describes dose–effect relationships in the
simplest possible term [13], which is given by the dose of a drug;
Fa is the fraction affected by drug’s dose. The effect (Fa) for any
given dose (D) can be determined in this method.

RNA Isolation
The left hippocampus of nine mice from each group was homogenized in TRIzol Reagent, and the total RNA was isolated according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was further purified to
remove the genomic DNA contamination and concentrated using
an RNeasy micro kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). The RNA quality was assessed by determining the 26 S/18 S ratio using Bioanalyzer microchip (Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA).

Microarray
The mouse brain array (Boao Capital, Beijing, China), a microarray chip containing 16,463 oligoclones (Incyte Genomics, Santa
Clara, CA, USA), was used to conduct gene expression profiling.
On a given chip, each clone was printed in duplicate spots, generating four technical replicates for each clone. A single intensity
value for each clone was generated by averaging the quadruplet
measurements after smoothing spline normalization. All clones
had been verified by DNA sequencing. RNA from the vehicle
group as a pool was labeled with Cy3, while RNA from the other
groups was labeled with Cy5. The microarrays were hybridized,
washed, and scanned according to standard protocols. For each
group, the above procedures were repeated in at least biological
triplicates and technical quadruplets.

Microarray Data Analysis
All experimental data were uploaded to the ArrayTrack system. Experimental analysis was based on the Minimum Information about a Microarray Experiment guidelines and
Microarray Quality Control project. The results were submitted
to the Array Express database. All microarray data were normalized by locally weighted linear regression (Lowess) so as to
reduce the experimental variability (smoothing factor, 0.2;
robustness iterations, 3). A one-way ANOVA model and significance analysis of microarrays (SAM) were used to compare
the means of the altered genes between sham and vehicle,
BA and vehicle, JA and vehicle, and BJ and vehicle groups.
Genes with a P value <0.05 and a fold change >1.5 were
picked out for further analysis. In addition, an increase >1.5fold or a decrease <0.5-fold of expression levels indicated
up-regulation or down-regulation, respectively. And then, all
of the significantly differentially expressed genes were

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

uploaded to the IPA system (http://www.ingenuity.com/). A
cutoff was set to identify molecules whose expression was significantly differentially regulated. These molecules were called
network-eligible molecules. Networks of network-eligible molecules were then algorithmically generated based on their connectivity. Right-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to calculate
a P value determining the probability that each biological
function assigned to that network was due to chance alone.
The significance of association between these genes and the
canonical pathway was measured in two ways: (1) a ratio of
the number of genes from the data set that mapped to the
pathway divided by the total number of genes that mapped to
the canonical pathway was displayed, and (2) Fischer’s exact
test was used to calculate a P value determining the probability that the association between the genes and the canonical
pathway was explained by chance alone. The level of statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. Finally, canonical pathways with a P value <0.05 and a fold change >1.5 were
screened out and analyzed.

Defining Additive Index
Multiple pathways coordinate or interact with one another to
achieve a complex biological process that can contribute to the
additive effect. On the basis of pathway-components-related variation, we defined the additive exponent additive index (AI) of
node j by
AI ðjÞ ¼ 1 

k
T
P
Pi

(1)

i¼1

where AI (j) refers to the additive index of any pathway j in
drug combination group, P represents the number of statistically
significant pathway, which is induced by every compound from
i, and k is defined as the total number of pathways stimulated
by all the compounds connected with j.

Real-Time RT-PCR Analysis
Three animals from each group were anesthetized with chloral
hydrate (400 mg/kg) and decapitated. Real-time polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) (50 lL) was performed using Thermo-fast 96
PCR plates (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA), which
were sealed with iCycler IQ optical-quality tapes (Bio-Rad Laboratories) on an iCycler IQ thermocycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories).
Each measurement was taken in three replicates. A dilution series
of positive control DNA was used in the same plates as the calibration standards. Positive control DNA was generated by the amplification of the gene from samples. The amplicon was purified,
cloned into TOPO TA cloning vector (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA,
USA), and reamplified. After purification, the concentrations of
PCR products were determined using a fluorometer as described
above and were serially diluted to generate calibration standards.
Data analysis was carried out with iCycler software (Bio-Rad
Laboratories). Based on the standard curve, a threshold cycle
measured in a sample was converted to the copy number of the
gene in a sample. Forward and reverse premiers of regulators of

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

255

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

G-protein signaling 6 (Rgs6) (NM_015812) and SH2-B mRNA
(AF036355) were as follows: -f ATGCCCAGGAGCACATCTACA,
-rGCGACTTTCCCTTCTTCTTGG; and -fTGGCTCCCATGGTGTCTTCTT, -rTTAGTGACAAGCGCAGGTGCT, respectively.

Western Blot Analysis
The hippocampus was removed from the brains of the remaining
six mice from each group. The proteins (40 lg per lane) were
separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)–polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (PAGE) and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Hybond-C, Amersham, Buckinghamshire, UK) by electroblotting. Blots were stained with the mice anticyclic
adenosine monophosphate cAMP-response-element-binding
protein (CREB) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA,
USA), which was developed by enhanced chemiluminescence
(Amersham). Band density was determined with a GS-700
densitometer (Bio-Rad). Each measurement was taken in three
replicates.

Results
Effects on Ischemia-Induced Infarction
It was found that BJ was more effective than BA or JA monotherapy in reducing the ischemic infarction volume (P < 0.05)
[14,15]. The dose–effect curves of BA, JA, and combination therapy (Figure 1B) at concentrations of 1–16 mg/mL had CI values
close to 1.0 (Figure 1C), indicating additive effects between the
agents.

Canonical Pathways between Different Groups
Compared with the sham group, six statistically significant canonical pathways involving the differentially expressed genes were
identified in the vehicle group, this result has been reported in
our previous study [16]. In addition, a total of 7, 16, and 6 statistically significant canonical pathways involving the differentially
expressed genes were found in BA, JA, and BJ groups (vs. vehicle), respectively ([16] and Figure 2). No more overlapping path-

Figure 2 Significant canonical pathways in all treatment groups. A total of 7, 16, and 6 significant canonical pathways were identified between
baicalin (BA) versus vehicle, jasminoidin (JA) versus vehicle, and BJ versus vehicle groups, respectively. The orange vertical line indicates a threshold
of P < 0.05.

256

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

ways were found between two or three groups except Huntington’s Disease Signaling existing between JA and BJ groups. All
canonical pathways in the three treatment groups presented a certain relationship with cerebral ischemia in previous research
(Table S1).

(A)

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

Reconstructing Pathway Network
A network containing 29 nodes and 176 edges was reconstructed
based on IPA knowledge (Figure 3A). Diverse relationships were
found between these pathways except arachidonic acid metabo-

(B)

(C)

Figure 3 Construction of pathway network and additive index distribution. (A) The network contains 29 nodes and 176 edges. The pathway in the three
treatment groups is regarded as a node, and common components as pathways relationship that confirms an edge between the pathway of monotherapy
and combination therapy groups (pink and blue lines). The yellow lines represent relationships between pathways of BJ and BJ group, and the gray lines
represent relationships between pathways of baicalin (BA) and jasminoidin (JA) group. Network reconstruction is based on pathway correlation in
Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) knowledge base. (B) Histogram illustrates the additive index of the pathway in BJ group based on pathway correlation.
(C) Pathway integration from both compounds; this micronetwork is divided into three regions, that is, immune-related cluster, neuron-related cluster,
and ERK/MAPK signaling cascade-related cluster (gray shaded area).

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

257

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

lism in BA group and sulfur metabolism in BJ group. When sharing a component between two pathways, a line linked the two
pathways. More lines indicated more relations to other pathways.

Distribution of AI
The histogram presenting the AIs of BJ pathways illustrated a
hierarchical distribution (Figure 3B). The AI score of sulfur
metabolism was 1, representing soundly additive change from the
original pathways in BA and JA groups. However, the AI score of
neuropathic pain signaling in dorsal horn neurons was 0.09, indicating a lower additive degree in which many of the original compounds in BA and JA groups could be found in BJ group.

Horizontal and Vertical Pathway Convergence or
Divergence
Besides the analysis of additive degrees, additive direction of pathway convergence or divergence was also explored in this study.
Those significant pathways of the BA and JA treatment groups
could be divided into three regions, that is, immune-related cluster, neuron-related cluster, and ERK/MAPK signaling cascaderelated cluster (Figure 3C). When different drugs targeted different clusters, a horizontal additive action might emerge; while a
vertical pathway convergence took place between the upperstream and downstream in a same cluster, broad horizontal and
vertical pathway convergences or divergences were identified
among those pathways in BJ group. Moreover, both pathway convergence and divergence might appear even in a same cluster.
Some additive pathways followed a similar pattern in horizontal
or vertical pathway convergence; for example, four pathways of
Huntington’s disease signaling, CDK5 signaling, cAMP-mediated
signaling, and neuropathic pain signaling in dorsal horn neurons
in BJ group similarly targeted T Cell receptor signaling in BA
group and B Cell receptor signaling in JA group in the immunerelated cluster.

Evidence of Pathways Convergence and
Divergence
Pathways not only showed convergence or divergence through
overlapping nodes, but also acted on sandy targets to produce
novel pathways, such as fusing T Cell receptor signaling in BA
group and ERK/MAPK signaling in JA group to form Huntington’s
disease signaling in BJ group. As AI was only 0.13, many original
genes in monotherapy groups were still found in this pathway of
BJ group. BA and JA affected different pathways and fused those
differentially expressed genes to contribute to the additive effects
of BJ (Figure 4).
The fold change in gene expression was demonstrated to be
consistent in all treatment groups, determined by real-time
reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR and by microarray. For example,
Rgs6 had the highest decreasing activity according to both analyses. However, SH2-B expression did not show any significant variation between these groups (Figure 5A). Results of Western blot
analysis indicated that the CREB was increased significantly in the
pathway of JA and BJ groups; and the p-ERK1/2 level was
increased significantly in the pathway of BA, JA, and BJ groups

258

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

(Figure 5B), both of which were consistent with the findings displayed in Figure 4.

Subnetworks between Different Groups and
Biofunctions Distribution
A total of 726, 361,414, and 465 significantly differentially
expressed genes were found between vehicle versus sham, BA
versus vehicle, JA versus vehicle, and BJ versus vehicle, respectively. Based on the IPA analysis of those network-eligible identifiers, 5, 8, 9, and 7 high score subnetworks were identified in
vehicle, BA, JA, and BJ groups, respectively ([16] and Table S2).
The top five networks in the BJ group were shown in Figure 6A–
E. According to the molecular functions, IPA analysis indicated
that compared with the vehicle group, 70, 74, and 76 statistically
significant functions were identified in BA, JA, and BJ groups,
respectively, and the percentage of overlapping functions (60)
among these three groups was 71.43%. Each function represented
a cluster, including the same functional molecules, and these biofunctions were divided into three categories, that is diseases and
disorders, molecular and cellular functions, and physiological system development and function (Table S3). Those biofunctions
indicated not only the same regulation process in each group but
also their own unique tendencies (Figure 6F). Three functions of
protein synthesis, RNA posttranscriptional modification, and psychological disorders contributed special actions to the additive
mechanism in networks analysis. All of these functions were also
demonstrated to have certain relationships with cerebral ischemia
in previous literatures (Table S3).

Discussion
We displayed a vivid example that each of the monotherapy drugs
and the combination therapy not only shared common targets,
but also had their unique targets that may play an important role
in the emergence of additive effect. Obviously, as a network, the
wiring diagram is determined by overlapping components
between pathways, and such a complicated relationship reflects
that pathways of BA and JA groups could work together through
shared genes, where the additive effect of BJ is created. Evidence
suggests that pathways convergence and divergence often intersect and regulate each another to trigger a response to a complex
set of stimulation, whether it is positive or negative [17–19]. In
our study, multiple pathways coordinate or interact with one
another to achieve a complex biological process that may contribute to the additive effect of the combination therapy. A high AI
represents a strong variation, even though merely for the pathways of sulfur metabolism and cell cycle regulation by BTG family
proteins in this reconstructed network. Beyond that, the construction of another network different from the component correlation-based network reveals pathway integration from both
compounds (Figure 3C), and this micronetwork is divided into
three regions, namely immune-related cluster, neuron-related
cluster, and ERK/MAPK signaling cascade-related cluster. We find
that the pathways in BA and JA groups present an interactive connection, including horizontal regulation such as TGF-b signaling
and EGF signaling regulating ERK/MAPK signaling, and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis signaling and Huntington’s disease signal-

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Figure 4 Additive mechanism of pathway convergence and divergence in Huntington’s disease signaling pathway. On the basis of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) knowledge base, the overlapping
components between T Cell Receptor Signaling of baicalin (BA) group and Huntington’s disease signaling of BJ group were Ca2+, PIP3, c-Jun, JNK1, PIP2, IP3, DAG, PI3K, GRB2, SOS, hRas, and ERK/1/2;
those between ERK/MAPK signaling of jasminoidin (JA) group and Huntington’s disease signaling of BJ group were CREB, SHC, PIP2, IP3, DAG, PI3K, GRB2, SOS, hRas, and ERK/1/2; and the overlapping
ones among the three groups were PIP2, IP3, DAG, PI3K, GRB2, SOS, hRas, and ERK/1/2. Differentially expressed genes in the three groups are marked with pink, blue, green, and yellow arrows, up- and
down-regulated genes were labeled with the up and down arrow, respectively. The overlapping components between the different groups are marked with different color stars.

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

259

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

(A)

(B)

Figure 5 Validation of Rgs6, SH2-B, cAMP-response-element-binding
protein (CREB), p-ERK1/2 expression levels using both real-time polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot analysis. (A) No significant
discrepancies were found between the findings of microarray and real-time
RT-PCR analyses. (B) Western blot analysis was employed to identify CREB
and p-ERK1/2 between different groups. *P < 0.05 versus vehicle.

ing regulating Apoptosis signaling, as well as vertical regulation
such as VDR/RXR activation regulating PDGF signaling and IGF-1
signaling, primary immunodeficiency signaling regulating T Cell
receptor signaling and B Cell receptor signaling. Cross talk
between pathways in this network displays cross-inhibition, crossactivation, and pathway convergence [20]. In fact, the additive
effect of drug combination does not mean the sum of pathways
simply, but transmitting information each other, triggering different space-time effect by drug interactions, and generating firenew phenotypic correlation information set. Specifically, to illustrate the therapeutic mechanism of the combination group, we
base on the published literatures to further explain the differentially expressed genes of the pathways in BJ group. Neuropathic
pain signaling in dorsal horn neurons arises from an injury discharge originating at the site of nerve injury which may result
from stroke and other causes [21]. Molecules such as BDNF and
CAMK1G in this pathway in our experimental data showed
down-regulated expressions, which can directly or indirectly
activate N-methyl-D-aspartate-(NMDA) and a-amino-3-hydroxy5-methyl-4-isoxazolepro-pionic acid (AMPA) receptor, the
dependent receptor of calcium ions, leading to calcium influx
restrictedly. NMDA and AMPA receptor antagonists resulted in
almost complete neuroprotection [22]. FOSB, BDNF, and EGR1
can cause down-regulation of MAPK cascade, which were downregulated in CDK5 signaling. A very early expression of MAPKs
suggested that MAPKs might be closely involved in signal transduction during cerebral ischemia [23]. Activation of MAPK
cascades was involved in neuroprotection against gerbil global
ischemia/reperfusion injury [24]. Dnajb1-Hsp70 as a complex
structure had a down-regulated expression in Huntington’s
disease signaling, and this would weaken the expression of HD,
whose reduction can effectively control the influx of calcium by

260

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

calcium channel and GRIN2B, against the excitotoxic death and
release of cytochrome c, cut down the action of calpain, a type of
calcium-dependent protease that can activate caspase 3/7 to
induce apoptosis. Moreover, a low expression of BDNF can block
cell death that exists in the path of suppression of gene transcription from Hdac-Rcor-Rest-Sin3a. Interestingly, recent research
shows similar molecular pathological mechanisms between
Huntington’s disease and cerebral ischemia, such as endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) dysfunction, mitochondrial disturbances, excitotoxicity, and neuroinflammation [25–28]. As a second messenger
central to a number of biological processes, cAMP-mediated signaling has four down-regulated genes in our findings, that is,
GRM3, CAMK1G, DUSP6, and DUSP4. Low expressions of
CAMK1G and GRM3 would contribute to the activation from
cAMP to ERK; meanwhile, DUSP6 and DUSP4, members of MKP,
would weaken the inhibition of ERK. This complex process can
help CREB, the cAMP-response-element-binding protein, to perform transcriptional regulation, which plays a critical role in synaptic plasticity and neuronal survival [29]. Consistently, another
study revealed that the number of new neurons was increased in
cerebral ischemic stroke, which was correlated with the activation
of CREB [30]. A down-regulation of BTG2 would reduce the level
of activation of the complex structure CDC2-CDK4-BTG1-CNOT7,
together with the PPP2R1B lower expression, and resist antiproliferation effectively. Although research on the relationship
between BTG family and cerebral ischemia is very limited, BTG
protein is considered to be a modulator of cell survival and differentiation and could help to protect against cell death by inhibition
of necrosis and/or apoptotic signaling pathways [31]. In the treatment of cerebral ischemia, sulfur metabolism is a very novel factor
in the additive mechanism of combination therapies, which may
play an important neuroprotective role in the brain during cerebral hypoxia [32]. Previous studies indicated that inorganic sulfur
significantly inhibited MMP-2 and MMP-9 expressions in the cells
[33], and MMP inhibitors might have an important significance in
the treatment for cerebral ischemia, especially antineuroinflammation and reestablishment of cerebral blood flow [34,35].
As a functional community [36], genes with a same molecular
function are listed together, which present a kind of biofunction.
A high frequency of overlapping biofunctions indicates that a similar regulatory process between BA and JA has been inherited
after drug combination, constituting a fusion background. Amino
acid metabolism, lipid metabolism, cell cycle, cell death, and
immune response from the overlapping functions were thought to
have important relevance to cerebral ischemia. It has been shown
that branched chain amino acids are reduced in ischemic stroke,
and the degree of reduction correlates with worse neurological
outcome [37]. Moreover, glutamate as a nonessential amino acid
is an excitatory neurotransmitter that plays a major role in the
pathogenesis of ischemia brain injury [2]. Excitatory amino acid
transporters may provide neuroprotection during cerebral ischemic insult [38]. A relation between lipid alterations and dysfunction of energy metabolism has also been confirmed after brain
infarction in rats [39]. Phospholipid degradation with subsequent
free fatty acid release and alteration in membrane-bound enzymes
may have a direct effect on metabolic machinery and may slow
cerebral metabolic rate. Brain lipid metabolism was studied by
bilateral common carotid artery ligation, a model for chronic cere-

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

(A)

(B)

(D)

(E)

(C)

(F)

Figure 6 The top five statistically significant signaling pathway networks between BJ and vehicle groups and Wayne figures of network functions among
baicalin (BA), jasminoidin (JA), and BJ groups. The top five statistically significant signaling pathway networks involving the differentially expressed genes
between BJ and vehicle groups, with functions in organ morphology, reproductive system development and function, cellular compromise (A); cell-to-cell
signaling and interaction, nervous system development and function, cellular movement (B); skeletal and muscular system development and function,
tissue morphology, connective tissue disorders (C); cell-to-cell signaling and interaction, cell-mediated immune response, organ morphology (D); and cell
signaling, molecular transport, vitamin, and mineral metabolism (E). The red node denotes an up-regulated gene, and the green node denotes a downregulated gene. The intensity of colors indicates the degree of up-regulation or down-regulation. (F) Only significant functions are shown in this figure
based on a P value <0.05 and a fold change >1.5 between groups.
ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

261

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

bral hypoperfusion, which showed that dysbolism might be
caused by compensatory secretory phospholipase A (2)-mediated
vasodilation [40]. Another experiment used compound to prevent
membrane lipid loss and suggested that lipid metabolism was
important for the development of ischemic damage [41]. A recent
study suggested that cell cycle modulation resulted in neuroprotection in ischemia, which was mediated at least in part through
inhibition of microglia proliferation and production of inflammatory cytokines [42]. Besides that, researchers also confirmed that
the application of natural medicine induced cell cycle arrest and
cell survival to resist cerebral ischemia injury [43]. It is essential to
understand the different cell death mechanisms after cerebral
ischemia [44]. Furthermore, autophagy-like injury may contribute to ischemia-induced cell death in the brain, which could be
regulated by the NF-jB pathway, suggesting potential treatments
for ischemic stroke [45]. Confidently, T cells were required for
stroke-induced reductions in non-T immune cells, and they were
the most crucial lymphocytes for stroke-induced immunodepression [46]. A study analyzing the temporal dynamics of immune
cell accumulation in a rodent stroke model showed that peculiar
activation pattern and massive increase of antigen-presenting cells
in temporal conjunction with regulatory cells might provide additional insight into poststroke immune regulation [47]. A better
understanding of the roles of the different T-lymphocyte subpopulations and their temporal profile of damage versus repair will help
to clarify whether T-lymphocyte targeting may be a viable poststroke therapy for clinical use [48].
A novel nonoverlapping function, RNA posttranscriptional
modification, was identified in BJ group, which might turn out to
be a factor of more general importance in gene expression, and
was identified as a participant in precise decoding of the genetic
code that had been demonstrated to be associated with the treat-

References

ment for cerebral ischemia [49]. An investigation focusing on the
role of miRNAs in ischemia indicated that miRNAs played a role in
the regulation of gene expression at the posttranscriptional level,
which may serve as biomarkers and therapeutic targets in cerebral
ischemia [50]. Another review examined the implicated RNAbased networks in the molecular pathogenesis of stroke and
revealed therapeutic strategies that more effective neuroprotective
and neural regenerative responses may be developed through the
modulation of RNA transcription, posttranscriptional RNA processing, and RNA translation [51]. Although found to be associated with ischemia in previous studies, other special functions of
psychological disorders and protein synthesis in BJ group may
need to be studied further in order to get a more complete understanding of the underlying additive mechanism of the combination therapy.

Conclusions
In conclusion, system-pathways hierarchical analysis may need a
kind of integrative and quantitative method, and analysis of
known pathways convergence and divergence may suggest an
interdependent paradigm of revealing pharmacological additive
mechanisms of drug combinations, such as BA and JA.

Acknowledgment
This work was supported by National 11th Five-years-plan Supporting R&D Project (2006BAI08B04-06).

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

8. Zhang ZJ, Wang LY, Wang Z, Li PT, Wang YY.

1. Goldstein LB, Bushnell CD, Adams RJ, et al. Guidelines

signaling pathways and networks reveal two

and their combination on focal cerebral

complementary pharmacological mechanisms. CNS Neurol

for the primary prevention of stroke: A guideline for

ischemia-reperfusion injury. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi

healthcare professionals from the American Heart

2006;31:907–910.

Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke

9. Jing ZW, Zhou CX, Wang Z, et al. Principal component

2011;42:517–584.

analysis of gene expression of baicalin, jasminoidin and

2. Degterev A, Huang Z, Boyce M, et al. Chemical inhibitor

their combination in experimental stroke. J Tradit Chin
Med 2010;51:164–167.

of nonapoptotic cell death with therapeutic potential for
ischemic brain injury. Nat Chem Biol 2005;1:112–119.

10. Hopkins AL. Network pharmacology: The next paradigm

3. Doyle KP, Simon RP, Stenzel-Poore MP. Mechanisms of
ischemic brain damage. Neuropharmacology 2008;55:310–

in drug discovery. Nat Chem Biol 2008;4:682–690.
11. Hopkins AL. Network pharmacology. Nat Biotechnol

318.
4. Andersen M, Overgaard K, Meden P, Boysen G, Choi SC.

2007;25:1110–1111.
12. Wang J, Wang YY, Yang G. The research methods and

Effects of citicoline combined with thrombolytic therapy

mode of compatibility theory of traditional Chinese

in a rat embolic stroke model. Stroke 1999;30:1464–

medicine and prescription. China Journal of Chinese Materia

1471.

Medica 2005;30:6–8.

5. Zhu H, Fan X, Yu Z, et al. Annexin A2 combined with

13. Chou TC. Theoretical basis, experimental design, and

low-dose tPA improves thrombolytic therapy in a rat

computerized simulation of synergism and antagonism in

model of focal embolic stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab

drug combination studies. Pharmacol Rev 2006;58:621–

2010;30:1137–1146.
6. Haddad M, Beray-Berthat V, Coqueran B, Plotkine M,

16. Chen Y, Meng F, Fang H, et al. Hierarchical profiles of

Pharmacological evaluation of baicalin and jasminoidin

681.
14. Chen Y, Zhou C, Yu Y, et al. Variations in target gene

Disord Drug Targets 2013;12:882–893.
17. Konsavage WM Jr, Yochum GS. Intersection of Hippo/
YAP and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathways. Acta
Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai) 2013;45:71–79.
18. Nowsheen S, Yang E. The intersection between DNA
damage response and cell death pathways. Exp Oncol
2012;34:243–254.
19. Zeidan Q, Hart GW. The intersections between
O-GlcNAcylation and phosphorylation: Implications for
multiple signaling pathways. J Cell Sci 2010;123:13–22.
20. Mendoza MC, Er EE, Blenis J. The Ras-ERK and
PI3K-mTOR pathways: Cross-talk and compensation.
Trends Biochem Sci 2011;36:320–328.
21. Halder SK, Yano R, Chun J, Ueda H. Involvement of
LPA1 receptor signaling in cerebral ischemia-induced
neuropathic pain. Neuroscience 2013;235:10–15.
22. Arias RL, Tasse JR, Bowlby MR. Neuroprotective
interaction effects of NMDA and AMPA receptor
antagonists in an in vitro model of cerebral ischemia.
Brain Res 1999;816:299–308.

Marchand-Leroux C, Margaill I. Combined therapy with

expression and pathway profiles in the mouse

PJ34, a poly (ADP-ribose)polymerase inhibitor, reduces

hippocampus following treatment with different

tissue plasminogen activator-induced hemorrhagic

effective compounds for ischemia-reperfusion injury.

mitogen-activated protein kinases after permanent

transformations in cerebral ischemia in mice. Fundam Clin

Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol 2012;385:797–

cerebral artery occlusion in mouse brain. J Cereb Blood

Pharmacol 2013;27:393–401.

806.

7. Wang Z, Jing ZW, Zhou CX, et al. Fusion of core

15. Lin G, Meng FY, Zhang GD, et al. Baicalin and

23. Wu DC, Ye W, Che XM, Yang GY. Activation of

Flow Metab 2000;20:1320–1330.
24. Dai J, Chen L, Qiu YM, et al. Activations of GABAergic

pathways reveals a horizontal synergistic mechanism

jasminoidin effects on gene expression and compatibility

signaling, HSP70 and MAPK cascades are involved in

underlying combination therapy. Eur J Pharmacol

in the hippocampus following focal cerebral ischemia.

baicalin’s neuroprotection against gerbil global ischemia/

2011;667:278–286.

Neural Regen Res 2011;6:165–170.

reperfusion injury. Brain Res Bull 2013;90:1–9.

262

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Y.-Y. Zhang et al.

25. Stone TW, Forrest CM, Stoy N, Darlington LG.

Decoding Hierarchical Additive Mechanisms

33. Kim JJ, Ha AW, Kim HS, Kim WK. Inorganic sulfur

IL-1beta, MIP-1alpha, and NO after focal cerebral

Involvement of kynurenines in Huntington’s disease and

reduces the motility and invasion of MDA-MB-231

stroke-induced brain damage. J Neural Transm

human breast cancer cells. Nutr Res Pract 2011;5:375–380.

2012;119:261–274.
26. Mehta A, Prabhakar M, Kumar P, Deshmukh R, Sharma
PL. Excitotoxicity: Bridge to various triggers in
neurodegenerative disorders. Eur J Pharmacol 2013;698:6–
18.
27. Zadori D, Klivenyi P, Szalardy L, Fulop F, Toldi J, Vecsei
L. Mitochondrial disturbances, excitotoxicity,
neuroinflammation and kynurenines: Novel therapeutic

34. Cunningham LA, Wetzel M, Rosenberg GA. Multiple

PI3K/Akt. Eur J Pharmacol 2013;708:44–55.

35. Candelario-Jalil E, Yang Y, Rosenberg GA. Diverse roles of

death mechanisms in the mediation of excitotoxicity and

metalloproteinases in neuroinflammation and cerebral

ischemic brain damage: A challenge for neuroprotection.

ischemia. Neuroscience 2009;158:983–994.

Metabolite profiling identifies a branched chain amino
acid signature in acute cardioembolic stroke. Stroke

48. Brait VH, Arumugam TV, Drummond GR, Sobey CG.

enzyme activities after brain infarction in rats. Stroke

2004;101:9453–9457.

1987;18:418–425.

immunodeficiency, and recovery after cerebral ischemia.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012;32:598–611.

40. Bhattacharjee AK, White L, Chang L, et al. Bilateral
common carotid artery ligation transiently changes brain

neurons after ischaemic stroke. Pathobiology

lipid metabolism in rats. Neurochem Res 2012;37:1490–

and alternative folding of RNA. Nucleic Acids Res
2006;34:721–733.
50. Ouyang YB, Stary CM, Yang GY, Giffard R. microRNAs:

1498.

Innovative targets for cerebral ischemia and stroke. Curr

41. Simao F, Matte A, Breier AC, et al. Resveratrol prevents

Drug Targets 2013;14:90–101.

global cerebral ischemia-induced decrease in lipid content.
Neurol Res 2013;35:59–64.

51. Qureshi IA, Mehler MF. The emerging role of epigenetics
in stroke: II. RNA regulatory circuitry. Arch Neurol

42. Zhang Q, Chen C, Lu J, et al. Cell cycle inhibition

2010;67:1435–1441.

attenuates microglial proliferation and production of

Supporting Information
The following supplementary material is available for this article:
Table S1. Relationships between canonical pathways and cerebral
ischemia which were supported by published literatures.

ª 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

Importance of T lymphocytes in brain injury,

49. Helm M. Post-transcriptional nucleotide modification

translocation gene 2 is over-expressed in peri-infarct

protein 90 pathway. Neuroscience 2010;167:277–286.

accumulation in stroke. Stroke 2009;40:1849–1857.

2010;35:1224–1230.

adult dentate gyrus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A

kinase C/extracellular signal-regulated kinase/heat shock

and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell

transporters in cerebral ischemia. Neurochem Res

metabolism, cerebral metabolic rate, and some related

stimulation of ATP-sensitive potassium channel/protein

One 2013;8:e59602.

38. Chao XD, Fei F, Fei Z. The role of excitatory amino acid

39. Bralet J, Beley P, Jemaa R, Bralet AM, Beley A. Lipid

sulfide protects neurons against hypoxic injury via

contribute to stroke-induced lymphopenia in rats. PLoS
47. Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, et al. Temporal

focal cerebral ischemia stimulates neurogenesis in the

2009;76:129–135.

46. Gu L, Xiong X, Wei D, Gao X, Krams S, Zhao H. T cells

2013;44:1389–1395.

cAMP-response-element-binding protein (CREB) after

32. Tay AS, Hu LF, Lu M, Wong PT, Bian JS. Hydrogen

NF-kappaB in autophagy-like cell death after focal
cerebral ischemia in mice. Neuroscience 2013;244:16–30.

neurological disease. Lancet Neurol 2013;12:105–118.

31. Slevin M, Sanfeliu C, Turu MM, et al. B-cell

45. Li WL, Yu SP, Chen D, et al. The regulatory role of

37. Kimberly WT, Wang Y, Pham L, Furie KL, Gerszten RE.

DA, Marciniak SJ. Endoplasmic reticulum dysfunction in

30. Zhu DY, Lau L, Liu SH, Wei JS, Lu YM. Activation of

Prog Neurobiol 2013;105:24–48.

36. Barabasi AL, Gulbahce N, Loscalzo J. Network medicine:
Genet 2011;12:56–68.

the brain. Rinsho Shinkeigaku 2012;52:904–907.

44. Puyal J, Ginet V, Clarke PG. Multiple interacting cell

matrix metalloproteinases and tissue inhibitors of

A network-based approach to human disease. Nat Rev

CREB activation is a key player for ischemic tolerance in

reperfusion and correlations with p53/cyclin D1 and

2005;50:329–339.

2012;322:187–191.

29. Kitagawa K, Sasaki T, Terasaki Y, Yagita Y, Mochizuki H.

cycle arrest and cell survival during cerebral ischemia and

roles for MMPs and TIMPs in cerebral ischemia. Glia

strategies for neurodegenerative disorders. J Neurol Sci
28. Roussel BD, Kruppa AJ, Miranda E, Crowther DC, Lomas

ischemia in the rat. Glia 2009;57:908–920.
43. Chai YS, Hu J, Lei F, et al. Effect of berberine on cell

Table S2. Statistically significant signaling pathway networks
between BJ and vehicle groups.
Table S3. Cerebral ischemia/stroke-related overlapping functions
among BA, JA and BJ groups which were supported by published
literatures.

CNS Neuroscience & Therapeutics 20 (2014) 253–263

263

