Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014) 34, 1928–1935
© 2014 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/14 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Cellular origin and regulation of D- and L-serine in in vitro and
in vivo models of cerebral ischemia
Takato Abe1,5, Masataka Suzuki2,5, Jumpei Sasabe2, Shinichi Takahashi1, Miyuki Unekawa1, Kyoko Mashima1, Takuya Iizumi1,
Kenji Hamase3, Ryuichi Konno4, Sadakazu Aiso2 and Norihiro Suzuki1
D-Serine is known to be essential for the activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in the excitation of glutamatergic
neurons, which have critical roles in long-term potentiation and memory formation. D-Serine is also thought to be involved in
NMDA receptor-mediated neurotoxicity. The deletion of serine racemase (SRR), which synthesizes D-serine from L-serine, was
recently reported to improve ischemic damage in mouse middle cerebral artery occlusion model. However, the cell type in which
this phenomenon originates and the regulatory mechanism for D-/L-serine remain elusive. The D-/L-serine content in ischemic brain
increased until 20 hours after recanalization and then leveled off gradually. The results of in vitro experiments using cultured cells
suggested that D-serine is derived from neurons, while L-serine seems to be released from astroglia. Immunohistochemistry studies
of brain tissue after cerebral ischemia showed that SRR is expressed in neurons, and 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (3-PGDH),
which synthesizes L-serine from 3-phosphoglycerate, is located in astrocytes, supporting the results of the in vitro experiments.
A western blot analysis showed that neither SRR nor 3-PGDH was upregulated after cerebral ischemia. Therefore, the increase in
D-/L-serine was not related to an increase in SRR or 3-PGDH, but to an increase in the substrates of SRR and 3-PGDH.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014) 34, 1928–1935; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.164; published online 8 October 2014
Keywords: excitotoxicity; focal ischemia; glial cells; glutamate; neuronal–glial interaction

INTRODUCTION
Neurotoxicity mediated by the activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors, a glutamate receptor subtype, has an
important role in the pathogenesis of ischemic brain injury.1 The
overstimulation of NMDA receptors by the massive release of
glutamate during cerebral ischemia leads to an increase in Ca2+
inﬂux into cells, the activation of catabolic enzymes, and the
generation of reactive oxygen species, which have detrimental
effects on the brain after transient ischemia.2,3 Although
antagonists of the glutamate binding site of the NMDA receptor
have been shown to have protective effects in a rodent model,
they failed to induce a response in clinical trials.4,5 Therefore, the
development of other stroke treatments to block excitotoxicity
other than the use of glutamate antagonists is anticipated.
In addition to glutamate, the NMDA receptor requires a
coagonist at a second site. Although glycine was initially thought
to be a ligand for this site, subsequent evidence has revealed that
6,7
D-serine binds to this site with a greater potency than glycine.
DSerine is needed to activate the NMDA receptor and is essential
for the excitation of glutamatergic neurons, which have a critical
role in long-term potentiation and are required for memory
formation.8 However, D-serine is also involved in NMDA receptormediated neurotoxicity and has a pathophysiologic role in stroke
and neurodegenerative diseases.9,10
In terms of cerebral ischemia, the deletion of serine racemase
(SRR), which synthesizes D-serine from L-serine, has recently been
reported to improve ischemic damage in a murine middle cerebral

artery occlusion (MCAO) model.11 Therefore, the inhibition of
D-serine production might have therapeutic potential for the
treatment of ischemic stroke. However, the mechanism by which
D-/L-serine is regulated during and after cerebral ischemia is not
understood. The present study was conducted to determine the
temporal proﬁle of D-/L-serine and to clarify the cell types from
which D-/L-serine is derived during cerebral ischemia. First, we
investigated the D-/L-serine contents in the brain after ischemia
using an in vivo ischemic model; we also examined the release of
D-/L-serine from cultured cells after hypoxia. Second, we clariﬁed
the expressions of SRR and 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase
(3-PGDH), which synthesizes L-serine from 3-phosphoglycerate, in
the brain after MCAO using immunohistochemistry and western
blotting.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with The Animal
Experimentation Guidelines of Keio University School of Medicine and
were approved by the Laboratory Animal Care and Use Committee of Keio
University. Experiments were performed in 6- to 8-week-old male SRR+/+
or SRR − / − mice (weight: 20 to 24 g). An SRR knockout (SRR − / − )
mouse strain was produced as described previously.12 The mice were
obtained from house colonies and were backcrossed onto the C57BL/6
background to generate homozygous animals free of background
effects on phenotypes. Wild-type (WT) siblings were used as WT controls.

1
Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan; 2Department of Anatomy, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
Japan; 3Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences Kyushu University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan and 4Department of Pharmacological Sciences, International University of
Health and Welfare, Ohtawara, Tochigi, Japan. Correspondence: Dr S Takahashi, Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.
E-mail: takashin@tka.att.ne.jp
5
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 25 May 2014; revised 19 August 2014; accepted 31 August 2014; published online 8 October 2014

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1929
Timed-pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were purchased from Japan SLC, Inc.
(Hamamatsu, Japan).

Chemicals
All chemicals and materials were obtained from the following sources:
Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with or without glucose,
penicillin, and streptomycin was obtained from Life Technologies (Grand
Island, NY, USA); deﬁned fetal bovine serum was obtained from HyClone
Laboratories (Logan, UT, USA); Tissue-Tek O.C.T. Compound was obtained
from Sakura Finetek Japan (Tokyo, Japan); an anti-SRR antibody was
obtained from BD Biosciences (Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA); an antibody for
Nissl was obtained from Millipore (Bedford, MA, USA); an antibody for glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) was obtained from Dako (Glostrup,
Denmark); secondary antibodies labeled with ﬂuorescein or Texas-Red
were obtained from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories (West Grove,
PA, USA); and the derivatizing reagent 4-ﬂuoro-7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole (NBD-F) was obtained from Tokyo Chemical Industry (Tokyo, Japan).
Water was puriﬁed using a Milli-Q gradient A 10 system (Millipore); Alamar
Blue was obtained from Invitrogen Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA, USA);
the LDH assay kit was obtained from Wako Chemicals (Osaka, Japan); all
other chemicals were obtained from Sigma (St Louis, MO, USA).

Preparation of Cultured Neurons and Astroglia
A primary culture of neurons was prepared from the cortex and striatum of
fetal rats on embryonic day 16 as described previously.13 Mechanically
dissociated cells were counted, and viable cells (1.5 × 106 cells/mL) without
trypan blue were cultured in 12-well culture plates (0.8 mL/well,
respectively) (Nalge Nunc., Rochester, NY, USA) coated with poly-L-lysine
(5 μg/mL). The cells were cultured in a glucose-containing medium (ﬁnal
concentration, 12 mmol/L of D-glucose) comprises DMEM with 10% (v/v)
fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL), and streptomycin (100 μg/mL) at
37°C in humidiﬁed air with 7% CO2. Cytosine arabinoside (10 μmol/L) was
added 72 hours later to induce mitotic arrest of the astroglia. Assays were
performed using 7- to 8-day-old cultures. The nutrient medium remained
untouched until the experiments were performed. The astroglial cultures
were prepared from the cerebral cortices of pups at 24 to 48 hours after
birth.13 The brains were excised, the meninges and blood vessels were
removed, and the front-parietal cortices were dissected out and
mechanically disrupted. The dissociated cells (2.5 × 105 cells/mL) were
plated (15 mL per ﬂask) in uncoated 75 cm2-culture ﬂasks (Sumitomo
Bakelite, Tokyo, Japan) and cultured at 37°C in humidiﬁed air with 7% CO2.
The culture medium was changed twice a week until the cultures reached
conﬂuence. The ﬂask was then shaken overnight at 37°C to eliminate
loosely adherent round cells, which were thought to be O2A progenitors
and microglia. The adherent cells were treated with trypsin-EDTA solution
for 1 to 2 minutes at 37°C, suspended in four volumes (60 mL) of fresh
culture medium, and placed in uncoated 12-well culture plates (0.8 mL/
well, respectively). The culture medium was changed twice a week, and the
secondary astroglial cells were used once they reached conﬂuence
(day 21).

Experimental Protocol for D/L-Serine Release
To assess the effect of hypoxia on D/L-serine release, cells were placed in a
hypoxic chamber (Multi-gas incubator APM-30DR; ASTEC, Fukuoka-ken,
Japan) at 37°C in humidiﬁed air containing 1% O2 and 7% CO2 for 24 hours.
After 24 hours of exposure, 0.3 mL of the culture medium supernatant was
sampled and used for two-dimensional high performance liquid chromatography (2D-HPLC). The net production and release of D/L-serine in the
medium were calculated by subtracting the D/L-serine content of the
medium from that after 24 hours of exposure to hypoxia and were
normalized according to the cellular protein content of each well as
measured using the bicinchoninic acid method.14

Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
The procedures used for transient MCAO were identical to those previously
described and are only summarized here.15–17 Mice were anesthetized with
isoﬂurane (1.5% to 2%). A ﬁber optic probe was glued to the parietal bone
and then connected to a laser Doppler ﬂow meter (ALF 21R; Advance Co.,
Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) to monitor the cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF). A heatblunted 6.0 monoﬁlament surgical suture was inserted into the external
carotid artery, advanced into the internal carotid artery, and wedged into
the circle of Willis to obstruct the origin of the middle cerebral artery. The
© 2014 ISCBFM

ﬁlament was left in place for 40 minutes and then withdrawn. Only animals
that exhibited an 85% reduction in CBF during MCAO and in which the CBF
had recovered by 80% after 10 minutes of reperfusion were included in the
present study.16,18,19 This protocol for MCAO led to reliable infarcts
comparable in size and distribution (cortex and striatum) to those reported
by others.20,21 In this study, one mouse for the stroke volume experiment
was excluded by the blood ﬂow criteria. In all the mice, the rectal
temperature was maintained at 37.0 ± 0.5 °C during surgery and during the
recovery period until the animals regained consciousness.

Measurement of Infarct Volume
One day after ischemia, the mice were anesthetized and were perfused
transcardially with 2% triphenyltetrazolium chloride. The brains were
removed, frozen, and sectioned (thickness, 30 μm) using a cryostat. The
brain sections were collected at 600-μm intervals, and the infarct volume
was presented as a percentage relative to the entire right hemisphere
volume.

Double-Label Immunohistochemistry
To identify cell types expressing SRR and 3-PGDH, mice were anesthetized
with sodium pentobarbital (120 mg/kg) and perfused transcardially with
4% paraformaldehyde. The brains were then removed, cryoprotected in
20% sucrose phosphate buffer saline (PBS), frozen in Tissue-Tek O.C.T.
Compound (Sakura Finetek Japan), sectioned through the parietal cortex,
and stored at − 80°C until use. Sections were rinsed in PBS (pH 7.4),
permeabilized with 0.3% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes, and incubated at
room temperature for 3 hours with a blocking solution containing
appropriate normal serum (1:60; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA,
USA). Subsequently, the sections were incubated at 4°C for 12 to 72 hours
in appropriate primary antibodies (anti-SRR antibody, 1:100, BD Biosciences; anti-3-PGDH, 1:300, a kind gift from Dr Shigeki Furuya; GFAP,
1:1,000, Dako) diluted in PBS containing blocking serum. Then, the sections
were incubated at room temperature for 40 minutes in a mixture of the
neuronal marker Nissl (1:100; Millipore) and/or species-speciﬁc secondary
antibodies labeled with ﬂuorescein or Texas-Red (Jackson Immunoresearch
Laboratories). The sections were washed again and were mounted using
ProLong Gold Antifade Reagent with DAPI (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA).
Images of double-labeled neocortex were sequentially acquired using a
Zeiss LSM 510 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).

Two-Dimensional High Performance Liquid Chromatography
The amino-acid analysis was conducted using a previously described
protocol12,22,23 with a small modiﬁcation. Brain tissue was freeze-dried for
24 hours using a freeze dryer and was homogenized in a 19.5-fold volume
(w/v) of methanol. For the cell cultures, cultured media were mixed with a
10-fold volume (v/v) of methanol. These homogenates were then
centrifuged at 20,400 g for 10 minutes, and the supernatants were spindried using Savant SpeedVac (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA). Then,
the dried residues were resuspended in 200 mmol/L sodium borate. After
the addition of 40 mmol/L NBD-F (Tokyo Chemical Industry), the reaction
mixture was incubated at 60°C for 2 minutes. The reaction of ﬂuorescent
derivatization was stopped by adding 2% triﬂuoroacetate. The NBD-Fderivatives were subjected to 2D-HPLC (NANOSPACE SI-2 series; Shiseido),
separated into each amino acid using a reversed-phase column, a
monolithic-ODS column (750 mm × 0.53 mm ID, 454 prepared in a fused
silica capillary, provided by Shiseido), and further separated into
enantiomers using an enantioselective column (Sumichiral OA-2500S;
Sumika Chemical Analysis Service, Kyoto, Japan).12,22 The ﬂuorescence
intensity was detected at 530 nm with excitation at 470 nm.

Evaluation of Cell Damage Using Alamar Blue Reduction Activity
and Lactate Dehydrogenase Release
Cellular damage was evaluated quantitatively using the amount of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) released into the culture media and was conﬁrmed
using a colorimetric assay based on Alamar Blue (Invitrogen Life
Technologies) reduction.
The LDH release assay, a standard cell death/viability assay reﬂecting
cellular membrane integrity, was applied. Three hundred microliters out of
0.5 mL of culture medium was collected from a 12-well culture plate and
was used for the LDH activity assay after 24 hours of hypoxia (1% O2). The
remaining cells were used for the Alamar Blue assay, as described below.
The LDH activities in the sampled medium were measured using an LDH
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1930

Figure 1. Reduced infarct volumes in serine racemase (SRR) − / − mice. (A) Infarct volume was determined 24 hours after middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO) (n = 7 to 8/group); *P o0.05 vs. wild type (WT) (Student’s t-test). (B) Core blood ﬂow during and after MCAO (n = 7 to
8/group); not signiﬁcant between WT and SRR − / − (analysis of variance, ANOVA). (C) Representative triphenyltetrazolium chloride-stained
brain sections derived from animals analyzed in (A). CBF, cerebral blood ﬂow.

assay kit (Wako Chemicals) based on the conversion of lactate and NAD+
into pyruvate and NADH catalyzed by LDH. The produced NADH was
measured (340 nm), and the LDH concentrations in the samples were
calculated using the LDH standard solution. Six wells of appropriate sister
culture cells were treated with 0.5 mL of 1% Triton-X 100 in PBS and the
average LDH activity was considered as the maximal LDH release. The
released LDH activity from each well exposed to hypoxia (n = 6) was
divided by the maximal LDH release and was considered as the percent of
cell death in each well after 24 hours of exposure to hypoxia (1% O2).
Alamar Blue is a redox indicator that exhibits both ﬂuorescence and
colorimetric changes in response to metabolic activity and cellular
viability.24,25 After the removal of nutrient medium from the 12-well
culture plate, the cells were washed once with PBS, and 0.5 mL of DBSS
containing 2 mmol/L glucose and Alamar Blue (10% ﬁnal volume) was
added. The cells were incubated for 60 minutes in a CO2 incubator (21%
O2) for color development. The ﬂuorescence level was measured at 0 and
60 minutes using a ﬂuorescence microplate reader (Inﬁnite F200 PRO;
TECAN Japan, Kanagawa, Japan) with excitation at 535 nm and emission at
590 nm. As the ﬂuorescent signals increased linearly for up to 60 minutes
(data not shown), Alamar Blue reduction (cell viability) was expressed as
the percent increase in the ﬂuorescent signal at 60 minutes compared with
that at 0 minute. Cell viability after 24 hours of exposure to hypoxia (1% O2)
was evaluated using the percent of Alamar Blue reduction activity in the
control cells (21% O2).

In Vivo D-Serine Production Assay
The ischemic core region of the brain was homogenized in 2 mL of in vivo
assay buffer (20 mmol/L Tris-HCl, 4 mmol/L MgCl2, 0.5 mmol/L sodium
benzoate, 0.1% Triton X-100) and the debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,400 g for 10 minutes. Then, the small molecules were removed
from the homogenate using the Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal ﬁlter device
3000 NMWL (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany), and the homogenate was
concentrated. The protein concentration in the homogenate was
measured using a BCA assay, and 600 μg of protein in 75 μL of the assay
buffer was mixed with 5 μL of 10 mmol/L ATPγS (Wako, Tokyo, Japan).
Then, 20 μL of 50 mmol/L L-serine was added and the mixture was
incubated at 37°C for 2 hours. Finally, the reaction was stopped by the
addition of a 10-fold volume (v/v) of methanol. After centrifugation at
20,400 g for 10 minutes, the D-serine in the supernatant of the assay
mixture was analyzed using HPLC.

Statistical Analysis
Data are presented as the mean ± s.e.m. Comparisons between two groups
were statistically evaluated using the Student’s t-test. Multiple comparisons
were evaluated using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the
Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test. Differences were considered as
signiﬁcant at Po0.05.

Western Blotting
The MCAO mice were anesthetized with diethylether and euthanized by
the perfusion of PBS. Each brain was then dissected into the right/left
parietal or temporal region. The central area of infarction was the right
temporal region. Each tissue was homogenized in lysis buffer (50 mmol/L
Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 15 mmol/L NaCl, 20 mmol/L EDTA, 1% Triton X-100,
protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifuged at 20,400 g for 10 minutes. The
protein concentration of the supernatant was then analyzed using a BCA
assay (Thermo Scientiﬁc), and 20 μg of protein was mixed with the sample
buffer (320 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 3.6% SDS, 18% glycerol, and 15% βmercaptoethanol). The denatured samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE
and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. Then, the membrane was
immunoblotted with a mouse monoclonal antibody to SRR (BD Transduction Laboratories, Franklin Lake, NJ, USA), a rabbit monoclonal antibody to
GAPDH (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), and a rabbit
polyclonal antibody to 3-PGDH (a kind gift from Dr Shigeki Furuya).
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

RESULTS
Serine Racemase − / − Mice have Smaller Infarcts after Middle
Cerebral Artery Occlusion
First, we examined the effects of SRR on brain injury at 24 hours
after transient MCAO. The infarct volumes after 40 minutes of
MCAO were 32.5% and 19.3% of the whole hemisphere in WT
and SRR − / − mice, respectively (Figure 1A). The infarct volume
in SRR − / − mice was signiﬁcantly smaller than that in WT mice
(Figures 1A and 1C). The reduction in the infarct volume could not
be attributed to the differences in the degree of ischemia because
the CBF reduction in the center of the ischemic territory was
comparable in the WT and SRR − / − mice (Figure 1B).
© 2014 ISCBFM

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1931

Figure 2. Temporal proﬁle of D-/L-serine content in the cortex after reperfusion. D-Serine (A) and L-serine (B) content in ipsilateral (ischemic)
and contralateral hemisphere after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in wild type (WT) mice (n = 3 − 4/group). *P o0.05 vs. 0 hour
(analysis of variance, ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls test). D-Serine (C) and L-serine (D) content in WT and serine racemase (SRR) − / − mice
at 20 hours after reperfusion (n = 3 to 4/group). ***P o0.001, n.s., not signiﬁcant vs. WT ipsilateral side (Student’s t-test).

Temporal Proﬁle of D-/L-Serine Contents after Middle Cerebral
Artery Occlusion
Next, we measured the contents of D-serine and L-serine in the
cerebral cortex after MCAO using 2D-HPLC. Total serine was ﬁrst
separated from a methanol supernatant of the cortex using a
reverse-phase column (Supplementary Figures A and C). Then,
D-serine and L-serine were further separated using an enantioselective column (Supplementary Figures B and D). The D-serine
content in the ipsilateral cerebral cortex was gradually increased
until 20 hours after reperfusion, but gradually decreased thereafter
(Figure 2A). No increase in D-serine was observed in contralateral
cortex. The L-serine content in the ipsilateral cortex prominently
increased compared with 0 hour and peaked at 20 hours after
reperfusion (Figure 2B). We also compared the difference in the
D-serine and L-serine contents in the ipsilateral cortex between WT
and SRR − / − mice at 20 hours after reperfusion, when both serine
contents were at their maximum levels. The D-serine content in
the SRR − / − mice was lower by about 90%, compared with that
in the WT mice, whereas the L-serine contents were similar in the
WT and SRR − / − mice (Figures 2C and 2D).

than that at baseline in the normoxia control, the L-serine
concentration was increased compared with the baseline after
24 hours of hypoxia (Figure 3B). However, the release of L-serine
did not increase in the neuronal cultures (Figure 3B). These results
suggested that neurons release D-serine, whereas L-serine is
derived from astrocytes during cerebral ischemia. To examine
whether cell death is induced after exposure to oxygen depletion,
LDH released from damaged cultured cells was measured. After
20 hours of exposure to hypoxia, no signiﬁcant LDH increase was
observed in both cultured astroglia and neurons after oxygen
deprivation (Figure 3C). These results showed that structural
integrity was not affected during the 24 hours of hypoxia.
Furthermore, the Alamar Blue reduction activities of those cells
that had been exposed to hypoxia for 24 hours were evaluated. As
shown in Figure 3D, the Alamar Blue reduction activities were not
altered after hypoxia in astroglia, while the Alamar Blue reduction
activity was decreased in neurons after hypoxia. These results
suggest that the cellular viability of neurons was affected after
hypoxia.

Determination of D-/L-Serine Release from Cultured Cells during
Experimental Ischemia
Next, we used cultured cells to determine which cell type can be
ascribed to the increase in D-/L-serine after experimental ischemia.
We measured the contents of D-/L-serine in cultured media
containing neurons and astroglia after hypoxia. At 24 hours after
hypoxia, the release of D-serine from the cultured neurons was
signiﬁcantly higher than that in a normoxia control (Figure 3A). In
astroglial cultures, no change in the D-serine concentration was
observed between the control and hypoxia conditions (Figure 3A).
The L-serine value after 24 hours of normoxia incubation was a
negative value because L-serine is taken up and consumed by
astrocytes continuously for the maintenance of normal metabolism (Figure 3B). Although the L-serine concentration was lower

Expression of Serine Racemase and 3-Phosphoglycerate
Dehydrogenase and Distribution of D-/L-Serine in Tissues after
Cerebral Ischemia
Next, we tried to investigate the cellular localization of key
enzymes for D-/L-serine production after cerebral infarction. First,
we performed immunohistochemistry for SRR in the ischemic
brain. Expression of SRR was increased in the peri-infarct area on
the ipsilateral side and was relatively low in the corresponding
contralateral side (Figure 4A to 4C). The SRR signal was colocalized
with the neuronal marker Nissl. Expression of 3-PGDH was also
increased in the ipsilateral peri-infarct area, compared with the
contralateral side, and was colocalized with the astroglial marker
GFAP (Figures 4D and 4E). These ﬁndings suggested that D-serine
was synthesized in neurons and L-serine was produced in

© 2014 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1932

Figure 3. D-/L-Serine release to culture medium from neurons and astroglia during hypoxia. D-Serine (A) and L-serine (B) contents in the
medium after 24 hours hypoxia (n = 6). The Y axis shows the quantity of D- or L-serine in the culture medium during hypoxia. A negative value
indicates the consumption of D- or L-serine from the culture medium during hypoxia. (C) Cell death during hypoxia was calculated based on
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release (n = 6). (D) Alamar Blue reduction activity at 24 hours after hypoxia (n = 6). n.s., not signiﬁcant; *Po 0.05;
***P o0.001 vs. normoxia (Student’s t-test).

astrocytes in the brain, supporting the results of the experiments
with cultured cells.
Western Blots for Serine Racemase and 3-Phosphoglycerate
Dehydrogenase after Cerebral Ischemia and D-Serine Producing
Activity in Brain Tissue after Ischemia
We also attempted to quantify the expressions of SRR and 3-PGDH
after cerebral ischemia using a western blot analysis. Samples
were separately collected from the temporal region (peri-infarct
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

area) and the parietal region (ischemic core) at 20 hours after
reperfusion (Figure 5A). In the peri-infarct lesion tissue, the expression of SRR was almost the same as that in the corresponding
area in the contralateral hemisphere; however, the expression was
markedly decreased in the ischemic core (Figure 5B). Although
immunohistochemistry showed the upregulation of SRR in a small
lesion of peri-infarct area, the expression of SRR was not increased
overall. The 3-PGDH expression level was slightly decreased in the
ischemic core; in the peri-ischemic area, the level was almost the
same as that on the contralateral side (Figure 5B). Furthermore,
© 2014 ISCBFM

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1933

Figure 4. Cellular localization of serine racemase (SRR) and 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (3-PGDH) in the brain after middle cerebral
artery occlusion (MCAO). The squares in the ipsilateral and contralateral cortex show the lesion where the pictures were taken
(A). Immunohistochemistry of SRR, 3-PGDH, Nissl, and glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) in the peri-infarct area of the ipsilateral hemisphere
(B, D) and the corresponding area in the contralateral hemisphere (C, E) after 20 hours of reperfusion. Scale bar = 100 μm.

the D-serine producing activity in brain homogenates was analyzed
to evaluate the activity of SRR at 20 hours after reperfusion in WT
mice. Brain homogenates were mixed with L-serine and incubated
at 37°C for 2 hours. The amount of D-serine produced by the brain
homogenate was subtracted from the amount for the same sample
measured before incubation. The D-serine producing activity on the
ipsilateral side of the MCAO was signiﬁcantly reduced, compared
with the contralateral side (Figure 5C).
DISCUSSION
The present study showed that SRR − / − mice have a smaller
infarct volume than WT mice. In addition, the temporal proﬁles of
D-/L-serine after cerebral ischemia were investigated in a reperfusion model for the ﬁrst time. The D-/L-serine content increased until
20 hours after recanalization and then leveled off gradually. The
© 2014 ISCBFM

results of in vitro experiments using cultured neurons and astroglia
suggested that D-serine is derived from neurons, while L-serine was
thought to be released from astrocytes. Immunohistochemistry of
brain tissue after cerebral ischemia showed that SRR is expressed in
neurons and that 3-PGDH is located in astrocytes, supporting the
results of the in vitro experiments. The amounts of SRR and 3-PGDH
were not upregulated when examined using western blotting.
Therefore, the increase in D-/L-serine does not result from the
increase in SRR or 3-PGDH.
Serine racemase − / − mice were previously reported to have a
smaller infarct than WT mice after MCAO.11 Neuroprotection in
SRR − / − mice is expected to be due to a reduction in D-serine,
which exacerbates the excitotoxicity after cerebral ischemia. We
ﬁrst report the D-serine content in SRR − / − mice after transient
MCAO. The D-serine content in naïve SRR − / − mice has been
reported to be almost 10% of that in WT mice.12 If so, our data
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1934

Figure 5. Expressions of serine racemase (SRR) and 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (3-PGDH) in the peri-infarct area and ischemic core.
(A) Location where samples were obtained for the western blot. The parietal sample from the ischemic hemisphere contains tissue from the
peri-infarct area, and the temporal sample contains tissue from the ischemic core. These tissues were compared with those from the
corresponding area of the contralateral hemisphere. (B) Western blot for SRR and 3-PGDH in parietal (peri-infarct area) and temporal (ischemic
core) samples at 20 hours after reperfusion in wild type (WT) mice. C: contralateral hemisphere, I: ischemic hemisphere. (C) D-Serine producing
activity in brain homogenates at 20 hours after reperfusion in WT mice (n = 4/group). The Y axis shows the amount of D-serine produced by
600 μg of protein for 2 hours. C, contralateral hemisphere; I, ischemic hemisphere. **P o0.01 vs ischemic hemisphere.

showed that the D-serine content in the SRR − / − brain remained
at about the same level even at 20 hours after reperfusion,
compared with the baseline. These ﬁndings also mean that a
D-serine peak after reperfusion was not seen in SRR − / − mice.
However, the 20-hour peak is unlikely to affect ischemic brain
damage, since the therapeutic time window for NMDA is reported
to be up to several hours.26,27 Therefore, the difference in the
stroke volume was likely caused by the decrease in the D-serine
concentration in the SRR − / − mice at baseline.
The reduction in D-serine producing activity was, at least in part,
due to the decrease in SRR protein as shown by western blot.
Although the D-serine producing activity was reduced in MCAObrain homogenate, the D-serine content increased after MCAO.
One possible explanation is that the reduced expression of SRR
affected the degradation of D-serine, because SRR itself also
catalyzes the degradation of cellular D-serine in the forebrain
region.28 So, D-serine once transformed from L-serine would retain
its level if SRR expression was decreased. Also, D-serine located in
the extracellular space would be important because it would be
capable of stimulating NMDA receptor and exacerbating excitotoxicity during cerebral ischemia. Although the overall increase in
the total content of D-serine after MCAO was very subtle, the
transfer from intracellular to extracellular might be facilitated after
cerebral ischemia, as suggested by the results of our in vitro
experiments. The D-serine level in the extracellular space should
be investigated using microdialysis in the near future.
Our ﬁndings are consistent with a recent report showing that
SRR exists in neurons and that 3-PGDH is located in astrocytes.29
On the basis of these ﬁndings, it could be hypothesized that
L-serine is synthesized and released from astrocytes to be taken up
by neurons for further conversion to D-serine. Then, D-serine is
released from neurons and is taken up again by astrocytes to be
degraded by diamine oxidase.22 The L-serine that is produced and
released by the astrocytes is thought to be shuttled to neurons to
support neurotransmission. This shuttle system is quite similar to
the ANLSH, the hypothesis describing lactate shuttling between
neurons and astrocytes.30–32
Cultured neuronal cells that had been exposed to hypoxia
(1% O2) for 24 hours were somewhat unhealthy but were not
damaged severely, since their axons and dendrites were thinner
than those of the control cells but were not torn or cleaved. In fact,
LDH release, which reﬂects membrane lysis and integrity, was not
signiﬁcantly elevated after 24 hours of hypoxic insult. Therefore, an
elevation in D-serine release from neurons after hypoxia does not
necessarily indicate passive release as a result of membrane lysis.
In contrast, the Alamar Blue reduction activity, which is dependent
on normal mitochondrial function in neurons,24,25 decreased
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

signiﬁcantly after 24 hours of hypoxia. Neuronal depolarization
reportedly elicits the release of endogenous D-serine from
primary neuronal cultures.33 Reduced ATP production as a result
of impaired mitochondrial function might have induced D-serine
release from neurons. In contrast to neurons, neither LDH release
nor Alamar Blue reduction was affected in astroglia after 24 hours of
hypoxia.
The 3-PGDH expression level was not increased overall in the
ischemic hemisphere in our western blot analysis. The increase in
the L-serine content during ischemia might arise from an increase
in 3-phoshoglycerate, a substrate of 3-PGDH, through the
upregulation of glycolysis during ischemia. The glucose utilization
rate is increased in ischemic brain,34 and downstream products of
3-phoshoglycerate are also likely to be increased. In terms of the
increase in D-serine after reperfusion, the upregulation of L-serine
might also serve as a possible explanation. L-Serine is a substrate
of SRR and drastically increases by up to 200% after ischemia.
The function of L-serine released during cerebral ischemia has
not yet been clariﬁed. The intravenous administration of L-serine is
reported to be neuroprotective as a result of vascular dilatation
through its activity as a Ca2+ channel blocker.35 However, L-serine
was reported to be a trophic factor released from astrocytes,
which promote the survival, dendritogenesis, and electrophysiologic development of cultured neurons.36 Therefore, it is likely that
L-serine from astrocytes also directly affects neurons during
cerebral ischemia. Studies of conditional knockout mice for 3PGDH in astrocytes would likely help to solve this problem.
DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Shiseido Co., Ltd., for essential technical support in performing the
2D-HPLC experiments. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
26461279.

REFERENCES
1 Lee JM, Grabb MC, Zipfel GJ, Choi DW. Brain tissue responses to ischemia. J Clin
Invest 2000; 106: 723–731.
2 Itoh Y, Takaoka R, Ohira M, Abe T, Tanahashi N, Suzuki N. Reactive oxygen species
generated by mitochondrial injury in human brain microvessel endothelial cells.
Clin Hemorheol Microcirc 2006; 34: 163–168.
3 Bonventre JV, Huang Z, Taheri MR, O'Leary E, Li E, Moskowitz MA et al. Reduced
fertility and postischaemic brain injury in mice deﬁcient in cytosolic
phospholipase A2. Nature 1997; 390: 622–625.

© 2014 ISCBFM

Regulation of D-/L-serine during cerebral ischemia
T Abe et al

1935
4 Grotta J, Clark W, Coull B, Pettigrew LC, Mackay B, Goldstein LB et al. Safety
and tolerability of the glutamate antagonist CGS 19755 (Selfotel) in patients
with acute ischemic stroke. Results of a phase IIa randomized trial. Stroke 1995;
26: 602–605.
5 Davis SM, Albers GW, Diener HC, Lees KR, Norris J. Termination of acute stroke
studies involving selfotel treatment. ASSIST steering committed. Lancet 1997;
349: 32.
6 Wu SZ, Bodles AM, Porter MM, Grifﬁn WS, Basile AS, Barger SW. Induction of serine
racemase expression and D-Serine release from microglia by amyloid beta-peptide. J Neuroinﬂammation 2004; 1: 2.
7 Mothet JP, Parent AT, Wolosker H, Brady RO, Jr, Linden DJ, Ferris CD et al. D-Serine
is an endogenous ligand for the glycine site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97: 4926–4931.
8 Basu AC, Tsai GE, Ma CL, Ehmsen JT, Mustafa AK, Han L et al. Targeted disruption
of serine racemase affects glutamatergic neurotransmission and behavior. Mol
Psychiatry 2009; 14: 719–727.
9 Inoue R, Hashimoto K, Harai T, Mori H. NMDA- and beta-amyloid1-42-induced
neurotoxicity is attenuated in serine racemase knock-out mice. J Neurosci 2008;
28: 14486–14491.
10 Shleper M, Kartvelishvily E, Wolosker H. D-Serine is the dominant endogenous
coagonist for NMDA receptor neurotoxicity in organotypic hippocampal slices.
J Neurosci 2005; 25: 9413–9417.
11 Mustafa AK, Ahmad AS, Zeynalov E, Gazi SK, Sikka G, Ehmsen JT et al.
Serine racemase deletion protects against cerebral ischemia and excitotoxicity.
J Neurosci 2010; 30: 1413–1416.
12 Miyoshi Y, Konno R, Sasabe J, Ueno K, Tojo Y, Mita M et al. Alteration of intrinsic
amounts of D-Serine in the mice lacking serine racemase and D-amino acid oxidase. Amino Acids 2012; 43: 1919–1931.
13 Takahashi S, Izawa Y, Suzuki N. Astroglial pentose phosphate pathway rates in
response to high-glucose environments. ASN Neuro 2012; 4: art:e00078;
doi:10.1042/AN20120002.
14 Smith PK, Krohn RI, Hermanson GT, Mallia AK, Gartner FH, Provenzano MD et al.
Measurement of protein using bicinchoninic acid. Anal Biochem 1985; 150:
76–85.
15 Abe T, Zhou P, Jackman K, Capone C, Casolla B, Hochrainer K et al. Lipoprotein
receptor-related protein-6 protects the brain from ischemic injury. Stroke 2013;
44: 2284–2291.
16 Kunz A, Abe T, Hochrainer K, Shimamura M, Anrather J, Racchumi G et al.
Nuclear factor-kappaB activation and postischemic inﬂammation are suppressed
in CD36-null mice after middle cerebral artery occlusion. J Neurosci 2008; 28:
1649–1658.
17 Jackman K, Kahles T, Lane D, Garcia-Bonilla L, Abe T, Capone C et al. Progranulin
deﬁciency promotes post-ischemic blood-brain barrier disruption. J Neurosci 2013;
33: 19579–19589.
18 Kawano T, Anrather J, Zhou P, Park L, Wang G, Frys KA et al. Prostaglandin E(2) EP1
receptors: downstream effectors of COX-2 neurotoxicity. Nat Med 2006; 12:
225–229.
19 Abe T, Kunz A, Shimamura M, Zhou P, Anrather J, Iadecola C. The neuroprotective
effect of prostaglandin E2 EP1 receptor inhibition has a wide therapeutic window,

20

21

22

23

24

25
26
27

28

29

30

31
32

33

34
35

36

is sustained in time and is not sexually dimorphic. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2009;
29: 66–72.
Borsello T, Clarke PG, Hirt L, Vercelli A, Repici M, Schorderet DF et al. A peptide
inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase protects against excitotoxicity and cerebral
ischemia. Nat Med 2003; 9: 1180–1186.
Plesnila N, Zinkel S, Le DA, Amin-Hanjani S, Wu Y, Qiu J et al. BID mediates
neuronal cell death after oxygen/ glucose deprivation and focal cerebral ischemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98: 15318–15323.
Sasabe J, Miyoshi Y, Suzuki M, Mita M, Konno R, Matsuoka M et al. D-amino acid
oxidase controls motoneuron degeneration through D-Serine. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2012; 109: 627–632.
Suzuki M, Sasabe J, Furuya S, Mita M, Hamase K, Aiso S. Type 1 diabetes mellitus in
mice increases hippocampal D-Serine in the acute phase after streptozotocin
injection. Brain Res 2012; 1466: 167–176.
Abe T, Takahashi S, Fukuuchi Y. Reduction of Alamar Blue, a novel redox indicator,
is dependent on both the glycolytic and oxidative metabolism of glucose in rat
cultured neurons. Neurosci Lett 2002; 326: 179–182.
Page B, Page M, Noel C. A new ﬂuorometric assay for cytotoxicity measurements
in-vitro. Int J Oncol 1993; 3: 473–476.
Meldrum B. Protection against ischaemic neuronal damage by drugs acting on
excitatory neurotransmission. Cerebrovasc Brain Metab Rev 1990; 2: 27–57.
Danysz W, Parsons CG. Glycine and N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors: physiological
signiﬁcance and possible therapeutic applications. Pharmacol Rev 1998; 50:
597–664.
Foltyn VN, Bendikov I, De Miranda J, Panizzutti R, Dumin E, Shleper M et al. Serine
racemase modulates intracellular D-Serine levels through an alpha,beta-elimination activity. J Biol Chem 2005; 280: 1754–1763.
Ehmsen JT, Ma TM, Sason H, Rosenberg D, Ogo T, Furuya S et al. D-Serine in glia
and neurons derives from 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase. J Neurosci 2013;
33: 12464–12469.
Pellerin L, Magistretti PJ. Glutamate uptake into astrocytes stimulates aerobic
glycolysis: a mechanism coupling neuronal activity to glucose utilization. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1994; 91: 10625–10629.
Magistretti PJ, Pellerin L, Rothman DL, Shulman RG. Energy on demand. Science
1999; 283: 496–497.
Chih CP, Roberts EL, Jr. Energy substrates for neurons during neural activity: a
critical review of the astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle hypothesis. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 2003; 23: 1263–1281.
Rosenberg D, Kartvelishvily E, Shleper M, Klinker CM, Bowser MT, Wolosker H.
Neuronal release of D-Serine: a physiological pathway controlling extracellular DSerine concentration. FASEB J 2010; 24: 2951–2961.
Vannucci RC, Brucklacher RM, Vannucci SJ. Glycolysis and perinatal hypoxicischemic brain damage. Dev Neurosci 2005; 27: 185–190.
Ren TJ, Qiang R, Jiang ZL, Wang GH, Sun L, Jiang R et al. Improvement in regional
CBF by L-serine contributes to its neuroprotective effect in rats after focal cerebral
ischemia. PLoS ONE 2013; 8: e67044.
Furuya S, Tabata T, Mitoma J, Yamada K, Yamasaki M, Makino A et al. L-serine and
glycine serve as major astroglia-derived trophic factors for cerebellar Purkinje
neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2000; 97: 11528–11533.

Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism website (http://www.nature.
com/jcbfm)

© 2014 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1928 – 1935

