Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9
DOI 10.1186/s13041-015-0101-6

RESEARCH

Open Access

Alpha-lipoic acid treatment is neurorestorative
and promotes functional recovery after stroke in
rats
Kang-Ho Choi1,2, Man-Seok Park2*†, Hyung-Seok Kim3*†, Kyung-Tae Kim4, Hyeon-Sik Kim5, Joon-Tae Kim2,
Byeong-Chae Kim2, Myeong-Kyu Kim2, Jong-Tae Park3 and Ki-Hyun Cho2

Abstract
The antioxidant properties of alpha-lipoic acid (aLA) correlate with its ability to promote neuroproliferation. However, there have been no comprehensive studies examining the neurorestorative effects of aLA administration after
the onset of ischemia. The middle cerebral artery (MCA) of adult rats was occluded for 2 hours and then reperfused.
aLA (20 mg/kg) was administered in 71 animals (aLA group) through the left external jugular vein immediately after
reperfusion. An equivalent volume of vehicle was administered to 71 animals (control group). Functional outcome,
levels of endogenous neural precursors with neurogenesis, glial cell activation, and brain metabolism were evaluated. Immediate aLA administration after reperfusion resulted in significantly reduced mortality, infarct size, and
neurological deficit score (NDS) in the test group compared to the control group. Long-term functional outcomes,
measured by the rotarod test, were markedly improved by aLA treatment. There was a significant increase in the
number of cells expressing nestin and GFAP in the boundary zone and infarct core regions after aLA treatment. Furthermore, significantly more BrdU/GFAP, BrdU/DCX, and BrdU/NeuN double-labeled cells were observed along the
boundary zone of the aLA group on days 7, 14, and 28 days, respectively. And brain metabolism using 18F-FDG
microPET imaging was markedly improved in aLA group. The effects of aLA was blocked by insulin receptor inhibitor, HNMPA (AM)3. These results indicate that immediate treatment with aLA after ischemic injury may have significant neurorestorative effects mediated at least partially via insulin receptor activation. Thus, aLA may be useful for
the treatment of acute ischemic stroke.
Keywords: Stroke, Antioxidants, Neuroprotection, Neurorestoration, Acute therapy

Introduction
Stroke is a leading cause of death worldwide and the largest single cause of long-term disability in millions of
people in developed countries [1]. In particular, large
hemispheric infarctions due to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) are a major cause of severe morbidity
and mortality. Despite sophisticated medical management and neurosurgical techniques, middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory infarction still results in a high
mortality rate of 40% to 80% [2]. A better understanding
* Correspondence: mspark@chonnam.ac.kr; veritas@jnu.ac.kr
†
Equal contributors
2
Department of Neurology, Chonnam National University Medical School, 8
Hak-dongDong-gu, Gwangju 501-757, Korea
3
Department of Forensic medicine, Chonnam National University Medical
School, 8 Hak-dongDong-gu, Gwangju 501-757, Korea
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

of the major factors contributing to cerebral ischemic
damage would improve the functional outcomes in cerebral ischemia and significantly influence the clinical
management and prognosis of stroke.
There is a considerable body of evidence to suggest
that oxidative stress is a fundamental mechanism causing brain damage in stroke and reperfusion ensuing
stroke [3]. The brain is highly susceptible to reactive
oxygen species (ROS) that induce damage due to low
levels of protective antioxidants, high concentrations of
peroxidizable lipids, high oxygen consumption, and high
iron levels that act as pro-oxidants under pathological
conditions [4]. Therefore, ROS have been implicated as
one of the earliest and most important components of
tissue injury after reperfusion of an ischemic organ [5].

© 2015 Choi et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Page 2 of 16

Alpha-lipoic acid (aLA) is an antioxidant commonly
used for treatment of many neurological disorders such
as diabetic polyneuropathy and multiple sclerosis. It is
absorbed from the diet and crosses the blood–brain barrier [6]. It is not toxic at therapeutic doses [7]. This
strong antioxidant influences a number of cellular processes, including direct radical scavenging, recycling,
metal chelation, regeneration of endogenous antioxidants, and modulation of transcription factor activity. It
has been shown to improve endothelial function and
blood flow, and accelerate glutathione synthesis, which
plays a crucial role in regulating the expression of several antioxidant and anti-inflammatory genes [6,8-10].
The neuroprotective effects of aLA pretreatment for
ischemic injury have been shown in several different experimental models of MCAO in rodents [11-15]. Recent
evidence from an in vitro experimental model suggests
that the antioxidant properties of aLA, specifically its
ability to restore glutathione content, correlate with its
ability to promote glial-neuronal interactions [16]. Previous studies in this area are limited and have either (a) focused on one specific antioxidant mechanism rather
than a more comprehensive analysis, (b) utilized pretreatment with aLA rather than administration after the
onset of ischemia, or (c) evaluated only early ischemic
injury rather than the long-term effects of treatment.
To date there have been no reports of comprehensive
studies examining the long-term effects and outcomes of
aLA administered after the onset of ischemia. Using a
rat model that closely approximates clinical stroke with
MCAO, we sought to investigate the long-term neurorestorative effects of aLA in immediate treatment after
cerebral ischemic injury, particularly those related to
neuroproliferation.

Materials and methods
Animal preparation

All animal procedures were performed in accordance
with the Chonnam National University guidelines for
the care and use of laboratory animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use

Committee (IACUC) of Chonnam National University
(Permit Number: 2011–14). All experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines laid down by
the National Institutes of Health (NIH, USA) regarding
the care and use of animals for experimental procedures.
Adult (8-week-old) male Sprague–Dawley (SD) rats
weighing 253–288 g (n = 201) were purchased from
Samtako (Seoul, Korea).
To examine the effect of aLA on brain infarction, aLA
injection (20 mg/kg body weight [B.W.], Bukwang pharmaceutic company, Seoul, Korea), was administered immediately after reperfusion of the left MCAO through
the left external jugular vein in 71 animals (aLA group,
Table 1). An equivalent volume of vehicle (0.9% NaCl)
was administrated in 71 animals (control group) using
the same procedure. As an additional control for nonspecific findings, 10 animals underwent sham surgery
(sham group). In the sham group, 10 animals were used
for behavioral test. Among them, 6 animals were used
for determination of infarct volume and molecular studies at scheduled time points.
In the previous study, hydroxy-2-naphthalenylmethyl
phosphoric acid triacetoxymethyl ester (HNMPA(AM)3),
a highly specific insulin receptor (IR) inhibitor, blocked
the protective effects of aLA in hepatocyte [17,18].
Therefore, to further verify the effect of aLA, HNMPA
(AM)3 (200 uM, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz,
CA, USA) was pretreated for 3 h before aLA treatment
in 49 animals (HNMPA group).
Surgical procedures

The left MCA of 191 SD rats was occluded for 2 hours
using the intraluminal filament technique, as previously
described [19]. Rats were anesthetized with isoflurane
(3% for induction and 2% for maintenance) in a mixture
of oxygen/nitrous oxide (30/70). Their body temperature
was maintained at 36.6 ± 0.5°C throughout and following
surgery with a thermostatically controlled heating pad.
All efforts were made to minimize suffering. After a 2hour occlusion, reperfusion was performed as described
previously. Sham surgery was carried out by introducing

Table 1 Total numbers and groups of Sprague–Dawley rats used in this study
aLA group

Control group

HNMPA group

Sham group

Age (wk)

8.0 ± 0.3

8.0 ± 0.3

8.0 ± 0.3

8.0 ± 0.3

Body weight (g)

270.9 ± 8.3

271.3 ± 8.1

270.8 ± 6.1

271.1 ± 7.5

No. of animals used for main experiment

71

71

49

10

Micro-PET image/TTC stain

1/30 (10 rats/day)

1/30 (10 rats/day)

0/30 (10 rats/day)

0/3 (1 rat/day)

Behavior test

20

20

10

10

Micro-PET image/IHC & RT-PCR

1/9 (3 rats/day)

1/9 (3 rats/day)

0/9 (3 rats/day)

0/3 (1 rat/day)

Immunofluorescence

12 (4 rats/day)

12 (4 rats/day)

0

0

Mortality, %

29.6

53.5

46.9

0

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

the thread through the left MCA, followed by immediate
withdrawal in 10 SD rats. All other procedures in the
sham group were identical to the ischemic surgery
groups.
Rats were placed in cages with normal water and food
after reperfusion. Mortality rate of the rats as a direct result of ischemic stroke was calculated and compared
after reperfusion. The MCA occluded rats were observed
closely for the first 2 hours, hourly for the next 6 hours,
thereafter four times a day for 7 days, and twice a day
after the first week. Animals were humanely sacrificed
by cervical dislocation after anesthesia by an expert at 1,
3, 7, and 14 days following MCAO for the measurement
of cerebral infarct volume and immunostaining analysis.
At each time point, rats were anesthetized with isoflurane and the brains were removed quickly. Rats that survived until the final endpoint for behavioral testing and
survival analysis were humanely euthanized with an
overdose of sodium pentobarbital. when they met the
euthanasia guidelines of Chonnam National University,
signs of severe central nervous system dysfunction nonresponsive to treatment.
BrdU administration

The thymidine analog 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU;
Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) was used to label
proliferating cells. BrdU was dissolved in 0.9% sterile
NaCl and filtered at 22 μm. The resulting solution was
injected at 50 mg/kg (10 mg/mL) intraperitoneally in
both groups. Injections were given 5 days after ischemic
insult for 3 days, a period that is documented to be during peak cell proliferation after ischemia [20], and additionally given once daily for 3 days before rats were
euthanized (2 weeks and 4 weeks post-MCAO) to
maximize the labeling of proliferating cells(Figure 1).
Determination of infarct volume

Ten rats from the aLA and control groups were euthanized by deep isoflurane anesthesia at 1, 3, and 7 days

Page 3 of 16

after occlusion. The brains were carefully removed from
the skull and then sectioned in the coronal plane at
2 mm intervals, starting at 1 mm from the frontal pole,
using a rodent brain matrix (RBM-4000C; ASI Instruments, Warrin, MI, USA). Coronal slices were incubated
in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 2% 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC; Sigma) at room
temperature for 1 hour and then transferred to 4% buffered paraformaldehyde solution for fixation [21]. The
area of brain damage over the entire ipsilateral hemisphere was measured using the Adobe Photoshop software (Adobe Systems) and the total volume of infarction
(mm3) was calculated from the sum of the damaged volumes (i.e., damaged areas × thickness) in the brain slices.
18

F-FDG positron emission tomography (PET) imaging

Regional glucose metabolism of the brain lesion was
evaluated in vivo by 18F-FDG microPET imaging 1 day
and 7 days after cerebral MCAO on a microPET R4
scanner (Concorde Microsystems, Knoxville, TN). Under
brief (2 min) halothane gas anesthesia, the rats were
intravenously injected with 2 mCi/mmol 18F-FDG
through the tail vein. The animals were then returned to
their cage and placed in a room with minimal ambient
noise. After an uptake period of 60 min, the animals
were placed in the microPET scanner under halothane
gas anesthesia (5% induction and 1.5% for maintenance).
A 20 min static acquisition was performed in 3-D mode.
Data were collected in list mode and reconstructed by a
maximum a-posteriori probability algorithm with a pixel
size of 0.4 × 0.4 × 1.2 mm3.
The imaging data acquired from the microPET were
displayed and analyzed by IDL (ver. 6.2, Research Systems, Colorado, USA). Axial MR images were used to
assign regions of interest (ROIs) per slice according to a
rat brain atlas. Glucose metabolism was evaluated by
drawing ROIs in the bilateral cortex and striatum for
each slice. A semiquantitative method (standardized

Figure 1 Overview of double immunostaining design. (A) Diagram of the initial experiments comparing early proliferation of astrocytes
(BrdU/GFAP-positive) at 1 week and mature neuron formation at 4 weeks (BrdU/NeuN-positive) after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). (B)
Coronal sections delineating the main areas of interest: frontal and temporal boundary zone.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

uptake value, SUV) was used to calculate the changes in
metabolic rate of the bilateral cortex and striatum.
Behavioral tests of ischemic stroke model rats

All animals were trained for neurobehavioral assessment
for 7 days before MCAO. A neurological examination
was performed at defined points after MCAO. An investigator who was blinded to the experimental groups determined the neurological deficit score (NDS) based on
(a) consciousness: 0, normal; 1, restless; 2, lethargic; 3,
stuporous, (b) gait: 0, normal; 1, paw adduction; 2, unbalanced walking; 3, circling; 4, unable to stand; 5, no
movement, (c) limb tone: 0, normal; 1, spastic; 2, flaccid,
and (d) pain reflex: 0, normal; 2, hypoactive; 4, absent, at
2 hours and 1, 3, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, and 56 days
after MCAO by [21]. A higher NDS indicated a worse
neurological status.
Motor impairment was assessed using the accelerating
rotarod test. A 5 min activity test was performed for
each experimental group. Prior to the induction of ischemia, rats were trained on the rotarod for five consecutive
days, for 15 sessions in total. The rotating drum was accelerated from 4 to 40 rpm over 5 min and the time
taken (in seconds) for the animal to fall off the drum
was recorded. Each session included five consecutive trials with a maximum time of 300 s; the mean latency to
fall was calculated from the five trials. Animals that
could not stay on the rod for an average of at least 250 s
by the end of training were excluded from the stroke
surgery.
Spontaneous motor activity (SMA) was evaluated for
5 min by placing the animals in their normal environment (their cage). Neurological scoring of SMA was
assigned as follows: 0, moved about the cage and explored the environment; 1, moved about the cage but
did not approach all sides and was hesitant to move; 2,
barely moved about the cage and showed postural abnormalities (curved towards the paretic side); 3, unable
to move and posture curved towards the paretic side.
The flexion test was scored as follows: 0, no observed
neurological deficit; 1, contralateral forelimb flexion with
wrist flexion and shoulder adduction; 2, reduced resistance to lateral push; 3, circling movements towards the
paretic side [22,23]. Behavioral testing was conducted at
3, 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, and 56 days after surgery.
Immunohistochemistry

Paraffin-embedded sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated successively in a gradient of ethanol, and then
treated twice in a pressure cooker for antigen retrieval.
After rinsing in PBS 3 times for 2 min each, the sections
were incubated in IHC blocking solution (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) for 20 min at room temperature to
block non-specific binding sites. They were then

Page 4 of 16

incubated with anti-rabbit polyclonal glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP) antibody (Millipore, Billerica,
MA, USA, 1:1,000) or anti-mouse monoclonal nestin
antibody (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA; 1:200) for
2 hours at 37°C, and finally, with biotinylated antimouse and -rabbit secondary antibody (IgG) for 30 min
at 37°C. Sections were washed 4 times with PBS for
5 min each and then covered with water-soluble mounting reagent. The immunoreactivity was visualized by
treating with 0.02% 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB). To
prevent variations in DAB staining, we processed all tissue in a single batch.
Paired samples from one aLA-treated and vehicletreated rat were immunostained and two fields (magnification, 40×, 200×, and 400×) in the frontal and temporal
cortex were captured using an Olympus BX 50 optical
microscope (Olympus Optical Co., GmbH, Hamburg,
Germany). GFAP and nestin immunoreactivity in aLA
and control rats at each time point after surgery were
analyzed. Immunostained samples were captured with a
Nikon camera (Digital Sight DS, Kanagawa, Japan)
equipped with Nikon NIS-Elements imaging software
(Nikon, Melville, NY).
Immunofluorescence

To determine levels of neurogenesis, double labeling was
carried out with fluorescent-tagged secondary antibodies. After rinsing with washing buffer (PBS with 1%
BSA and 0.1% Tween 20), we incubated sections in the
appropriate primary antibodies against BrdU (Accurate
Chemical and Scientific Corp., Westbury, NY, USA;
1:200 anti-mouse) as a marker of newborn cells, GFAP
(DAKO Corporation, Via Real, Carpinteria, CA, USA;
1:500 anti-rabbit) for astrocytes, doublecortin (DCX;
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA; 1:100
anti-goat) for neuronal progenitor cells at 2 weeks, or
NeuN (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, USA;
1:200 anti-rabbit), for mature neurons at 4 weeks (Figure 1). Cells were counterstained with Alexa 488 donkey
anti-rabbit (1:200; Invitrogen) and Cy3 donkey antimouse (1:200; Jackson ImmunoResearch Europe Ltd.,
Suffolk, UK) for 60 min at room temperature. The slides
were mounted with Vectashield mounting medium containing 4′-6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Vector
Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA) and examined
in a Leica TCS SP confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems Gmbh, Wetzlar, Germany). Images were analyzed
with Adobe Photoshop version 5.5 (Adobe systems, San
Jose, CA, USA). We applied the optical fractionator
method to count double-labeled cells (BrdU/GFAP–
positive, BrdU/DCX–positive, or BrdU/NeuN–positive
cells). Each brain had five contiguous homologous coronal sections containing the infarct between +2.2 and
−1.3 mm from the bregma as previously described [24].

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

In each brain, double-labeled cells were counted along
the boundary area of the frontal and temporal cortex
(Figure 1) and a mean cell count was obtained. Each
brain was analyzed by two independent investigators
(WY Choi and JH Jeon) who were blind to the treatment
group. Confocal images were taken with the Zeiss LSM510 microscope and multiple z-sections were obtained
to ensure colocalization.
RNA isolation and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR)

RT-PCR was used to analyze the mRNA expression of
the inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α), macrophage inflammatory protein 1 (MIP1),
ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba-1), and
interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β). In addition, RT-PCR analysis
for SOX2, a transcription factor, and nestin, neuronal
precursor cells, was performed at 3, 7, and 14 days after
MCAO. Total RNA was isolated from the brain by using

Page 5 of 16

Trizol (Life Technologies, NY, USA) and then converted
to cDNA using a high capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit (Life Technologies). Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as an internal control. RT-PCR was performed using the 7900 HT fast
real-time PCR system and primers (Life Technologies).
For all RT-PCR plates, samples were run in triplicate to
eliminate potential errors and variance between wells.
The results of the real-time PCR data are presented as
Ct values.
Statistical analysis

All data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the
mean (SEM). A Student’s t test or the Mann–Whitney-U
test was used to compare the results of TTC staining between the aLA and control groups. Continuous variables
were compared between the aLA, control, and sham
groups by the Kruskal-Wallis test. Statistical comparisons were performed using ANOVA with repeated

Figure 2 Changes in infarct volume and mortality. (A) 2% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining of ischemic infarct regions in alphalipoic acid (aLA) and control animals following artificial occlusion of the left MCA at 1, 3, and 7 days after the occlusion. (B) Infarct volume was
quantified and compared between the three groups. Infarct volume significantly decreased in the aLA group 7 days after occlusion (†P < 0.01 as
compared to the control; Student’s unpaired t test). Data represents mean ± SEM (n = 10 rats/day in aLA, control, and HNMPA groups, n = 1 rat/
day in the sham group). (C) Kaplan–Meier survival curves for aLA (n = 71), control (vehicle alone, n = 71), and HNMPA (n = 49) groups over 56 days
following left MCAO.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

measures to assess behavioral performance. Survival analysis was used to compare mortality between the aLA
and control groups. A P value of <0.05 was considered
statistically significant. All measurements were taken by
observers blind to the individual treatments. All statistical analyses were performed using PASW 18.0 for Windows (SPSS, Inc., Somers, NY, USA).

Results
The volume of damage assessed by TTC staining

TTC staining of brain sections was obtained from
MCAO rats. It showed reproducible and readily detectable lesions in the areas supplied by the MCA at 1, 3,
and 7 days after reperfusion (Figure 2A). The lesions
were present in the hippocampus, lateral striatum, and
the overlying cortex. As shown in Figure 1, infarct volume in the group of ischemic rats treated with aLA
(aLA group) was decreased at 1, 3, and 7 days after left
MCA occlusion when compared with the group of rats
treated with vehicle alone (control group). Infarct volume was significantly reduced at 7 days by aLA treatment when compared with the control group. The
volume of damage at 7 days was approximately 26.0%
lower in the aLA group (221.8 ± 31.5 mm3, P = 0.002)
than the control group (299.4 ± 21.1 mm3; Figure 2B).
This effect was blocked by pretreatment of HNMPA
(AM)3, a selective insulin receptor inhibitor. The volume of cerebral infarction at 7 days was 282.1 ±

Page 6 of 16

31.1 mm3 in the HNMPA group. We did not observe
cerebral infarction in the sham group.
Increased survival rate in MCAO rats treated with aLA

At 56 days after reperfusion, 38 of 71 rats who underwent MCAO had died in the control group (53.5% mortality) vs. 21 of 71 rats in the aLA group (29.6%
mortality). The mortality rate demonstrated a 24% absolute increase in survival for rats treated with aLA relative
to those treated with vehicle alone. The cumulative
probability of vascular death was significantly lower for
the aLA group than the control group in Kaplan-Meier
survival curves (log-rank test, P = 0.005; HR = 0.496; CI
= 0.291–0.846; Figure 2C). Coadministration of the IR
inhibitor HNMPA(AM)3 increased the mortality rate
similar to that of control group.
Regional cerebral metabolic changes related to aLA
treatment

MCAO decreased metabolic activity in the affected (left)
hemisphere by more than 50% than the contralateral
hemisphere, as measured by 18F-FDG microPET imaging
(Figure 3A, B). There was no significant difference between SUVs of the cortex and striatum at 1 day after
cerebral ischemia in both groups. However, the SUVs in
the cortex and striatum of the affected hemisphere were
significantly higher in the aLA group than in the control
group at 7 days after cerebral ischemia (P < 0.01,

Figure 3 The effects of aLA treatment on metabolic glucose activity as measured by microPET. One day after MCAO, decreased uptake of
18
F-FDG was revealed in the PET images of coronal sections in the rat brains (A and C). By 7 days after MCAO, the hypometabolic region
remained distinct in the control group (B), while it lessened significantly in ischemic rats receiving aLA (D).

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Figure 3C, D). The SUVs in the cortex and striatum recovered to 91.2 ± 10.3% of the corresponding homologous contralateral regions in the aLA group, while the
values were not recovered when compared with the corresponding contralateral values in the control group at
7 days after cerebral ischemia. The SUVs in the contralateral cortex and striatum were not significantly different in either group at all the times studied.
Functional recovery

To ensure that all MCAO animals were subjected to
similar ischemic insult, the extent of acute neurological
deficit by NDS was evaluated in these as well as the
sham animals. NDS was significantly greater in MCAO
animals than the sham animals, and was similar for both
the aLA and control groups (Figure 4A). Initial neurological function was similar for each groups of MCAO
animals at 1 day after reperfusion (aLA, control, and

Page 7 of 16

HNMPA groups). NDS was significantly lowered in the
aLA group (5.09 ± 0.52, P = 0.001) than the control
group (6.41 ± 0.48). HNMPA blocked aLA-induced functional recovery tested by NDS (6.27 ± 0.79, Figure 4A).
We did not observe any neurological deficits in shamoperated animals (NDS = 0).
Prior to MCAO, the time spent on the accelerating
rotarod was similar in both, the aLA and control groups.
In the sham group, there was no evidence of a neurological deficit in the rotarod test, whereas MCAO animals exhibited severe neurological deficits up to 3 days
after reperfusion. Remarkably, aLA-treated rats showed
significantly improved recovery during the postoperative
period when compared with control animals (P = 0.013;
Figure 4B), while this aLA effect was not observed in the
HNMPA group (Figure 4B).
In the SMA test, ischemic animals spent most of their
time in the center of the cage, with a curved posture

Figure 4 The effect of alpha-lipoic acid (aLA) on functional recovery. (A) The initial neurological deficit score (NDS) following ischemic
stroke was similar for three groups. After treatment with aLA, the NDS was significantly different, with the lowest scores observed for the aLA
group (5.09 ± 0.52) when compared with the control group (6.41 ± 0.48, P = 0.001; ANOVA with repeated measures). (B) Artificial occlusion of the
MCA resulted in severe impairments in the rotarod performance test. Postoperative motor function in the rotarod test was significantly improved
by aLA treatment when compared with the control group (P = 0.013; ANOVA with repeated measures). (C) In the spontaneous motor activity
(SMA) test, there was a marked decrease (*P < 0.05; †P < 0.01 as compared to the control; Kruskal-Wallis test) in behavioral efficiency in the ischemic group when compared with sham animals. aLA treatment significantly improved behavioral output. (D) In the flexion test, there was a
marked improvement (*P < 0.05 as compared to the control; Mann–Whitney-U test) in the aLA group when compared with the control group.
Data represents mean ± SEM (n = 20 in the aLA and control groups, n = 10 in the HNMPA and sham group).

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

towards the paretic side. There was a marked decrease
(P < 0.05) in behavioral efficiency in the ischemic group
when compared with sham animals. aLA treatment significantly improved SMA; aLA-treated rats moved
around the cage and explored their environment more
efficiently than control animals. Behavioral output improved markedly (P < 0.05) in the aLA group than the
control group (Figure 4C). In the flexion test, ischemic
animals showed persistent circling movements with significant severe paw flexions. The aLA group exhibited
less persistent circling and comparatively less severe paw
flexions with decreased postural disturbances (Figure 4D). We found that HNMPA blocks aLA related
functional recovery on behavioral test (Figure 4). Neurological score of the flexion test was 0 in the sham group.

Page 8 of 16

corresponding area in aLA-treated animals exhibited
partial neuronal loss and intact neurons were evident between vacuolated spaces. There was a restorative zone
where the tissue had grown to invade the infarct core region. In addition, the number of processes was significantly increased in animals treated with aLA when
compared with control animals. In the aLA group,
nestin- and GFAP-positive cells were stellar in shape
with large cell bodies and multiple processes when compared with the cells of control group, which had small
cell bodies with marked vacuolization, degradation, and
loss of processes. At 3, 7, and 14 days post-MCAO, IHC
staining of brain sections revealed an increase in the
number of nestin- and GFAP-positive cells in the aLA
group when compared with the control group (Figures 5,
6 and 7).

Effect of aLA treatment on histopathological changes in
MCAO rats

Neuroproliferation after aLA treatment

Figures 5, 6 and 7 show the histopathological changes in
the peri-infarct area and infarct core regions at 3, 7, and
14 days after MCA occlusion in aLA and control rats.
Sections of the brain passing from the frontal cortex
were examined. In the infarct core region of the control
group, there was extensive neuronal loss and numerous
vacuolated spaces, and intact neurons were absent. The

To identify the cell lineage of proliferative cells, we performed double immunohistochemistry using BrdU,
GFAP, DCX, and NeuN in frontal and temporal boundary zone (Figure 1) Immunochemistry against BrdU
showed that aLA group had a greater number of BrdUpositive cells in the cerebral cortex (P < 0.001) than the
control group (Figure 8). In addition, BrdU and GFAP

Figure 5 Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for anti-nestin in the peri-infarct area at 3, 7, and 14 days after ischemia (magnification,
A 40×; B 400×). Compared with the corresponding regions of the control group, there was an increase in nestin-positive cells in the aLA group
at 3, 7, and 14 days after the MCAO. Nestin-positive cells in the aLA group exhibited a variety of morphological features such as stellar shape,
large cell body, and multiple processes (arrow). In contrast, stained cells in the control group exhibited small cell bodies, vacuolization, degradation, and loss of processes (arrowhead). n = 3 rats/day/group.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Page 9 of 16

Figure 6 IHC staining for anti-GFAP in the in the peri-infarct area at 3, 7, and 14 days after ischemia (magnification, A 40×; B 200×; C
400×). The number of GFAP-positive cells was increased in the aLA group when compared with the control group. In vehicle-treated animals, a
greater infarct core region was clearly defined at 7 and 14 days, compared with 3 days. By contrast, the infarct core region was not well defined
in aLA-treated animals, because of the presence of cells that had grown inside the infarct core region from the boundary of the lesion at 7 and
14 days. Furthermore, GFAP-positive cells with necrotic morphology, vacuolization (arrow), and loss of processes (arrowhead) in the peri-infarct
area were markedly reduced in aLA-treated animals when compared with controls. In contrast, GFAP-positive cells had large cell bodies and multiple processes (star) in the aLA group. n = 3 rats/day/group.

double staining showed an increased astroglial proliferation (P < 0.001) in the aLA group compared with the
control group (Figure 8). aLA-treated rats had a significantly higher number of BrdU/DCX-positive cells, currently a gold standard in measuring neurogenesis, in
both the frontal and temporal boundary areas versus
control rats 2 weeks after MCAO (Figure 9). The number of BrdU/DCX-positive cells in rats treated with aLA
after brain ischemia was 5 fold more than that in
vehicle-treated rats. To determine whether the early proliferative effects of aLA on post-stroke neurogenesis seen
at 2 weeks were sustained, we evaluated the number of
cells co-labeled with BrdU and the mature neuronal
maker NeuN 4 weeks after stroke. aLA-treated rats
showed an increased number of BrdU/NeuN-positive
cells in the cerebral cortex (P < 0.001) when compared
with control (Figure 10). Therefore, these results indicate
that aLA strengthens intrinsic neurogenic processes as
higher numbers of BrdU/GFAP, BrdU/DCX, and BrdU/
NeuN-positive cells were found in the peri-infarct
cortex.

Effect of aLA treatment on inflammation and
neurorestoration after ischemic insult

To analyze the basic mechanism and possible relationship between the neurorestorative effects of aLA and
changes in inflammatory cytokine levels, TNF-α, MIP1,
Iba-1, and IL-1β mRNA expression was determined by
RT-PCR. Expression of TNF-α and MIP1 were significantly lower in the brains of aLA-treated rats than that
in vehicle-treated rats 3 days after stroke (P < 0.05, Figure 11). The expression of TNF-α, MIP1, Iba-1, and IL1β were significantly lower in the aLA group than in the
control group at 7 days after stroke (P < 0.05, Figure 11).
Employment of the IR inhibitor HNMPA(AM)3 completely inhibited aLA-induced anti-inflammatory properties. Conversely, coadministration of the HNMPA
augmented the level of inflammatory cytokine induction
such as TNF-α (Figure 11). Additionally, aLA increased
the relative mRNA expression of SOX2 and nestin when
compared with the control group at 3 days after stroke
(P < 0.05, Figure 12).

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Page 10 of 16

Figure 7 IHC staining for anti-nestin (A) and GFAP (B, C) protein following ischemia in the infarct core region at 3, 7, and 14 days after
ischemia (magnification, A, C 400×; B 200×). Compared with the corresponding regions in the control group, there was an increase in nestinand GFAP-positive cells and vessels in the aLA group at 3, 7, and 14 days after the MCAO. Additionally, the morphological features of nestin- and
GFAP-expressing cells and vessels, such as the number and shape of cell bodies and processes, were significantly improved in the aLA group
(arrow and star). In contrast, the control group exhibited loss of processes (arrowhead). n = 3 rats/day/group.

Discussion
We have shown that urgent treatment with aLA (20 mg/
kg) after ischemic injury had long-term (56 days) neurorestorative effects against neural damage caused by
cerebral infarction in rats. Furthermore, these long-term
neurorestorative effects of aLA may be due, at least in
part, to enhanced neuroproliferation and insulin receptor (IR) activation. Previous in vivo studies examining
the neuroprotective effects of aLA have focused solely
on its role in diminishing oxidative stress [11-15]. Given
the increased use of aLA by the general population, the
current results are of potential importance in the clinical
setting.
Administration of aLA has been shown to reduce infarct size in several different models of MCAO in rodents [11-15]. These earlier studies assessed the effect of
pretreatment with aLA, ranging from acute preadministration to several daily injections for up to a
week prior to MCAO, and survival times for periods of
1 to 7 days following MCAO. However, none of these
studies demonstrated whether aLA is still effective if
given after the onset of ischemia. In addition, the studies
had limited duration, with post-ischemic evaluations
over 7 days or less. Therefore, these models only represented events associated with early ischemic injury and

did not address whether aLA has an effect later in recovery. Furthermore, each of these studies assessed neuroprotection at a single time point. For the first time, we
report the long-term neurorestorative effects of urgent
treatment with aLA after cerebral ischemia.
Treatment with aLA resulted in a 26% relative reduction in lesion size at 7 days. The magnitude of this reduction was similar to previous reports of reduced
ischemic cell damage in MCAO rat models in response
to various other agents [25-28]. Furthermore, the metabolic defect, as measured by 18F-FDG microPET imaging, in the cortex and striatum of the affected
hemisphere significantly recovered after aLA treatment,
while no recovery was seen in the control group, at
7 days after cerebral ischemia. Urgent treatment with
aLA after cerebral ischemia was associated with improvement in functional outcomes after 56 days. The ultimate goal of therapy after stroke is improved
functional outcome over time, the ability to measure improvements in functional deficits is essential for new
therapeutic applications. In the current study, functional
outcome was assessed by various neurobehavioral tests
and was significantly improved in the aLA group when
compared with the control group over a relatively long
period of time (56 days).

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Page 11 of 16

Figure 8 Immunofluorescence for BrdU (red) and GFAP (green). aLA increased the absolute number of newly developing astrocytes (BrdU/
GFAP-positive) in the frontal and temporal boundary zone at 7 days after ischemia (A and D). Bar graph showing the absolute numbers of newly
developing glia (BrdU/GFAP-positive) in the brain (B, C, E, and F; *P < 0.05; †P < 0.01 when compared with the control group; Student’s unpaired
t test). Data represents mean ± SEM (n = 4 rats/day/group). Scale bars = 100 μm.

The long-term neurorestorative effects of aLA were
associated with several markers of neuroproliferation.
This is a novel finding and demonstrates for the first
time a putative mechanism of neurorestoration by aLA
involving enhanced neuroproliferation. Both nestin and
GFAP expression were significantly increased after

treatment with aLA, based on IHC staining of brain sections. Nestin is a distinct intermediate filament protein
that is transiently expressed in proliferating neuroepithelial stem cells during the neurulation stage of development.[29] Nestin expression has been used extensively
as a marker for central nervous system (CNS) progenitor

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Page 12 of 16

Figure 9 Immunohistochemistry for DCX (red) and BrdU (green). aLA treatment increased early neurogenesis (BrdU/DCX-positive) in the
frontal (A) and temporal (C) boundary zone at 2 weeks after stroke. Bar graph showing the absolute numbers of co-labeled cells (BrdU/DCX-positive) in the brain (B and D; *P < 0.05; †P < 0.01 when compared with the control group; Student’s unpaired t test). Data represents mean ± SEM (n
= 4 rats/day/group). Scale bars = 50 μm.

Figure 10 Immunohistochemistry for BrdU (red) and NeuN (green). aLA increased the co-localization of neurons and markers of proliferation
in the frontal (A) and temporal (C) boundary zone at 4 weeks after ischemia. Bar graph showing the absolute number of newborn neurons
(BrdU/NeuN-positive) in the brain (B and D; *P < 0.05 when compared with the control; Student’s unpaired t test). Data represents mean ± SEM
(n = 4 rats/day/group). Scale bars = 50 μm.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

Page 13 of 16

Figure 11 The effects of aLA on the mRNA expression of inflammatory markers in the cortex of rats 3 and 7 days after cerebral
ischemia, as measured by RT-PCR analysis. (A) TNF-α mRNA expression. (B) MIP1 mRNA expression. (C) Iba-1 mRNA expression. (D) IL-1β
mRNA expression. The expressions were normalized to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) levels and expressed as relative fold
activation. Data represents mean ± SEM (n = 3 rats/day in aLA, control, and HNMPA groups, n = 1 rat/day in the sham group). *P < 0.05; †P < 0.01
as compared to the control.

cells, as there is a correlation between nestin expression
and this cell type in vivo [30]. Nestin has also recently
been implicated as a novel angiogenesis marker for proliferating endothelial cells [31]. Following brain injury,
increased nestin expression plays an important role in,
and promotes the functional repair of, neuronal processes and synaptic plasticity [32].
Astrocytes increase following MCAO [33]. A growing
body of data demonstrate that astrocytes respond to ischemia with functions important for neuroprotection

and neurorestoration [34]. The rapidly expanding astrocytic processes create both physical and functional walls
surrounding the ischemic core, which extend the time
available for marshalling endogenous repair mechanisms
[35]. Astrocytes are robustly immunoreactive for antioxidant proteins such as glutathione peroxidase, hemeoxygenase 1, and DJ-1 in infarcts; therefore, these glial
cells are relatively resistant to oxidative stress compared
to neurons, and important in neuronal antioxidant
defense and secrete growth factors [36,37]. Furthermore,

Figure 12 Changes of relative mRNA expression of SOX2 and Nestin compared to the control group at3 days after cerebral ischemia,
as measured by RT-PCR analysis. (A) SOX2 mRNA expression. (B) Nestin mRNA expression. aLA increased the mRNA expression of SOX2 and
Nestin at 7 and 14 days after ischemia. Data represents mean ± SEM (n = 3 rats/day in aLA and control groups, n = 1 rat/day in the sham group).
*P < 0.05; †P < 0.01 when compared with the control group.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

astrocytes also play an important role to promote neurorestoration in stroke [38]. Astrocytes effect long-term
recovery after brain injury, through neurite outgrowth,
synaptic plasticity, or neuron regeneration, and is also
influenced by astrocyte surface molecule expression and
trophic factor release [39-41]. In addition, the death or
survival of astrocytes themselves may affect the ultimate
clinical outcome and rehabilitation through effects on
neurogenesis and synaptic reorganization [41]. Astrocyte
cultures derived from the hippocampus have been
shown to promote neurogenesis [42]. Astrocytes appear
to play an important role in neurorestoration following
CNS injury and promote neuronal differentiation [43]. It
is clear that astrocytes are important in brain plasticity
and recovery after stroke [44-46]. Astrocytes are characterized by a high level of GFAP expression, which has
led to GFAP being one of the most frequently used
astrocyte markers [47]. For these reasons, astrocytic activity, expressed by GFAP staining, reflects the outcome
of the ischemic injury [48].
IHC staining using rat-specific anti-nestin and antiGFAP antibodies show that aLA enhanced endogenous
nestin and GFAP expression at 3, 7, and 14 days after
MCAO. Nestin- and GFAP-positive cells were significantly increased with aLA treatment when compared
with control animals in the peri-infarct and infarct core
regions. Furthermore, the relative mRNA expression of
nestin was significantly increased after aLA treatment
when compared with control group at 3 days after ischemia. Additionally, the morphological features of nestinand GFAP-expressing cells, such as the number and
shape of cell bodies and processes, were significantly improved in the aLA group. These results suggest that aLA
treatment increases the number of nestin- and GFAPexpressing cells, showing a marked neuroproliferative effect following ischemic brain damage. These results are
consistent with an earlier study of cultured astroglial
cells, which showed that nestin and GFAP expression increases significantly after aLA treatment [16]. In this
study, the proliferation and differentiation of astrocytes
in culture correlated with the antioxidant properties of
aLA, particularly with its ability to restore glutathione
content. These findings have led to the hypothesis that
the neurorestorative effects of aLA against oxidative
stress promote the proliferation and differentiation of
astroglial cells.
Most importantly, there was a restorative zone shown
in the IHC and immunofluorescence staining, where the
cells had grown into the infarct core region from the
boundary of the lesion after aLA treatment. aLA significantly increased the proliferating astrocytes (BrdU/
GFAP-positive) in the boundary zone at 7 days after ischemia in line with IHC. In 18F-FDG microPET imaging,
the brain metabolism in the BrdU/GFAP-positive

Page 14 of 16

boundary zone at 7 days recovered in the aLA group. In
the previous studies, the majority of 18F-FDG hyperuptake regions were not recruited in the final infarction,
suggesting that the 18F-FDG uptake may be associated
with neuronal survival and activity [49-51]. The increased 18F-FDG uptake might be through facilitative expressing of GFAP-positive cells [52,53]. These results
suggest that BrdU/GFAP positive cells might promote
neuronal survival and neurorestoration.
Moreover, aLA treatment increased BrdU/DCX colabeled cells, a marker for early neurogenesis, in the
boundary zone at 2 weeks after stroke. By 4 weeks after
stroke, BrdU positive cells developed into newborn neurons (BrdU/NeuN-positive), suggesting that these cells
had survived, and the early proliferative effects of aLA
on post-stroke neurogenesis seen at 2 weeks were
sustained.
The mechanism by which aLA promotes neuroproliferation could be related to the anti-inflammatory and
anti-oxidant properties of aLA. It has been suggested
that reactive oxygen species inhibit the actions of stem
cells and that suppressing oxidative stress promotes a restorative effect of stem cells against ischemic injury
[54-56]. Antioxidants also promote growth of progenitor
cells and have been shown to play a role in the growth,
development, protection of stem cells [54,57]. In our
study, aLA treatment significantly decreased the expression of major inflammatory cytokines that play an important role during the acute phase of stroke such as
TNF-α, MIP1, Iba-1, and IL-1β in RT-PCR. In addition,
aLA significantly increased the mRNA expression of
SOX2, a transcription factor that is essential for maintaining the self-renewal properties, or pluripotency, of
undifferentiated embryonic stem cells. These mechanisms may play a pivotal role in neurorestoration following cerebral ischemia, further supporting the utility of
this antioxidant as a neurorestorative agent.
IR inhibitor HNMPA(AM)3 has been evaluated in recent studies to demonstrate IR dependent effects
[17,18]. The previous study demonstrated a direct binding site for aLA to the tyrosine kinase domain of the IR,
and HNMPA(AM)3 blocked the protective effects of
aLA for apoptosis [17]. aLA also has been reported to
directly activate dopamine receptor and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PRAR-γ) [58,59]. To
verify the effect of aLA on cerebral ischemia, we tested
the effects of aLA via IR could be blocked by HNMPA
(AM)3 or not. Consequently, pretreatment of IR inhibitor blocked aLA-induced neuroprotection and functional
recovery. Inflammatory cytokine levels were markedly
increased in the HNMPA group compared to aLA
group. These results suggest that the effects of aLA are
mediated at least partially via IR activation, a welldocumented neuroprotective pathway in ischemic

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

models [60-62]. However, more research is needed to
determine the underlying mechanisms and/or link between neuroproliferation and aLA in cerebral ischemia.
There were some important limitations to this study.
We used young rats rather than older animals. Young
animals may easily enhance neurogenesis after stroke
compared to aging animals. Moreover, markers for
neurogenesis and inflammatory cytokines are known to
change with age. Therefore, this could be the major limitation of our work for translation into the clinic. Another limitation of our study is that we did not
investigate the effects of different (i.e., increased) doses
or repeated infusions of aLA. Instead, we selected the
most suitable dose of aLA based on currently available
literature.
In conclusion, aLA acts as a potent neuroprotectant
by promoting neuroproliferation following ischemic
brain damage. Despite sophisticated medical management and the availability of neurosurgical techniques,
MCA territory infarction still results in a high mortality
rate. Therefore, neurorestorative and survival pathways
represent potential therapeutic targets for acute ischemic
injury in clinical settings. The current study is the first
to demonstrate that urgent aLA treatment given poststroke within a short treatment window has a significant
neurorestorative effect and promotes long-term functional recovery through enhanced anti-inflammatory and
anti-oxidant actions mediated at least partially via IR activation. These results provide further evidence of the
positive therapeutic effects of aLA in the treatment of ischemic stroke and allow developing novel clinical approaches to minimize ischemia/reperfusion damage.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
KHC designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. MSP and HSK
contributed to experimental design and reviewed the manuscript. KHC and
HSK performed the experiments. KHC, MSP and HSK analyzed the data. JTK
and JTP contributed to experimental design and discussed the results. KTK,
BCK, MKK and KHC revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual
content and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
This work was carried out with the support of “Cooperative Research
Program for Agriculture Science & Technology Development (Project title:
Diversification of food materials for new demands in domestic Oat, Project
No. PJ010508042014, Kim HS)” Rural Development Administration, Republic
of Korea, and a grant from the Korean Health Technology R&D Project,
Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (A121751, Choi KH).
Author details
1
Department of Neurology, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital,
Hwasun, Korea. 2Department of Neurology, Chonnam National University
Medical School, 8 Hak-dongDong-gu, Gwangju 501-757, Korea. 3Department
of Forensic medicine, Chonnam National University Medical School, 8
Hak-dongDong-gu, Gwangju 501-757, Korea. 4Department of Anesthesiology
and Pain Medicine, Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital, Goyang, Korea.

Page 15 of 16

5
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Chonnam National University Hwasun
Hospital, Hwasun, Korea.

Received: 3 September 2014 Accepted: 3 February 2015

References
1. Hicks A, Jolkkonen J. Challenges and possibilities of intravascular cell
therapy in stroke. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2009;69(1):1–11.
2. Rahme R, Rahme R, Curry R, Kleindorfer D, Khoury JC, Ringer AJ, et al. How
often are patients with ischemic stroke eligible for decompressive
hemicraniectomy? Stroke. 2012;43(2):550–2.
3. Chan PH. Role of oxidants in ischemic brain damage. Stroke. 1996;27
(6):1124–9.
4. Saeed SA, Shad KF, Saleem T, Javed F, Khan MU. Some new prospects in
the understanding of the molecular basis of the pathogenesis of stroke. Exp
Brain Res. 2007;182(1):1–10.
5. Lutskii MA, Esaulenko IE, Tonkikh RV, Anibal AP. [Oxidative stress in the
pathogenesis of stroke]. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2007;Suppl
21:37–42.
6. Biewenga GP, Haenen GR, Bast A. The pharmacology of the antioxidant
lipoic acid. Gen Pharmacol. 1997;29(3):315–31.
7. Shay KP, Moreau RF, Smith EJ, Smith AR, Hagen TM. Alpha-lipoic acid as a
dietary supplement: molecular mechanisms and therapeutic potential. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009;1790(10):1149–60.
8. Moini H, Packer L, Saris NE. Antioxidant and prooxidant activities of alphalipoic acid and dihydrolipoic acid. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002;182(1):84–
90.
9. Heitzer T, Finckh B, Albers S, Krohn K, Kohlschutter A, Meinertz T. Beneficial
effects of alpha-lipoic acid and ascorbic acid on endothelium-dependent,
nitric oxide-mediated vasodilation in diabetic patients: relation to parameters of oxidative stress. Free Radic Biol Med. 2001;31(1):53–61.
10. Guo S, Bragina O, Xu Y, Cao Z, Chen H, Zhou B, et al. Glucose up-regulates
HIF-1 alpha expression in primary cortical neurons in response to hypoxia
through maintaining cellular redox status. J Neurochem. 2008;105(5):1849–
60.
11. Panigrahi M, Sadguna Y, Shivakumar BR, Kolluri SV, Roy S, Packer L. alphaLipoic acid protects against reperfusion injury following cerebral ischemia in
rats. Brain Res. 1996;717(1–2):184–8.
12. Wolz P, Krieglstein J. Neuroprotective effects of alpha-lipoic acid and its enantiomers demonstrated in rodent models of focal cerebral ischemia.
Neuropharmacology. 1996;35(3):369–75.
13. Clark WM, Rinker LG, Lessov NS, Lowery SL, Cipolla MJ. Efficacy of
antioxidant therapies in transient focal ischemia in mice. Stroke. 2001;32
(4):1000–4.
14. Cao X, Phillis JW. The free radical scavenger, alpha-lipoic acid, protects
against cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in gerbils. Free Radic Res.
1995;23(4):365–70.
15. Connell BJ, Saleh M, Khan BV, Saleh TM. Lipoic acid protects against
reperfusion injury in the early stages of cerebral ischemia. Brain Res.
2011;1375:128–36.
16. Bramanti V, Tomassoni D, Bronzi D, Grasso S, Curro M, Avitabile M, et al.
Alpha-lipoic acid modulates GFAP, vimentin, nestin, cyclin D1 and MAPkinase expression in astroglial cell cultures. Neurochem Res. 2010;35
(12):2070–7.
17. Diesel B, Kulhanek-Heinze S, Holtje M, Brandt B, Holtje HD, Vollmar AM, et al.
Alpha-lipoic acid as a directly binding activator of the insulin receptor: protection from hepatocyte apoptosis. Biochemistry. 2007;46(8):2146–55.
18. Saperstein R, Vicario PP, Strout HV, Brady E, Slater EE, Greenlee WJ, et al.
Design of a selective insulin receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor and its effect
on glucose uptake and metabolism in intact cells. Biochemistry. 1989;28
(13):5694–701.
19. Koh SH, Park Y, Song CW, Kim JG, Kim K, Kim J, et al. The effect of PARP
inhibitor on ischaemic cell death, its related inflammation and survival
signals. Eur J Neurosci. 2004;20(6):1461–72.
20. Liu J, Solway K, Messing RO, Sharp FR. Increased neurogenesis in the
dentate gyrus after transient global ischemia in gerbils. J Neurosci. 1998;18
(19):7768–78.
21. Zhang Z, Chen TY, Kirsch JR, Toung TJ, Traystman RJ, Koehler RC, et al.
Kappa-opioid receptor selectivity for ischemic neuroprotection with BRL
52537 in rats. Anesth Analg. 2003;97(6):1776–83.

Choi et al. Molecular Brain (2015) 8:9

22. Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski H. Rat
middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model and development
of a neurologic examination. Stroke. 1986;17(3):472–6.
23. Khan MM, Ahmad A, Ishrat T, Khuwaja G, Srivastawa P, Khan MB, et al. Rutin
protects the neural damage induced by transient focal ischemia in rats.
Brain Res. 2009;1292:123–35.
24. Leker RR, Soldner F, Velasco I, Gavin DK, Androutsellis-Theotokis A, McKay
RD. Long-lasting regeneration after ischemia in the cerebral cortex. Stroke.
2007;38(1):153–61.
25. Chopp M, Zhang RL, Chen H, Li Y, Jiang N, Rusche JR. Postischemic
administration of an anti-Mac-1 antibody reduces ischemic cell damage
after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats. Stroke. 1994;25
(4):869–75. discussion 875–6.
26. Clark WM, Lessov N, Lauten JD, Hazel K. Doxycycline treatment reduces
ischemic brain damage in transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in the
rat. J Mol Neurosci. 1997;9(2):103–8.
27. Zhang RL, Chopp M, Zhang RL, Bodzin G, Chen Q, Rusche JR, et al. Antiintercellular adhesion molecule-1 antibody reduces ischemic cell damage
after transient but not permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion in the
Wistar rat. Stroke. 1995;26(8):1438–42. discussion 1443.
28. Chen H, Chopp M, Zhang RL, Bodzin G, Chen Q, Rusche JR, et al. AntiCD11b monoclonal antibody reduces ischemic cell damage after transient
focal cerebral ischemia in rat. Ann Neurol. 1994;35(4):458–63.
29. Lendahl U, Zimmerman LB, McKay RD. CNS stem cells express a new class
of intermediate filament protein. Cell. 1990;60(4):585–95.
30. Michalczyk K, Ziman M. Nestin structure and predicted function in cellular
cytoskeletal organisation. Histol Histopathol. 2005;20(2):665–71.
31. Teranishi N, Naito Z, Ishiwata T, Tanaka N, Furukawa K, Seya T, et al.
Identification of neovasculature using nestin in colorectal cancer. Int J
Oncol. 2007;30(3):593–603.
32. Duggal N, Schmidt-Kastner R, Hakim AM. Nestin expression in reactive astrocytes following focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Brain Res. 1997;768(1–2):1–9.
33. Shen CC, Yang YC, Chiao MT, Cheng WY, Tsuei YS, Ko JL. Characterization of
endogenous neural progenitor cells after experimental ischemic stroke. Curr
Neurovasc Res. 2010;7(1):6–14.
34. Anderson MF, Blomstrand F, Blomstrand C, Eriksson PS, Nilsson M.
Astrocytes and stroke: networking for survival? Neurochem Res. 2003;28
(2):293–305.
35. Li L, Lundkvist A, Andersson D, Wilhelmsson U, Nagai N, Pardo AC, et al.
Protective role of reactive astrocytes in brain ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 2008;28(3):468–81.
36. Rizzu P, Hinkle DA, Zhukareva V, Bonifati V, Severijnen LA, Martinez D, et al.
DJ-1 colocalizes with tau inclusions: a link between parkinsonism and dementia. Ann Neurol. 2004;55(1):113–8.
37. Yanagida T, Tsushima J, Kitamura Y, Yanagisawa D, Takata K, Shibaike T,
et al. Oxidative stress induction of DJ-1 protein in reactive astrocytes scavenges free radicals and reduces cell injury. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2009;2
(1):36–42.
38. Zhao Y, Rempe DA. Targeting astrocytes for stroke therapy.
Neurotherapeutics. 2010;7(4):439–51.
39. Larsson A, Wilhelmsson U, Pekna M, Pekny M. Increased cell proliferation
and neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of old GFAP(−/−)Vim
(−/−) mice. Neurochem Res. 2004;29(11):2069–73.
40. Privat A. Astrocytes as support for axonal regeneration in the central
nervous system of mammals. Glia. 2003;43(1):91–3.
41. Chen Y, Swanson RA. Astrocytes and brain injury. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 2003;23(2):137–49.
42. Song H, Stevens CF, Gage FH. Astroglia induce neurogenesis from adult
neural stem cells. Nature. 2002;417(6884):39–44.
43. Middeldorp J, Hol EM. GFAP in health and disease. Prog Neurobiol. 2011;93
(3):421–43.
44. Gao Q, Katakowski M, Chen X, Li Y, Chopp M. Human marrow stromal cells
enhance connexin43 gap junction intercellular communication in cultured
astrocytes. Cell Transplant. 2005;14(2–3):109–17.
45. Trendelenburg G, Dirnagl U. Neuroprotective role of astrocytes in cerebral
ischemia: focus on ischemic preconditioning. Glia. 2005;50(4):307–20.
46. Xin H, Li Y, Chen X, Chopp M. Bone marrow stromal cells induce BMP2/4
production in oxygen-glucose-deprived astrocytes, which promotes an
astrocytic phenotype in adult subventricular progenitor cells. J Neurosci Res.
2006;83(8):1485–93.

Page 16 of 16

47. Eng LF, Ghirnikar RS, Lee YL. Glial fibrillary acidic protein: GFAP-thirty-one
years (1969–2000). Neurochem Res. 2000;25(9–10):1439–51.
48. Chen H, Chopp M, Schultz L, Bodzin G, Garcia JH. Sequential neuronal and
astrocytic changes after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat.
J Neurol Sci. 1993;118(2):109–6.
49. Bunevicius A, Yuan H, Lin W. The potential roles of 18F-FDG-PET in management of acute stroke patients. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:634598.
50. Paschen W, Mies G, Hossmann KA. Threshold relationship between cerebral
blood flow, glucose utilization, and energy metabolites during development
of stroke in gerbils. Exp Neurol. 1992;117(3):325–33.
51. Rex S, Meyer PT, Baumert JH, Rossaint R, Fries M, Bull U, et al. Positron
emission tomography study of regional cerebral blood flow and flowmetabolism coupling during general anaesthesia with xenon in humans. Br
J Anaesth. 2008;100(5):667–75.
52. Pekny M, Eliasson C, Siushansian R, Ding M, Dixon SJ, Pekna M, et al. The
impact of genetic removal of GFAP and/or vimentin on glutamine levels
and transport of glucose and ascorbate in astrocytes. Neurochem Res.
1999;24(11):1357–62.
53. Li JH, Lu J, Zhang H. Functional recovery after scutellarin treatment in
transient cerebral ischemic rats: a pilot study with (18) F-fluorodeoxyglucose
MicroPET. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013;2013:507091.
54. Helgestad J, Storm-Mathisen I, Lie SO. Vitamin C and thiol reagents promote
the in vitro growth of murine granulocyte/macrophage progenitor cells by
neutralizing endogenous inhibitor(s). Blut. 1986;52(1):1–8.
55. Henkin RI, Hoetker JD. Deficient dietary intake of vitamin E in patients with
taste and smell dysfunctions: is vitamin E a cofactor in taste bud and
olfactory epithelium apoptosis and in stem cell maturation and
development? Nutrition. 2003;19(11–12):1013–21.
56. Yahata T, Takanashi T, Muguruma Y, Ibrahim AA, Matsuzawa H, Uno T, et al.
Accumulation of oxidative DNA damage restricts the self-renewal capacity
of human hematopoietic stem cells. Blood. 2011;118(11):2941–50.
57. Hao Y, Cheng D, Ma Y, Zhou W, Wang Y. Antioxidant intervention: a new
method for improving hematopoietic reconstitution capacity of peripheral
blood stem cells. Med Hypotheses. 2011;76(3):421–3.
58. Deslauriers J, Desmarais C, Sarret P, Grignon S. alpha-Lipoic acid interaction
with dopamine D2 receptor-dependent activation of the Akt/GSK-3beta signaling pathway induced by antipsychotics: potential relevance for the treatment of schizophrenia. J Mol Neurosci. 2013;50(1):134–45.
59. Wang KC, Tsai CP, Lee CL, Chen SY, Lin GJ, Yen MH, et al. alpha-Lipoic acid
enhances endogenous peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
to ameliorate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice. Clin Sci
(Lond). 2013;125(7):329–40.
60. Hung LM, Huang JP, Liao JM, Yang MH, Li DE, Day YJ, et al. Insulin renders
diabetic rats resistant to acute ischemic stroke by arresting nitric oxide
reaction with superoxide to form peroxynitrite. J Biomed Sci. 2014;21:92.
61. Yang D, Nakajo Y, Iihara K, Kataoka H, Yanamoto H. Alogliptin, a
dipeptidylpeptidase-4 inhibitor, for patients with diabetes mellitus type 2,
induces tolerance to focal cerebral ischemia in non-diabetic, normal mice.
Brain Res. 2013;1517:104–13.
62. Teramoto S, Miyamoto N, Yatomi K, Tanaka Y, Oishi H, Arai H, et al. Exendin4, a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist, provides neuroprotection in
mice transient focal cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011;31
(8):1696–705.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

