Evidence for Fibroblast Growth Factor-2 as a Mediator of
Amphetamine-Enhanced Motor Improvement following
Stroke
William A. Wolf1,5*, Jody L. Martin3, Gwendolyn L. Kartje1,2,4, Robert G. Farrer1,5
1 Research Service, Edward Hines, Jr. Veterans Administration Hospital, Hines, Illinois, United States of America, 2 Neurology Service, Edward Hines, Jr. Veterans
Administration Hospital, Hines, Illinois, United States of America, 3 Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Loyola University, Maywood, Illinois, United States of
America, 4 Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Loyola University, Maywood, Illinois, United States of America, 5 Department of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America

Abstract
Previously we have shown that addition of amphetamine to physical therapy results in enhanced motor improvement
following stroke in rats, which was associated with the formation of new motor pathways from cortical projection neurons
of the contralesional cortex. It is unclear what mechanisms are involved, but amphetamine is known to induce the neuronal
release of catecholamines as well as upregulate fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) expression in the brain. Since FGF-2 has
been widely documented to stimulate neurite outgrowth, the present studies were undertaken to provide evidence for
FGF-2 as a neurobiological mechanism underlying amphetamine-induced neuroplasticity. In the present study rats that
received amphetamine plus physical therapy following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion exhibited significantly
greater motor improvement over animals receiving physical therapy alone. Amphetamine plus physical therapy also
significantly increased the number of FGF-2 expressing pyramidal neurons of the contralesional cortex at 2 weeks poststroke and resulted in significant axonal outgrowth from these neurons at 8 weeks post-stroke. Since amphetamine is a
known releaser of norepinephrine, in vitro analyses focused on whether noradrenergic stimulation could lead to neurite
outgrowth in a manner requiring FGF-2 activity. Primary cortical neurons did not respond to direct stimulation by
norepinephrine or amphetamine with increased neurite outgrowth. However, conditioned media from astrocytes exposed
to norepinephrine or isoproterenol (a beta adrenergic agonist) significantly increased neurite outgrowth when applied to
neuronal cultures. Adrenergic agonists also upregulated FGF-2 expression in astrocytes. Pharmacological analysis indicated
that beta receptors and alpha1, but not alpha2, receptors were involved in both effects. Antibody neutralization studies
demonstrated that FGF-2 was a critical contributor to neurite outgrowth induced by astrocyte-conditioned media. Taken
together the present results suggest that noradrenergic activation, when combined with physical therapy, can improve
motor recovery following ischemic damage by stimulating the formation of new neural pathways in an FGF-2-dependent
manner.
Citation: Wolf WA, Martin JL, Kartje GL, Farrer RG (2014) Evidence for Fibroblast Growth Factor-2 as a Mediator of Amphetamine-Enhanced Motor Improvement
following Stroke. PLoS ONE 9(9): e108031. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031
Editor: Ken Arai, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical School, United States of America
Received June 26, 2014; Accepted August 25, 2014; Published September 17, 2014
This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for
any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
Data Availability: The authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. All relevant data are within the paper.
Funding: This work was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health Administration, Office of Research and Development, Biomedical
Laboratory Research and Development and Public Health Service Grant HD 44772 (WAW). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
* Email: william.wolf@va.gov

However, there is considerable interest in further improving
outcome through the use of adjunct medication.
In general, drugs that promote neural plasticity appear to
facilitate physical therapy-aided motor improvement although
there is great variability in outcomes depending on study design,
drugs and rehabilitation methods employed. Drugs that increase
the synaptic activity of the monoamines norepinephrine (NE),
dopamine (DA) and serotonin(5-HT), alter gene transcription,
protein synthesis and dendritic outgrowth in a manner similar to
what is seen in animals exposed to an enriched environment and/
or exercise and which appears to be associated with improved
functional outcome following brain injury [6–12]. In particular,
drugs that enhance central noradrenergic activity, such as
amphetamine (which induces the neuronal release of predomi-

Introduction
Stroke remains a leading cause of death and disability
worldwide [1]. In many cases some spontaneous functional
recovery occurs, but this is rarely complete and patients continue
to suffer from sensorimotor, cognitive or other neurologic
impairments. It is estimated that 50% of patients are left with
motor disability that predominantly occurs in the upper limbs
[2,3]. Neural plasticity, defined as the functional reorganization of
the brain, occurs following ischemic injury and can involve regions
quite distant from the lesion as well as peri-lesional areas [4,5].
Physical therapy has been the mainstay of rehabilitative strategies
for improved recovery of motor function following brain injury.

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

1

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

stroke surgery animals were trained to criterion on the skilled
forelimb reaching task and assessed for their baseline performance
on the ladder rung walk test. The pre-operative criterion for skilled
forelimb reaching was at least 16 successes in 20 attempts for 3
consecutive days. Animals then underwent middle cerebral artery
occlusion essentially as previously described [18]. Briefly, rats were
anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine (75 mg/kg ketamine plus
5 mg/kg xylazine, i.p.). Then a vertical 2 cm long incision was
made between the eye and ear, and the temporalis muscle was
retracted. A burr hole was made to expose the MCA and it was
permanently occluded with a 10-0 suture. The CCA ipsilateral to
the MCA was temporarily occluded for 45 min with a micro vessel
clamp. The wounds were then closed and animals were allowed to
recover. Experimental assignment of each cohort was done on a
random basis (i.e. not based on any post-stroke performance).

nantly NE and DA), have been the most widely studied drugs for
improving motor function following stroke [13–20]. Although
amphetamine has shown great promise in pre-clinical studies it has
produced mixed resulted in clinical trials [14,17,19,21,22]. The
variability in clinical efficacy combined with the tendency of
amphetamine to increase mortality due to cardiovascular side
effects have hindered its development as a rehabilitation adjunct in
stroke [17,22]. A greater understanding of the salient mechanisms
underlying amphetamine-enhanced motor improvement following
stroke would facilitate the development of safer, more effective
therapies. To this end, considerable evidence suggests a role for
fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) in mediating motor improvement following amphetamine or related drugs.
Preclinical studies indicate that fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF2; also known as basic fibroblast growth factor) FGF-2 is one of a
number of neurotrophic factors that are upregulated in response to
brain injury presumably to subserve protective/restorative roles
and to restore homeostasis [23–26]. The cellular actions of FGF-2
include the promotion of cellular proliferation, differentiation and
migration, as well as induction of neuronal fiber outgrowth.
Central administration of FGF-2 within 24 hr of experimental
stroke has been shown to improve motor recovery and upregulate
growth-associated protein 43, a marker of axonal growth [27,28].
Conversely, central application of neutralizing antibodies to FGF2 have been shown to impair motor recovery following cortical
damage [29]. The possibility that FGF-2 is involved in amphetamine-related neural plasticity is supported by several observations. First, short-term amphetamine (3 injections, once every
other day) induces a persistent increase in FGF-2 in the brain that
lasts for at least 1 month [30,31]. This short term regimen is
similar to the drug treatment used in our previous study in which
we demonstrated an amphetamine-mediated improvement in
motor function following stroke that was associated with new
neuronal projections originating from the contralesional cortex
[18]. Second, central administration of a neutralizing antibody to
FGF-2 blocks the persistent plasticity-related behavioral/motor
changes (referred to as ‘‘sensitization’’) caused by short, intermittent regimens of amphetamine [31]. Taken together the available
evidence led us to investigate whether FGF-2 is an important
contributor to the rehabilitative potential of amphetamine. The
present results support the hypothesis that enhanced noradrenergic activity induced by amphetamine upregulates FGF-2, which
leads to enhanced axonal outgrowth and improved motor function
following stroke.

Housing/Physical therapy
Immediately after surgery, groups of rats were randomly
allocated to different experimental conditions as follows:
1) vehicle administration/control housing (VEH+CON)
2) vehicle administration/rehabilitation (VEH+REHAB)
3) amphetamine administration/rehabilitation (AMPH+REHAB).

Materials and Methods

Amphetamine administration in the absence of physical therapy
was omitted as our previous study demonstrated that amphetamine alone does not improve motor performance or enhance
neurite outgrowth from contralesional cortex [18]. Control
housing conditions (CON) consisted of singly housed animals in
a standard Plexiglas cage (24 cm636 cm615 cm) with no
additions. Rehabilitation (REHAB) consisted of housing animals
in an enriched environment with supplementary sessions of
focused activity. The enriched environment consisted of grouphoused animals (5–6 per cohort) in multi-level ‘‘condos,’’ which
were 320 wide6320 deep6600 tall, constructed of Plexiglas on 3
sides with air holes throughout and fitted with hinged screen doors
of 1 cm square mesh and a mesh top. Each condo was furnished
with inclined ladders, hanging toys, climbing cylinders, chewable
material, and igloos. Once a week novel objects were introduced.
Focused activity sessions (20 min duration) were performed as
previously described and consisted of actively placing animals on
climbing apparatuses that relied heavily on the use of forelimbs,
but were distinct from the specific tasks being assessed (climbing
cylindrical grid, sisal covered vertical pole, inclined ladder and
ramps) [18,20].

Animals

Drug treatment

Adult male Long Evans, black-hooded rats (250–300 g) were
used. All experimental procedures were in accordance with the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved
by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Hines VA
and the Animal Care Committee at University of Illinois at
Chicago. Animals were maintained in a temperature and humidity
controlled room under a 12:12-h light/dark cycle. Food intake was
moderately restricted throughout the study to maintain body
weight at 95% of ad libitum weight. Water was available ad
libitum.

On days of drug administration (Post-op Days 2, 5 and 8)
activity sessions began after completion of daily behavioral testing
and fifteen minutes following drug or vehicle administration. Damphetamine sulfate (2 mg/kg based on salt wt; Sigma Chemical
Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) or vehicle (0.9% sterile saline) was
administered subcutaneously.

Behavioral tests
Skilled forelimb reaching was assessed by counting the number
of times an animal grasped a sucrose pellet on the first attempt and
placed it into the mouth (i.e. ‘‘first reach success’’). Each testing
session consisted of 20 reaching opportunities using the preferred
forelimb. Attempts using the non-preferred forelimb were not
included in analyses. Tests were performed daily. Ladder rung
walk utilized a horizontal ladder runway (1 m610 cm) with 2
Plexiglas walls on either side. Testing sessions consisted of 3

Initial training and stroke surgery
Upon arrival to the vivarium animals were randomly assigned
to groups that would ultimately comprise the experimental
cohorts. This was done in order to reduce aggression caused by
future shuffling of animals among established groups. Prior to
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

2

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

area (lateral extent of counting region). After outlining the region
of interest cell counting was performed following the optical
dissector protocol (Stereologer; Stereology Resource Center, St.
Petersberg, FL, USA). Section thickness following histological
processing averaged approximately 15 um. The guard zone and
optical dissector height were set at 2 um and 10 um, respectively.
Total cell population = total cells counted61/ssf61/asf61/hsf. A
Gunderson coefficient of error of estimation ,0.1 was obtained.

runway crossings and were performed weekly. Forelimb foot errors
were defined as either a complete miss or complete slip. Details of
behavioral testing can be found in our previous studies [18,20].
Investigators performing behavioral assessments were blind to the
treatment group.

Neuroanatomical tracing
After 8 weeks of behavioral testing, animals were anesthetized
with ketamine/xylazine (75 mg/kg ketamine plus 5 mg/kg
xylazine, i.p.). The sensorimotor cortex opposite to the stroke
lesion site was exposed, and 2 injections of 1 ml each of a 10%
biotinylated dextran amine (BDA) solution (10,000 MW, Molecular Probes/Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) were
placed stereotaxically into the forelimb sensorimotor cortex
(0.5 mm anterior, 2.5 mm lateral, 1.5 mm depth, relative to
bregma). Two weeks after BDA injection, animals were overdosed
with sodium pentobarbital (100 mg/kg; i.p.) and perfused
transcardially with 4% paraformaldehyde. Brains and spinal cords
were removed, placed in 30% sucrose for 1–2 days, embedded in
Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakura Finetek, USA, Torrance,
CA, USA), frozen, and stored at 280uC. Alternate coronal
cryosections (30 mm thick) were reacted for BDA positive fibers or
processed with Nissl stain and analyzed for lesion location and
extent as previously described [18].

Stroke size analysis and exclusion criteria
If the lesion did not impinge on the forelimb region of the
sensorimotor cortex, and/or if subcortical damage was observed,
then the animal was excluded from the study. Stroke volume was
quantitatively analyzed on Nissl stained sections using NIH image
as described previously by investigators blind to the treatment
group [18].

Primary cell culture
Cell culture media, serum, and antibiotics were obtained from
Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY, USA). Primary cultures of
rat cortical astrocytes were prepared from postnatal day 2 rat pups
essentially as described by McCarthy and de Vellis [32]. Cells were
grown and maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS
and 0.25% gentamicin until use. Cells were grown at 37uC in a
water-saturated environment in 5% CO2 and passaged twice
before use. Prior to use flasks were shaken on an orbital shaker
overnight to remove progenitor cells. Immunocytochemical
staining for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and S100 beta
indicated that cell populations were .95% astrocytes.
Primary cultures of rat cortical neurons were obtained from
embryonic day 18 cortices obtained from BrainBits (Springfield,
IL, USA) prepared per the supplier’s instructions. Cells were
seeded on 12 mm poly-lysine-coated coverslips (approximately
56103 neurons/cm2) initially in Neurobasal containing B27 and
0.5 mM glutamax supplemented with 10% FBS. The next day the
media was exchanged for fresh Neurobasal containing B27/
glutamax in which the FBS was omitted (hereafter referred to as
N/B27). After another 24 hr, neurons were placed in fresh N/B27
or astrocyte-conditioned media prepared as described below.
Following 24 hr incubation under experimental conditions coverslips were taken for immunocytochemical staining for microtubule
associated protein 2 (MAP-2) as described below. Cells were
maintained at all times at 37uC in a water-saturated environment
with 5% CO2

Neuroanatomical analysis of fiber crossing
Anatomical structures were identified with the atlas of Paxinos
and Watson. Quantification of sprouting corticorubral fibers from
the contralesional side to the deafferented (ipsilesional) red nucleus
was performed by counting all BDA-positive fibers crossing the
midline at the level of the red nucleus. The number of labeled
cortico-efferent fibers in the cerebral peduncle ipsilateral to the
BDA injection site was determined using NIH Image and used to
correct for inter-animal variances in BDA tracing as described
previously [18]. For all analyses the slides were coded and
investigators were blind to the treatment group.

Immunohistochemistry for FGF-2
Following pentobarbital overdose animals were perfused with
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M PBS. Animals were sacrificed at either 2 weeks postop or 8 weeks post-op. Brains were post-fixed for 1 hr,
cryoprotected then frozen. Free-floating cryostat sections (30 mm)
were incubated in PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBST)
containing 5% normal goat serum and primary antibody
(1:400 ms6FGF-2; clone 3; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA)
for 48 hr at 4uC. After PBST washes, sections were incubated in
goat anti-mouse (1:100; Covance Inc, Dedham, MA, USA) for
1 hr at room temperature, washed and then incubated with mouse
ClonoPAP (1:250; Covance Inc, Dedham, MA, USA) for 1 hr at
room temperature. Visualization was performed using diaminobenzidine (ImmPACT DAB, Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA,
USA). Serially adjacent sections were Nissl-stained using toluidine
blue for total cell counts and assessment of lesion size. For all
analyses the slides were coded and investigators were blind to the
treatment group.

Preparation of astrocyte-conditioned media (ACM)
Conditioned media was prepared by exchanging normal growth
media with N/B27 containing vehicle or the indicated drugs.
Routinely, 20 ml of N/B27 was used for T75 flasks of astrocytes
(approximately 106106 cells). After 6 hr of incubation the media
was collected and concentrated 10-fold using a 9000 MW cut-off
centrifugal concentrator. This concentrate was re-constituted by
10 fold dilution with fresh N/B27 immediately prior to application
to neurons.

Immunocytochemistry
Coverslips with neurons were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde/
4% sucrose on ice, washed, permeabilized with 0.1% triton X-100
for 5 min at room temperature, washed, blocked for 30 min at
room temperature with 5% BSA/5% normal donkey serum and
then incubated overnight at 4uC with primary antibody (rabbit
anti-MAP-2 at 1:500; EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).
Coverslips were then washed, incubated with secondary antibody

Stereologic analysis of FGF-2-labeled cells
A systematic random sampling procedure was followed using
every 10th section of the brain from approximately +2.0 mm to
21.0 mm from bregma. Counting was restricted to the region of
the motor cortex extending from the primary motor cortex (medial
extent of counting region) to the primary somatosensory forelimb
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

3

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Anterograde tracing of contralesional corticomotor pathways
revealed that amphetamine plus physical therapy also resulted in a
significant increase in the number of labeled axons originating
from the contralesional cortex and crossing the midline to
innervate the deafferentated red nucleus (Fig. 2A–E). Fig. 2-A
shows the typical pattern of contralesional corticorubral innervation (RN on left side) in an animal that received physical therapy
alone (VEH+REHAB) with few fibers crossing the midline to
innervate the deafferentated red nucleus (RN on right side). By
comparison Fig. 2-B shows that there is greater innervation of the
deafferentated red nucleus (RN on right side) in an animal
receiving amphetamine plus physical therapy (AMPH+REHAB).
A quantitative summary of these results is shown in Fig. 2-C, in
which significantly greater fiber crossing was observed in the group
of animals that received AMPH+REHAB as compared to all other
groups (p,0.05; ANOVA). Figs. 2-D and E show that the extent
of fiber crossing at the level of the red nucleus correlated
significantly with improved performance in forelimb reaching
(Pearson’s r = 0.6248; p,0.05) and ladder rung walking (Pearson’s
r = 20.7022; p,0.005) assessed at 8 weeks after stroke.

(Cy2-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit; Jackson ImmunoResearch,
West Grove, PA, USA) for 1 hr at room temperature, washed and
incubated with DAPI and mounted on slides with Fluoromount-G
(Southern Biotech, Birmingham, AL, USA).

Immunoblotting
Following the indicated treatments astrocyte whole cell lysates
were prepared in NuPage LDS sample buffer (Life Technologies)
supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail III (EMD Millipore/Calbiochem; final concentrations 1 mM AEBSF, 0.8 uM
aprotinin, 50 uM bestatin, 15 uM E-64, 20 uM leupeptin, 10 uM
pepstatin A), phosphatase inhibitor cocktails I and II (EMD
Millipore/Calbiochem; final concentrations 25 uM p-bromotetramisole, 5 uM cantharidin, 5 nM microcystin LR, 2 mM imidazole, 1 mM NaF, 1.15 mM sodium molybdate, 1 mM sodium
orthovanadate, 4 mM sodium tartrate) and 100 mM DTT with
heating at 70uC for 10 min. Samples were fractionated on 10%
Bis-Tris NuPage gels (Life Technologies) and proteins electrophoretically transferred to PVDF membrane. Following blocking for
90 min at room temperature with 5% BSA in TTBS (25 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.5 containing 0.1% Tween-20) membranes were
incubated in primary antibody (1:2000; ms6bFGF; clone 3; BD
Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) overnight at 4uC. Following
washes and secondary antibody (1:6000; goat anti-mouse APconjugate; Life Technologies) incubation for 60 min at room
temperature the immunoreactive bands were detected by chemiluminescence with ImmunStar AP substrate (BioRad, Hercules,
CA, USA) and quantified on a Fluorchem SP imager (Alpha
Innotech). Equal loading and uniformity of protein transfer were
verified by stripping and reprobing for actin and GAPDH.

Amphetamine-enhanced motor performance following
stroke is associated with a short-term increase in FGF-2expressing pyramidal cells in the contralesional cortex
Since amphetamine has been reported to upregulate growth
factors in the brain, such as FGF-2, that could lead to axonal
growth we assessed the effects of amphetamine on cellular FGF-2
expression [30,33–35]. Subsets of animals were sacrificed at 2
weeks post-stroke and 8 weeks post-stroke (end-point) for
stereological assessment of FGF-2 expressing cells in the contralesional cortex, which represents the origin of new corticomotor
pathways (Fig. 3). At 2 weeks post-stroke, animals that received
amphetamine plus physical therapy (AMPH+REHAB) exhibited a
significant increase of approximately 40% in FGF-2-expressing
Layer V cortical projection neurons in the unlesioned sensorimotor cortex over animals receiving physical therapy alone (VEH+
REHAB; Fig. 3, p,0.05). This effect was not apparent at 8 weeks
post-stroke. Total cell number in Layer V, as indicated by Nisslstained cells, was not different between groups at either time point.

Neurite analysis
Assessment of neurite formation was carried out using NIH
Image for PC (ImageJ) on fluorescence photomicrographs. For
each experimental condition (i.e. coverslip) micrographs of 4 fields
under a 206 objective (approximately 0.3 mm2 each) were taken.
After counting MAP-2 immunoreactive cells, the total neurite
length was obtained by first occluding cell bodies and tracing over
neuritic processes in Adobe Photoshop. The image was then
inverted and converted to grayscale for quantification using
ImageJ. For all analyses investigators were blind to the treatment
group. Data are expressed and analyzed as percent of corresponding vehicle control.

Neither amphetamine nor norepinephrine directly
stimulate neurite outgrowth in cultured primary neurons
Although upregulation of FGF-2 by amphetamine has previously been characterized as being localized to astrocytes the data
from Fig. 3 suggested a potential upregulation in neurons [33].
Since the primary pharmacological action of amphetamine is to
induce the neuronal release of norepinephrine we initially tested
whether these agents could directly stimulate neurite outgrowth
using primary neurons in culture [13,36–38]. Fig. 4 shows that
incubation of rat primary cortical neurons with either amphetamine (AMPH 10 uM) or norepinephrine (NE 10 uM) for 24 hr
had no effect on neurite growth.

Results
Amphetamine-enhanced motor performance following
stroke is associated with an increase in axonal sprouting
from corticomotor projection neurons of the
contralesional cortex
Table 1 describes the experimental groups under study and
shows that there was no significant difference in infarct volume
among these treatment groups. Fig. 1 shows that the addition of
amphetamine treatment to physical therapy (i.e. daily sessions of
focused activity) significantly enhanced long-term motor improvement following stroke in rats over physical therapy alone. At study
end point (8 weeks post-stroke) performance in the skilled forelimb
reaching task (Fig. 1-A) and ladder rung walk (Fig. 1-B) were
significantly better in animals that received amphetamine plus
physical therapy (AMPH+REHAB) than animals that received
physical therapy alone (VEH+REHAB). In fact, two-way analysis
of variance indicated that only AMPH+REHAB animals recovered to levels of performance that were similar to pre-stroke values.
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

Neurite outgrowth in primary cultured neurons is
stimulated by factors secreted from astrocytes exposed
to adrenergic agonists
Noradrenergic stimulation has been shown to upregulate FGF-2
expression in astrocytes [39]. To ascertain if this represented a
mechanism underlying stimulated neurite outgrowth we carried
out further investigations in vitro. Primary astrocytes from
postnatal day 2 rat cortex were incubated for 6 hr in N/B27 with
or without the addition of adrenergic agents. The conditioned
media obtained was then incubated for 24 hr with primary cortical
4

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Figure 1. Short term AMPH plus physical rehabilitation improves long term motor performance following stroke. (A) End point
analysis of skilled forelimb reaching – All animals enrolled in the study achieved the preoperative criteria of an average of at least 16 successes in 20
attempts for 3 days prior to surgery. At Day 2 Post-op, prior to any treatment, the mean deficit in reaching was not significantly different among
treatment groups. Treatment consisted of single housing in standard caging with vehicle (0.9% saline) administered on Days 2, 5 and 8 post-MCAO
(VEH+CON), enriched environment with daily sessions of focused activity and vehicle administered on Days 2, 5 and 8 post-MCAO (VEH+REHAB) or
enriched environment with daily sessions of focused activity and D-amphetamine sulfate (2 mg/kg based on salt weight) administered on Days 2, 5
and 8 post-MCAO (AMPH+REHAB). A two-way repeated measures ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak comparisons indicated that reaching performance
in AMPH+REHAB was significantly better than VEH+REHAB at eight weeks following MCAO (*, p,0.05). Comparisons also indicated that all groups
except AMPH+REHAB still displayed significant deficits in reaching when compared to pre-operative performance (+, p,0.001), which indicates that
only AMPH+REHAB induced a recovery to baseline performance in the forelimb reaching task. Behavioral data represent the mean 6 SEM for 12
animals/group. (B) End point analysis of ladder rung walking – At Day 2 Post-op, prior to any treatment, the mean deficit in skilled forelimb placement
was not significantly different among groups. A two-way repeated measures ANOVA followed by Holm-Sidak comparisons indicated that forelimb
placement performance in the ladder rung walk was significantly different among all three groups at eight weeks following MCAO indicating that
AMPH+REHAB was significantly better than VEH+REHAB (*, p,0.05). Comparisons also indicated that all groups except AMPH+REHAB still displayed
significant deficits in forelimb placement performance at 8 weeks when compared to pre-operative performance (+, p,0.001), which indicates that
only AMPH+REHAB induced a recovery to baseline performance in the ladder rung walk. Behavioral data represent the mean 6 SEM for 12 animals/
group.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g001

neurons from embryonic day 18 rat cortex and neurite growth was
assessed. Fig. 5-A demonstrates that neurons incubated in
conditioned media from astrocytes exposed to norepinephrine
(10 uM) or isoproterenol (beta adrenergic agonist; 1 uM) for 6 hr
exhibited a significant increase (approximately 70%) in neurite
outgrowth as compared to neurons incubated in unconditioned
N/B27 or conditioned media from astrocytes exposed to vehicle.
Fig. 5-B demonstrates that co-incubation of neurons with condi-

tioned media from unstimulated astrocytes (i.e. not exposed to
adrenergic agents) along with direct addition of either norepinephrine (10 uM), isoproterenol (1 uM) or amphetamine (10 uM)
led to no stimulatory effect on neurite outgrowth. Taken together
these data indicate that noradrenergic stimulation of astrocytes,
and not just coincident stimulation of astrocytic factors and
noradrenergic agents, is a prerequisite to the neurite-promoting
properties of astrocyte conditioned media.

Table 1. Lesion Analysis among Treatment Groups.

Group (n)

Drug/Housing+Activity conditions

Stroke Volume (% of contralesional hemisphere volume)

VEH+CON

Vehicle-treated animals singly

10.160.8

(12)

housed under control conditions no activity sessions

VEH+REHAB

Vehicle-treated animals group-

(12)

housed in enriched environment

AMPH+REHAB

AMPH-treated animals group-

(12)

housed in enriched environment

11.261.8

plus focused activity sessions
10.061.1

plus focused activity sessions
Following training animals were subjected to MCAO and distributed among the different treatment groups depicted above. Details of drug treatment, housing and
activity conditions are described in more detail in Methods. After 8 weeks of behavioral testing 5 animals were sacrificed for FGF-2 and histological analysis and 7
animals were microinjected with biotinylated dextran amine and sacrificed two weeks later for fiber staining and histological analysis. No significant difference in lesion
size among groups was observed (one-way ANOVA). Data represent the mean 6 SEM of the indicated number of animals per group.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.t001

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

5

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Figure 2. Short term AMPH plus physical rehabilitation enhances axonal outgrowth following stroke. (A) Representative
photomicrograph of BDA-positive fiber staining at the level of the red nucleus (RN) in an animal receiving vehicle plus enriched environment
with daily sessions of focused activity (VEH+REHAB). Few BDA-positive fibers can be seen crossing the midline (dotted line) from the non-denervated
RN (left side) to the denervated side (right). Aq = aqueduct; scale bar represents 100 um. (B) Representative BDA-positive fiber staining at the same
level of RN as in (A), but in an animal that received D-amphetamine sulfate (2 mg/kg based on salt weight) plus enriched environment with daily
sessions of focused activity (AMPH+REHAB). Note an increase in the number of BDA-positive fibers crossing the midline to the denervated side.
Aq = aqueduct; scale bar represents 100 um. (C) Quantification of midline crossing fibers in the area of the red nucleus normalized to the total labeled
cerebral peduncle fibers (to correct for differences in the tracing). A one-way ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls post hoc comparison
indicated that midline fiber crossing at the level of the red nucleus was significantly greater following AMPH+REHAB than all other groups (*, p,0.05).
Midline fiber crossing data represent the mean 6 SEM of a subset of 5 animals/group. Panels (D) and (E) depict linear regression and correlation
analyses between midline fiber crossing and performance in skilled forelimb reaching (Panel D) and ladder rung walk (Panel E). A significant positive
correlation was found between midline fiber crossing and skilled forelimb reaching (r2 = 0.3904, Pearson’s r = 0.6248; p,0.05). A significant negative
correlation was found between midline fiber crossing and footslips (error frequency) in the ladder rung walk (r2 = 0.4931, Pearson’s r = 20.7022;
p,0.005).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g002

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

6

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Figure 3. Short term AMPH plus physical rehabilitation increases FGF-2 expression in Layer V pyramidal cells of unlesioned motor
cortex. Top panel consists of representative photomicrographs of FGF-2 immunoreactivity in the unlesioned motor cortex. Layer V pyramidal cells
are clearly evident and appear more intensely stained in animals receiving AMPH+REHAB as compared to other groups. Left side- Stereological
assessment of FGF-2-like immunoreactive layer V pyramidal cells and total Nissl-stained cells in unlesioned motor cortex at 2 weeks after MCAO.
Animals underwent behavioral procedures and MCAO as described in Methods and Fig. 1, but were sacrificed 2 weeks post-MCAO for histological
procedures. One way ANOVA followed by Student-Newman-Keuls comparisons indicated a significant increase in the number of FGF-2-like
immunoreactive pyramidal cells in Layer V as compared to all other groups (p,0.05). Total number of Nissl stained cells did not differ among groups.
Data represent the mean 6 SEM of 6 animals/group. Right side- Stereological assessment of FGF-2-like immunoreactive layer V pyramidal cells and
total Nissl-stained cells in unlesioned motor cortex at 8 weeks after MCAO. A subset of animals that contributed to the behavioral data in Fig. 1 were
used for assessment of FGF-2 expression. Data represent the mean 6 SEM of 7 animals/group.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g003

Pharmacology of adrenergic receptor subtypes
mediating secretion of neuritogenesis-promoting factors
suggest beta adrenergic and alpha1 adrenergic receptors
are involved
Inclusion of the beta adrenergic antagonist propranolol (PROP)
during the 6 hr incubation of isoproterenol with astrocytes
completely blocked the neurite-promoting effects of isoproterenol-conditioned medium when subsequently applied to cortical
neurons (Fig. 6-A). Interestingly, the neurite-promoting effects of
norepinephrine-conditioned medium were attenuated when either
propranolol alone or phentolamine alone (PHEN; an alpha
adrenergic antagonist) were included with norepinephrine during
incubation with astrocytes (Fig. 6-B). By contrast, the alpha2
antagonist atipamezole (ATI) had no effect when co-incubated
with norepinephrine during exposure to astrocytes. These data
indicate that beta adrenergic and alpha1-, but not alpha2-,
adrenergic stimulation of astrocytes can lead to the production of
secreted astrocytic factors that promote neurite growth in neurons.
Figure 4. Direct treatment of primary cortical neurons with
amphetamine or norepinephrine for 24 hr has no effect on
neurite outgrowth. Cortices from E18 rats were dissociated and
plated on 12 mm poly-lysine-coated coverslips and allowed to
equilibrate as described in Methods. Amphetamine (10 uM), norepinephrine (10 uM) or vehicle was added and incubated with neurons for
24 hr. Neurons on coverslips were fixed and stained for MAP2 and
analyzed for neurite outgrowth as described in Methods. Data represent
the mean 6 SEM of 5 independent observations.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g004

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

Identification of FGF-2 as an essential component of
neurite-promoting astrocyte conditioned media
To establish that FGF-2 contributes to the neuritogenesis caused
by conditioned media from adrenergically-stimulated astrocytes
we first demonstrated that NE or isoproterenol upregulated FGF-2
expression in astrocytes. Fig. 7 demonstrates that 6-hr exposure of
astrocytes to drugs increased the expression of FGF-2. This figure
depicts an increase of close to 2-fold in expression of both high and
7

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Discussion
The present work extends our previous observations on
pharmacological adjuncts in stroke rehabilitation. In this study
we provide evidence to support FGF-2 as a mechanism underlying
the neural plasticity and neurorestorative properties of amphetamine in stroke. We found that, following stroke in rats, short-term
amphetamine paired with physical therapy induced an increase in
the number of FGF-2 expressing pyramidal neurons in the
unlesioned motor cortex as compared to physical therapy alone
(Fig. 3). This effect was evident at two weeks post-stroke
(approximately one week after cessation of amphetamine), but
not at 8 weeks suggesting a relatively short-lived event. Nevertheless, at 8 weeks post-stroke animals given amphetamine paired
with physical therapy had significantly greater axonal outgrowth in
corticorubral pathways that originated from these layer V
pyramidal neurons in the unlesioned motor cortex (Fig. 2-C).
This neural plasticity was associated with significantly improved
skilled motor function over physical therapy alone (Fig. 1-A,B). In
fact, a significant correlation between midline fiber crossing in the
corticorubral pathway and motor performance was observed
(Fig. 2-D,E). In our mechanistic studies we found that noradrenergic stimulation of astrocytes can led to the secretion of FGF-2
which, in turn, could stimulate neurite outgrowth in primary
cortical neurons. Taken together these data suggest a scenario in
stroke rehabilitation in which amphetamine-induced norepinephrine release can trigger the upregulation of FGF-2 which could
contribute to the neural plasticity observed.
In the stereological analysis of FGF-2 expression pyramidal cells
in the unlesioned cortex were identified by their distinct
morphology and clear evidence of staining. Although no formal
attempt was made to assess the intensity of cellular staining it
appeared that FGF-2-like immunoreactivity in animals given
amphetamine was more intense than in animals that had received
vehicle. Previous studies have shown amphetamine to modulate
FGF-2 expression. In these studies short-term amphetamine (3
injections, once every other day) induced a persistent increase in
FGF-2 in the brain that lasted for at least 1 month [30,31]. In
addition central administration of a neutralizing antibody to FGF2 blocked the persistent plasticity-related behavioral/motor
changes (referred to as ‘‘sensitization’’) caused by amphetamine
[31]. Interestingly, these authors observed the increase in FGF-2 to
be attributed largely to astrocytes with effects being dependent on
dosing and duration of amphetamine treatment [33]. The fact that
we observed an increase in neuronal FGF-2-like immunoreactivity
may relate to differences in treatment paradigms (e.g. amphetamine dosing or time point of analysis), immunohistochemical
procedures and/or in the brain regions analyzed (cortex vs.
midbrain). It seems reasonable to suggest that the increase in
neuronal FGF-2-like immunoreactivity reflects either an upregulation in neuronal expression of FGF-2 or the sequestration of FGF2 that has been released from neighboring cells, such as astrocytes.
Another interesting point is that despite the observation that FGF2 expression was a relatively short-lasting phenomenon (i.e.
observable at week 2 but not week 8) axonal growth from the
unlesioned pyramidal corticorubral projection neurons at study
endpoint (week 8) was observed. This may reflect our inability to
detect subtle differences in FGF-2 expression by immunohistochemistry or the possibility that a transient elevation in FGF-2 can
act as a trigger to engage mechanisms of lasting neural plasticity
and that protracted elevation in FGF-2 is not required.
To directly study a potential role for FGF-2 and the
involvement of astrocytes in mediating neurite outgrowth we
turned to a cell culture model. Since a major pharmacological

Figure 5. Conditioned media from astrocytes stimulated by
norepinephrine or isoproterenol enhance neurite outgrowth in
primary cortical neurons. (A) Conditioned media was obtained by
incubating primary astrocytes, derived from cortices of postnatal day 2
rat pups as described in Methods, in N/B27 media containing vehicle,
norepinephrine (NE; 10 uM) or the beta adrenergic agonist isoproterenol (ISO; 1 uM) for 6 hr. The conditioned media was collected,
concentrated 10-fold by ultrafiltration through a 7000 MW cutoff
membrane and then was applied to primary cortical neurons seeded on
poly-lysine coverslips in N/B27. Following 24 hr incubation neurons on
coverslips were fixed and stained for MAP2 and analyzed for neurite
outgrowth as described in Methods. Data represent the mean 6 SEM of
5 independent observations. (B) Conditioned media was obtained by
incubating primary astrocytes, derived from cortices of postnatal day 2
rat pups as described in Methods, in N/B27 containing vehicle only for
6 hr. Following concentration by ultrafiltration the control conditioned
media along with an aliquot of freshly prepared amphetamine (10 uM
final concentration), NE (10 uM final concentration) or ISO (1 uM final
concentration) were applied to primary cortical neurons seeded on
poly-lysine coverslips in N/B27. Following 24 hr incubation neurons on
coverslips were fixed and stained for MAP2 and analyzed for neurite
outgrowth as described in Methods. Data represent the mean 6 SEM of
4 independent observations.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g005

low molecular weight forms of FGF-2 in astrocyte lysates. Next, we
took conditioned media from NE-stimulated astrocytes and preincubated with either a neutralizing FGF-2 antibody or control
IgG prior to applying the media to neuronal cultures. Fig. 8
demonstrates that the neutralizing antibody significantly attenuated neurite outgrowth induced by the NE-stimulated astrocyte
conditioned media. These data demonstrate that FGF-2 is an
essential component of the neurite-promoting effects of conditioned media from noradrenergically stimulated astrocytes.

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

8

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Figure 6. Both alpha- and beta-adrenergic antagonists prevent adrenergic agonists from stimulating astrocytes to produce neuritepromoting factors. (A) Astrocytes were incubated in N/B27 media to which vehicle (VEH), isoproterenol alone (ISO; 1 uM), the beta antagonist
propranolol alone (PROP; 1 uM), or isoproterenol plus propranolol (ISO+PROP) were added just prior to 6 hr incubation. Following concentration by
ultrafiltration the conditioned media were applied to primary cortical neurons seeded on poly-lysine coverslips in N/B27. Following 24 hr incubation
neurons on coverslips were fixed and stained for MAP2 and analyzed for neurite outgrowth as described in Methods. Data were analyzed by one-way
ANOVA followed by Bonferroni multiple comparisons of selected groups (i.e. VEH vs VEH+ISO, PROP vs PROP+ISO). Data represent the mean 6 SEM
of 5 independent observations. *, P,0.05 as compared to VEH. (B) Astrocytes were incubated in N/B27 media to which vehicle (VEH) or the indicated
drugs were added just prior to 6 hr incubation. VEH = vehicle, NE = norepinephrine (10 uM), PHEN = phentolamine (1 uM), PROP = propranolol (1 uM),
ATI = atipamezole (1 uM). Following concentration by ultrafiltration the conditioned media were applied to primary cortical neurons seeded on polylysine coverslips in N/B27. Following 24 hr incubation neurons on coverslips were fixed and stained for MAP2 and analyzed for neurite outgrowth as
described in Methods. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni multiple comparisons of selected groups (i.e. VEH vs VEH+NE,
PHEN vs PHEN+NE, PROP vs PROP+NE, ATI vs ATI+NE). Data represent the mean 6 SEM of 5 independent observations. *, P,0.05.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g006

that both alpha and beta subtypes were involved. Conditioned
media from astrocytes exposed to the non-selective beta agonist,
isoproterenol, induced an equivalent amount of neurite outgrowth
as conditioned media from norepinephrine-stimulated astrocyes
(Fig. 5-A). Conditioned media in which the beta adrenergic
antagonist propranolol was present during incubation with
isoproterenol had no neuritogenic effect on cortical neurons
indicating that isoproterenol was acting through beta receptor
stimulation (Fig. 6-A). Consistent with this finding are results from
a recent study that demonstrated the ability of beta2-selective
receptor agonists to stimulate astrocytes to produce neuritepromoting conditioned media [43]. By comparison, in the present
study we found that when norepinephrine was the agonist either
the alpha-adrenergic antagonist phentolamine or the betaadrenergic antagonist propranolol was able to attenuate the ability
of norepinephrine to induce astrocytes to secrete neurite-promoting factors (Fig. 6-B). These data suggest the involvement of alpha
receptor subtypes. However, when the alpha2-selective antagonist
atipamezole was tested it had no effect when co-incubated with
norepinephrine during exposure to astrocytes. Thus, it appears

action of amphetamine is to induce the release of norepinephrine
we tested the effects of amphetamine and adrenergic agents on
neurite outgrowth in rat cortical primary neurons in culture. Our
results demonstrated that there was no direct effect of drugs on
neurite outgrowth (Fig. 4), but clearly indicated that adrenergic
stimulation of astrocytes leads to the secretion of factors that, when
exposed to primary cortical neurons, promoted neurite outgrowth
(Fig. 5-A). Coincident stimulation of neurons with adrenergic
agents carried in from conditioned media was unlikely to be
responsible as co-incubation of neurons with astrocyte conditioned
medium from unstimulated astrocytes plus exogenously added
drugs had no effect on neurite outgrowth (Fig. 5-B). Identification
of FGF-2 as a critical neurite-promoting factor was obtained
through the use of an FGF-2 neutralizing antibody, which when
co-incubated with astrocyte-conditioned media prior to exposure
to neurons, prevented neurite outgrowth (Fig. 8). These data are
consistent with literature describing the neurite-promoting properties of FGF-2 [40–42].
A pharmacological analysis of the adrenergic receptors involved
in stimulating astrocyte production of neuritogenic factors revealed
PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

9

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

Figure 7. Norepinephrine and isoproterenol stimulate the production of high and low molecular weight forms of FGF-2 in
astrocytes. Astrocytes were incubated in N/B27 media to which vehicle (V), norepinephrine alone (NE; 10 uM) or isoproterenol alone (ISO; 1 uM)
were added just prior to 6 hr incubation. After 6 hr, astrocytes were harvested and cell lysates run on 10% reducing SDS-PAGE followed by
immunoblotting for FGF-2 as described in Methods. FGF-immunoreactive bands ran at an approximate molecular weight of 23 kDa and 18 kDa,
which are referred to as high molecular weight (HMW) and low molecular weight (LMW) isoforms, respectively. Data represent the mean 6 SEM of 6
independent observations.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g007

antagonists on motor recovery following stroke and other forms of
brain damage [47–49].
The potential clinical utility of FGF-2 has been recognized for
years. More recently, an analysis of gene expression associated
with the learning of skilled motor tasks shows the involvement of
FGF-2-related genes in this process [50]. Given this information, it
seems reasonable to suggest that FGF-2 plays a key role in the
development of neural plasticity related to motor rehabilitation
following brain damage, such as in stroke. In the past a great deal
of research investigating a therapeutic role for FGF-2 following
ischemic damage had focused on its ability to stimulate
neurogenesis or act as a neuroprotective agent in acute stroke.
Preclinical studies had demonstrated that application of FGF-2
before or within hours of stroke could reduce infarct size [51–55].
However, clinical trials to assess the therapeutic efficacy of FGF-2
in acute stroke patients were halted due to severe hypotension and
other negative consequences raising the question of whether
neuroprotection in acute stroke is the most appropriate clinical
application for FGF-2 [56–58]. The potential for FGF-2 as a
neurorestorative adjunct in stroke was first demonstrated in studies
in which central administration of FGF-2 within 24 hr of MCAO
induced improved motor recovery and the upregulation of growthassociated protein 43, a marker of axonal growth [27,28].
Conversely, central application of neutralizing antibodies to
FGF-2 impaired motor recovery following aspiration lesions of
the cortex [29]. Despite such intriguing results there has been little

that in addition to beta-adrenergic receptors, alpha1-, but not
alpha2-, receptors can lead to the production of secreted astrocytic
factors that promote neurite growth. This latter point is important
in a translational context as alpha2 receptors function as inhibitory
autoreceptors in the brain and alpha2 antagonists could be used to
enhance norepinephrine release that would stimulate astrocytes to
secrete FGF-2 [44]. In fact, our lab has shown that atipamezole
administration after stroke in rats leads to improved rehabilitationaided motor recovery [20].
Consistent with the involvement of alpha1 receptors and the
concept that FGF-2 may be a critical neuritogenic component of
astrocyte conditioned media is the observation that alpha1adrenergic stimulation of the FGF-2 promoter leads to an
upregulation in FGF-2 synthesis [45]. Our findings that noradrenergic agonists increase FGF-2 synthesis in astrocytes paralleled
our observations on the production of neurite-promoting conditioned media and complement a recent study reporting on the
effects of noradrenergic drugs on FGF-2 gene expression in
astrocytes [46]. Finally, our observation that FGF-2 neutralizing
antibodies abrogated the neuritogenic properties of conditioned
media from stimulated astrocytes lend further support for our
hypothesis that the noradrenergic stimulation of astrocytes
represents an important mechanism leading to neurite outgrowth
in vivo. Along these lines a number of preclinical and clinical
studies have demonstrated a hindering effect of alpha adrenergic

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

10

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

studies indicating that antidepressants that increase noradrenergic
activity in the brain upregulate FGF-2 [61,62]. Finally, norepinephrine-activating antidepressants have shown some promise to
enhance motor rehabilitation following stroke, although this may
be the result of a remission of depression leading to improved
efficacy of rehabilitation regimens rather than a direct consequence of noradrenergic activation [63–65].
Stroke remains a leading cause of disability worldwide for which
the development of more effective rehabilitative strategies is
needed. Amphetamine, which induces the neuronal release of
catecholamines (norepinephrine, dopamine), has been one of the
most widely studied drugs for improving motor function following
stroke [13–19]. Amphetamine has shown great promise in preclinical studies, but has produced mixed resulted in clinical trials
[14,17,19,21,22]. The variability in clinical efficacy combined with
the negative cardiovascular side effects have led to the conclusion
at this point that the benefits of amphetamine do not outweigh the
risks [17,22]. Nevertheless a greater understanding of the salient
mechanisms underlying amphetamine-enhanced motor improvement following stroke would facilitate the development of safer,
more effective therapies. To that end, our present studies suggest
that FGF-2 may represent such a mechanism. Studies are
currently underway to directly test the therapeutic potential of
FGF-2 upregulation in motor rehabilitation following stroke.

Figure 8. Neutralizing antibody to FGF-2 blocks neuritepromoting effects of astrocyte conditioned media from
noradrenergically stimulated astrocytes. Astrocytes were incubated in N/B27 media to which norepinephrine (NE; 10 uM) was added
just prior to 6 hr incubation. After 6 hr, conditioned media (NE-ACM)
was collected and concentrated 10-fold by ultrafiltration through a
7000 MW cutoff membrane. The conditioned media was incubated for
30 min at room temperature in the presence of anti-FGF-2 neutralizing
antibody (2.5 ug/ml goat polyclonal from R&D systems) or control IgG
(2.5 ug/ml goat IgG) prior to applying to neuronal cultures on
coverslips. Following 24 hr incubation neurons on coverslips were
fixed and stained for MAP2 and analyzed for neurite outgrowth as
described in Methods. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA followed
by Student-Newman-Keuls comparisons. Data represent the mean 6
SEM of 3 independent observations. *, P,0.05 as compared to
unconditioned N/B27 media; #, P,0.05 as compared to NE-ACM or
NE-ACM+con IgG.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0108031.g008

Acknowledgments
We thank Veronica Sanchez and members of the Wolf lab as well as
Christine Staunton and Dr. Shih-Yen Tsai for their excellent assistance
and discussions.

Author Contributions

follow-up investigation on a ‘‘neurorestorative’’ role for FGF-2 in
rehabilitative therapy following stroke.
In a larger context our findings are consistent with the wealth of
preclinical studies that show that noradrenergic activation
enhances
motor
rehabilitation
after
brain
damage
[21,48,49,59,60]. Additionally, there are a number of preclinical

Conceived and designed the experiments: WAW JLM GLK RGF.
Performed the experiments: WAW JLM RGF. Analyzed the data:
WAW. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: WAW JLM GLK
RGF. Contributed to the writing of the manuscript: WAW JLM GLK
RGF.

References
1. American Heart Association (2010) Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics - 2010
Update. American Heart Association, Dallas, TX.
2. Harvey RL (2003) Motor recovery after stroke: new directions in scientific
inquiry. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 14: S1–S5.
3. Calautti C, Baron JC (2003) Functional neuroimaging studies of motor recovery
after stroke in adults: a review. Stroke 34: 1553–1566.
4. Nudo RJ, Plautz EJ, Frost SB (2001) Role of adaptive plasticity in recovery of
function after damage to motor cortex. Muscle Nerve 24: 1000–1019.
5. Teasell R, Bayona N, Salter K, Hellings C, Bitensky J (2006) Progress in clinical
neurosciences: stroke recovery and rehabilitation. Can J Neurol Sci 33: 357–
364.
6. Robinson TE, Kolb B (2004) Structural plasticity associated with exposure to
drugs of abuse. Neuropharmacology 47 Suppl 1: 33–46.
7. Shaw-Lutchman TZ, Impey S, Storm D, Nestler EJ (2003) Regulation of CREmediated transcription in mouse brain by amphetamine. Synapse 48: 10–17.
8. Biernaskie J, Corbett D (2001) Enriched rehabilitative training promotes
improved forelimb motor function and enhanced dendritic growth after focal
ischemic injury. J Neurosci 21: 5272–5280.
9. Vaynman S, Gomez-Pinilla F (2005) License to run: exercise impacts functional
plasticity in the intact and injured central nervous system by using
neurotrophins. Neurorehabil Neural Repair 19: 283–295.
10. Ang ET, Gomez-Pinilla F (2007) Potential therapeutic effects of exercise to the
brain. Curr Med Chem 14: 2564–2571.
11. Chen MJ, Russo-Neustadt AA (2009) Running exercise-induced up-regulation of
hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor is CREB-dependent. Hippocampus.
12. Forrester LW, Wheaton LA, Luft AR (2008) Exercise-mediated locomotor
recovery and lower-limb neuroplasticity after stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev 45: 205–
220.
13. Kuczenski R, Segal DS, Cho AK, Melega W (1995) Hippocampus norepinephrine, caudate dopamine and serotonin, and behavioral responses to the

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

14.

15.
16.

17.
18.

19.
20.

21.
22.
23.

24.

11

stereoisomers of amphetamine and methamphetamine. J Neurosci 15: 1308–
1317.
Gilmour G, Iversen SD, O’Neill MF, O’Neill MJ, Ward MA, et al. (2005)
Amphetamine promotes task-dependent recovery following focal cortical
ischaemic lesions in the rat. Behav Brain Res 165: 98–109.
Goldstein LB (2003) Amphetamines and related drugs in motor recovery after
stroke. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 14: S125–34, x.
Goldstein LB, Davis JN (1990) Influence of lesion size and location on
amphetamine-facilitated recovery of beam-walking in rats. Behav Neurosci 104:
320–327.
Martinsson L, Hardemark H, Eksborg S (2007) Amphetamines for improving
recovery after stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev CD002090.
Papadopoulos CM, Tsai SY, Guillen V, Ortega J, Kartje GL, et al. (2009) Motor
recovery and axonal plasticity with short-term amphetamine after stroke. Stroke
40: 294–302.
Walker-Batson D (2013) Amphetamine and post-stroke rehabilitation: indications and controversies. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 49: 251–260.
Beltran EJ, Papadopoulos CM, Tsai SY, Kartje GL, Wolf WA (2010) Long-term
motor improvement after stroke is enhanced by short-term treatment with the
alpha-2 antagonist, atipamezole. Brain Res 1346: 174–182.
Rosser N, Floel A (2008) Pharmacological enhancement of motor recovery in
subacute and chronic stroke. NeuroRehabilitation 23: 95–103.
Goldstein LB (2009) Amphetamine trials and tribulations. Stroke 40: S133–
S135.
Takami K, Iwane M, Kiyota Y, Miyamoto M, Tsukuda R, et al. (1992) Increase
of basic fibroblast growth factor immunoreactivity and its mRNA level in rat
brain following transient forebrain ischemia. Exp Brain Res 90: 1–10.
Takami K, Kiyota Y, Iwane M, Miyamoto M, Tsukuda R, et al. (1993)
Upregulation of fibroblast growth factor-receptor messenger RNA expression in
rat brain following transient forebrain ischemia. Exp Brain Res 97: 185–194.

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

Amphetamine, FGF-2, and Stroke

44. Gobert A, Billiras R, Cistarelli L, Millan MJ (2004) Quantification and
pharmacological characterization of dialysate levels of noradrenaline in the
striatum of freely-moving rats: release from adrenergic terminals and modulation
by alpha2-autoreceptors. J Neurosci Methods 140: 141–152.
45. Detillieux KA, Meij JT, Kardami E, Cattini PA (1999) alpha1-Adrenergic
stimulation of FGF-2 promoter in cardiac myocytes and in adult transgenic
mouse hearts. Am J Physiol 276: H826–H833.
46. Kajitani N, Hisaoka-Nakashima K, Morioka N, Okada-Tsuchioka M, Kaneko
M, et al. (2012) Antidepressant acts on astrocytes leading to an increase in the
expression of neurotrophic/growth factors: differential regulation of FGF-2 by
noradrenaline. PLoS One 7: e51197.
47. Feeney DM, De Smet AM, Rai S (2004) Noradrenergic modulation of
hemiplegia: facilitation and maintenance of recovery. Restor Neurol Neurosci
22: 175–190.
48. Feeney DM (1997) From laboratory to clinic: noradrenergic enhancement of
physical therapy for stroke or trauma patients. Adv Neurol 73: 383–394.
49. Goldstein LB (2003) Pharmacotherapy in stroke rehabilitation. Adv Neurol 92:
447–450.
50. Cheung VC, Deboer C, Hanson E, Tunesi M, D’Onofrio M, et al. (2013) Gene
expression changes in the motor cortex mediating motor skill learning. PLoS
One 8: e61496.
51. Ma YP, Ma MM, Cheng SM, Ma HH, Yi XM, et al. (2008) Intranasal bFGFinduced progenitor cell proliferation and neuroprotection after transient focal
cerebral ischemia. Neurosci Lett 437: 93–97.
52. Alzheimer C, Werner S (2002) Fibroblast growth factors and neuroprotection.
Adv Exp Med Biol 513:335–51.: 335–351.
53. Li Q, Stephenson D (2002) Postischemic administration of basic fibroblast
growth factor improves sensorimotor function and reduces infarct size following
permanent focal cerebral ischemia in the rat. Exp Neurol 177: 531–537.
54. Ren JM, Finklestein SP (2005) Growth factor treatment of stroke. Curr Drug
Targets CNS Neurol Disord 4: 121–125.
55. Sugimori H, Speller H, Finklestein SP (2001) Intravenous basic fibroblast growth
factor produces a persistent reduction in infarct volume following permanent
focal ischemia in rats. Neurosci Lett 300: 13–16.
56. Paciaroni M, Bogousslavsky J (2011) Trafermin for stroke recovery: is it time for
another randomized clinical trial? Expert Opin Biol Ther 11: 1533–1541.
57. Bogousslavsky J, Victor SJ, Salinas EO, Pallay A, Donnan GA, et al. (2002)
Fiblast (trafermin) in acute stroke: results of the European-Australian phase II/
III safety and efficacy trial. Cerebrovasc Dis 14: 239–251.
58. Jakala P, Jolkkonen J (2012) Time for a neurorestorative therapy in stroke.
Expert Opin Biol Ther 12: 267–270.
59. Phillips JP, Devier DJ, Feeney DM (2003) Rehabilitation pharmacology:
bridging laboratory work to clinical application. J Head Trauma Rehabil 18:
342–356.
60. Gladstone DJ, Black SE (2000) Enhancing recovery after stroke with
noradrenergic pharmacotherapy: a new frontier? Can J Neurol Sci 27: 97–105.
61. Bachis A, Mallei A, Cruz MI, Wellstein A, Mocchetti I (2008) Chronic
antidepressant treatments increase basic fibroblast growth factor and fibroblast
growth factor-binding protein in neurons. Neuropharmacology 55: 1114–1120.
62. Mallei A, Shi B, Mocchetti I (2002) Antidepressant treatments induce the
expression of basic fibroblast growth factor in cortical and hippocampal neurons.
Mol Pharmacol 61: 1017–1024.
63. Zittel S, Weiller C, Liepert J (2007) Reboxetine improves motor function in
chronic stroke. A pilot study. J Neurol 254: 197–201.
64. Bilge C, Kocer E, Kocer A, Turk BU (2008) Depression and functional outcome
after stroke: the effect of antidepressant therapy on functional recovery.
Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 44: 13–18.
65. Chen Y, Guo JJ, Zhan S, Patel NC (2006) Treatment effects of antidepressants
in patients with post-stroke depression: a meta-analysis. Ann Pharmacother 40:
2115–2122.

25. Reilly JF, Kumari VG (1996) Alterations in fibroblast growth factor receptor
expression following brain injury. Exp Neurol 140: 139–150.
26. Wei OY, Huang YL, Da CD, Cheng JS (2000) Alteration of basic fibroblast
growth factor expression in rat during cerebral ischemia. Acta Pharmacol Sin
21: 296–300.
27. Kawamata T, Dietrich WD, Schallert T, Gotts JE, Cocke RR, et al. (1997)
Intracisternal basic fibroblast growth factor enhances functional recovery and
up-regulates the expression of a molecular marker of neuronal sprouting
following focal cerebral infarction. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94: 8179–8184.
28. Kawamata T, Alexis NE, Dietrich WD, Finklestein SP (1996) Intracisternal basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) enhances behavioral recovery following focal
cerebral infarction in the rat. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 16: 542–547.
29. Rowntree S, Kolb B (1997) Blockade of basic fibroblast growth factor retards
recovery from motor cortex injury in rats. Eur J Neurosci 9: 2432–2441.
30. Flores C, Rodaros D, Stewart J (1998) Long-lasting induction of astrocytic basic
fibroblast growth factor by repeated injections of amphetamine: blockade by
concurrent treatment with a glutamate antagonist. J Neurosci 18: 9547–9555.
31. Flores C, Samaha AN, Stewart J (2000) Requirement of endogenous basic
fibroblast growth factor for sensitization to amphetamine. J Neurosci 20: RC55.
32. McCarthy KD, de VJ (1980) Preparation of separate astroglial and
oligodendroglial cell cultures from rat cerebral tissue. J Cell Biol 85: 890–902.
33. Flores C, Stewart J (2000) Changes in astrocytic basic fibroblast growth factor
expression during and after prolonged exposure to escalating doses of
amphetamine. Neuroscience 98: 287–293.
34. Kwon JH, Vogt Weisenhorn DM, Downen M, Ruan K, Roback L, et al. (1998)
Beta-adrenergic and fibroblast growth factor receptors induce neuronal process
outgrowth through different mechanisms. Eur J Neurosci 10: 2776–2789.
35. Hausott B, Schlick B, Vallant N, Dorn R, Klimaschewski L (2008) Promotion of
neurite outgrowth by fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 overexpression and
lysosomal inhibition of receptor degradation in pheochromocytoma cells and
adult sensory neurons. Neuroscience 153: 461–473.
36. Kuczenski R, Segal DS (1997) Effects of methylphenidate on extracellular
dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine: comparison with amphetamine.
J Neurochem 68: 2032–2037.
37. Krobert KA, Sutton RL, Feeney DM (1994) Spontaneous and amphetamineevoked release of cerebellar noradrenaline after sensorimotor cortex contusion:
an in vivo microdialysis study in the awake rat. J Neurochem 62: 2233–2240.
38. Rothman RB, Baumann MH, Dersch CM, Romero DV, Rice KC, et al. (2001)
Amphetamine-type central nervous system stimulants release norepinephrine
more potently than they release dopamine and serotonin. Synapse 39: 32–41.
39. Riva MA, Molteni R, Racagni G (1998) Differential regulation of FGF-2 and
FGFR-1 in rat cortical astrocytes by dexamethasone and isoproterenol. Brain
Res Mol Brain Res 57: 38–45.
40. Gilardino A, Farcito S, Zamburlin P, Audisio C, Lovisolo D (2009) Specificity of
the second messenger pathways involved in basic fibroblast growth factorinduced survival and neurite growth in chick ciliary ganglion neurons.
J Neurosci Res 87: 2951–2962.
41. Jeon CY, Kim HJ, Morii H, Mori N, Settleman J, et al. (2010) Neurite
outgrowth from PC12 cells by basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) is mediated
by RhoA inactivation through p190RhoGAP and ARAP3. J Cell Physiol 224:
786–794.
42. Zamburlin P, Ruffinatti FA, Gilardino A, Farcito S, Parrini M, et al. (2013)
Calcium signals and FGF-2 induced neurite growth in cultured parasympathetic
neurons: spatial localization and mechanisms of activation. Pflugers Arch 465:
1355–1370.
43. Day JS, O’Neill E, Cawley C, Aretz NK, Kilroy D, et al. (2014) Noradrenaline
acting on astrocytic beta(2)-adrenoceptors induces neurite outgrowth in primary
cortical neurons. Neuropharmacology 77:234–48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.09.027. Epub;%2013 Oct 12.: 234–248.

PLOS ONE | www.plosone.org

12

September 2014 | Volume 9 | Issue 9 | e108031

