MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1272-1278, 2015

1272

Blood-brain barrier permeability of Gualou Guizhi granules
and neuroprotective effects in ischemia/reperfusion injury
HUANG LI1, MIAO YE2, YUQIN ZHANG1, MINGQING HUANG1, WEI XU1,
KEDAN CHU1, LIDIAN CHEN3 and JINHUA QUE1
1

Pharmacy College; 2Centre of Biomedical Research and Development; 3Rehabilitation Medicine College,
Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China
Received August 5, 2014; Accepted January 21, 2015
DOI: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3520

Abstract. The present study aimed to estimate the blood‑brain
barrier (BBB) permeability of Gualou Guizhi granules
(GLGZG) in normal rats and in rat models of ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury, and to examine the neuroprotective effects
of GLGZG. A sensitive high‑performance liquid chromatography‑quadrupole‑time of flight‑mass spectrometry analytical
method was developed to determinate the components of
GLGZG in the plasma and brain tissue. Middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAO) in rats served as a model of in vivo I/R.
Citrulline, gallic acid, albiflorin, peoniflorin, liquiritin apioside,
liquiritin, isoliquiritin apioside, isoliquiritin, liquiritigenin,
isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid rapidly passed into
the bloodstream. Citrulline, albiflorin, peoniflorin, liquiritin
apioside, liquiritin, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid also passed the BBB and reached the brain tissue
of MCAO rats, while isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid
were not detected in the brain tissue of the normal rats. The
potential neuroprotective effect of GLGZG was determined
in MCAO rats. The intragastric administration of GLGZG
following reperfusion of rats for 2 h decreased the neurological
defects and infarction volume, attenuated pathological changes
of brain tissue and exerted a significant protective effect in
cerebral ischemia injury. In conclusion, certain components
of GLGZG passed through the BBB, particularly following
cerebral ischemia injury, and this may be therapeutically
effective for the treatment of cerebral ischemia injury in the
human brain.

Correspondence to: Dr Lidian Chen, Rehabilitation Medicine
College, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
1 Qiuyang Road, Fuzhou, Fujian 350122, P.R. China
E‑mail: clidianlab@gmail.com

Key words: Gualou Guizhi granule, blood-brain barrier, middle
cerebral artery occlusion, neuroprotection, high-performance liquid
chromatography-quadrupole-time of flight-mass spectometry

Introduction
Stroke, with ischemia of the brain and hemorrhagic injury as
the predominant clinical manifestations, is the main cause of
mortality worldwide (1‑3). The annual number of stroke cases
is increasing as the world population is ageing. According to
the World Health Organization, 15,000,000 individuals suffer
a stroke worldwide each year, which undoubtedly creates
an increased financial and social burden to the surviving
population (4). There are currently few preventative therapies
available for stroke and the only Food and Drug Administration
approved ‘pharmacological’ intervention to reduce brain
damage is tissue plasminogen activator (5). However, only
~3‑5% of patients benefit from this, due to its narrow time
window.
The blood‑brain barrier (BBB) is a highly selective permeability barrier, which separates the circulating blood from
the brain extracellular fluid in the central nervous system (6).
The BBB allows the passage of water, certain gases and lipid
soluble molecules by passive diffusion, and the selective
transport of molecules, including glucose and amino acids,
which are crucial to neurological function (6). By contrast, the
BBB may prevent the entry of lipophilic, potential neurotoxins
using an active transport mechanism, which is important for
protecting the brain from fluctuations in the plasma composition and from circulating agents (7).
Changes in the permeability of the BBB, which result in the
increase of vascular‑derived substances into the brain, leading
to pathophysiologic processes and affecting the passage of
drugs and various metabolites into the brain parenchyma, have
been investigated (8,9).
Gualou Guizhi granules (GLGZG; approval no. S20130001)
are a standard prescribed drug at Fujian University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) Affiliated Second
People's Hospital (Fuzhou, China). It is a well‑known traditional Chinese formula, first recorded in 'Essentials from
the Golden Cabinet' (10). GLGZG is comprised of six herbs,
including Trichosanthes kirilowii Maxim., Paeonia lactiflora
Pall., Cinnamomum cassia Presl., Glycyrrhiza uralensis
Fisch., Zingiber officinale Rosc. and Ziziphus jujuba Mill.,
according to the Yin‑Yang and Wu Hsing ‘Five Elements’
theory of TCM, in a weight ratio of 10:3:3:3:2:3 (10). It has
been used clinically to treat muscular spasticity following

LI et al: BLOOD BRAIN BARRIER AND GUALOU GUIZHI GRANULE

stroke, epilepsy and spinal cord injury in China (11‑13). Our
previous clinical study demonstrated beneficial effects of
GLGZG in stroke patients (unpublished data) and our previous
studies evaluated the effect of GLGZG on lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)‑induced BV‑2 murine microglial cells and demonstrated that GLGZG had an effect on the Toll‑like receptor
(TLR)4/nuclear factor (NF)‑κ B pathway and mitogen‑activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway (14,15). The
neuroprotective effects of GLGZG on glutamate‑induced
apoptosis in cultured BV‑2 cells (16) and the neuroprotective
effects of GLGZG in vivo were investigated, which demonstrated that GLGZG exerts its neuroprotective effects via the
modulation of excitatory amino acid levels and the expression
of N‑methyl‑D‑aspartate (NMDA) and α‑amino‑3‑hydroxy‑5
‑methyl‑4‑isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptors (17,18).
Although previous studies have demonstrated the neuroprotective effect of GLGZG in vivo and in vitro, the BBB
permeability of GLGZG under normal or ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury remains to be elucidated. The permeability
of the BBB is an important factor for compounds used in the
treatment of neurodegenerative disorders. The present study
investigated the BBB permeability of GLGZG in normal and
I/R injury models in vivo and also further examined the neuroprotective effects of GLGZG in vivo.
Materials and methods
Materials. GLGZG was provided by Fujian University of
TCM Affiliated Second People's Hospital (Fuzhou, China).
High‑performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade
methanol and acetonitrile were purchased from Merck Co.
(Darmstadt, Germany). Standard substances, including citrulline, gallic acid, albiflorin, peoniflorin, liquiritin apioside,
liquiritin, isoliquiritin apioside, isoliquiritin, liquiritigenin,
isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid were purchased
from the National Institute for the Control of Pharmaceutical
and Biological Products (Beijing, China). All other chemical
reagents used were of analysis grade.
A total of 98 male Sprague‑Dawley rats (4 weeks old;
weighing 280±20 g) were obtained from the Laboratory
Animal Center of Fujian University of TCM. The animals
were housed under controlled temperature conditions
(21‑23˚C) with a relative humidity of 55±5%, a 12‑h light/dark
cycle and free access to standard rat diet and tap water. The
study was approved by the ethics committee of the Animal
Experimental Center, Fujian University of TCM (Fuzhou,
China).
Model of focal cerebral I/R. An intraluminal suture was used
for the induction of focal cerebral ischemia, as described
in Longa et al (17‑19), with modification. Briefly, the rats
were anesthetized using 10% chloral hydrate solution
(0.3 ml/100 g, intraperitoneally administered; Sinopharm
Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) and the left
common carotid artery (CCA), external carotid artery (ECA)
and internal carotid artery (ICA) were exposed by a short
incision, and separated from the adjacent nerves and tissue.
A 3‑0 silicon rubber‑coated nylon monofilament (Guangzhou
Jialing Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China) was carefully inserted into the ICA and was advanced to occlude the

1273

origin of the left middle cerebral artery (MCAO) until light
resistance was detected at 18‑20 mm from the CCA bifurcation. Following ischemia for 2 h, the filament was withdrawn
allowing reperfusion. Neurological defects were scored using
a five‑point scale: 0, no neurological symptoms; 1, unable to
completely extend the front jaw on the other side; 2, rotating
while crawling and falling to the contralateral side; 3, unable
to walk without assistance; and 4, unconsciousness (16). Rats
with a score of 1‑3 points were considered successful models
of I/R and were used in the subsequent experiments.
Analysis of the compounds in the plasma and brain by
HPLC‑quadrupole‑time of f light‑mass spectrometry
(Q‑TOF‑MS). A total of 15 rats were separated into a normal
group, a normal group with GLGZG treatment and an I/R
model group with GLGZG treatment. The rats in the normal
group were subjected to the surgical procedure with exposure
of the ICA and ECA, however, no MCAO was induced, and the
rats received normal saline treatment. The rats in the normal
group with GLGZG treatment received GLGZG (7.2 g/kg/day
intragastrically), however, were not exposed to MCAO surgery.
The model group with GLGZG treatment received GLGZG
(7.2 g/kg/day intragastrically) and underwent MCAO surgery.
Following treatment with GLGZG for 15, 30 or 60 min (5 rats
at each time point), the rats were deeply anesthetized with
10% chloral hydrate solution (0.3 ml/100 g, intraperitoneally
administered) and decapitated, then brains were resected
immediately, prior to plasma and brain tissue samples being
obtained. The brain tissue was homogenized in deionized
water at a ratio of 1:1 (w/v) using a glass pestle, and the homogenate was centrifuged at 628 x g for 15 min at 4˚C to obtain
the supernatant. Methanol (4‑fold) was then added to the brain
tissue homogenate or plasma samples. The samples were then
vortex mixed for 2 min, followed by ultrasound‑associated
extraction using a KQ‑500DE single‑frequency ultrasonic
cleaner (Kunshan Ultrasonic Instruments Co., Ltd., Kunshan,
China) for 10 min. Following centrifugation at 628 x g for
10 min at 4˚C, 2 µl supernatant was injected into the HPLC
system.
Chromatographic analysis was performed on a Shimadzu
HPLC system (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) coupled
with a Bruker micrOTOF‑Q II mass spectrometer (Bruker
Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). The HPLC system consisted of
an LC‑20A pump, DGU‑20A5 degasser, SIL‑20A auto‑injector
and CTO‑20A column thermostat. The mobile phases
consisted of 0.1% formic acid (Aladdin Industrial Corporation,
Shanghai, China) in (A) water and (B) acetonitrile high
performance liquid chromatography grade (Merck Millipore,
Darmstadt, Germany). The gradient elution program was as
follows: 15% B for 0‑18 min; 15‑48% B for 18‑20 min; 48‑15%
B for 20‑25 min. Another chromatographic separation was
performed at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min using a sample volume
of 2 µl and a Shimadzu Inertsil SP C18 5 µm (250x4.6 mm)
column (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan).
The microTOF‑Q II mass spectrometer was equipped with
an electrospray ionization source and run in negative mode.
The acquisition parameters of Q‑TOF‑MS were as follows:
Capillary, ‑4.5 kV (negative mode); nebulizer pressure, 2.0 bar;
dry gas (N2) flow rate, 4.0 l/min; dry gas temperature, 180˚C.
Funnel 1 and 2 were 200.0 Vpp; hexapole Rf, 100.0 Vpp;

1274

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1272-1278, 2015

Figure 1. Chromatograms of the nine standard reference compounds in high‑performance liquid chromatography‑quadrupole‑time of flight‑mass spectrometry. 1, citrulline; 2, gallic acid; 3, albiflorin; 4, peoniflorin; 5, liquiritin apioside; 6, liquiritin; 7, isoliquiritin apioside; 8, isoliquiritin; 9, liquiritigenin;
10, isoliquiritigenin; 11, glycyrrhizinic acid.

quadrupole ion energy, 2.5 eV; collision Rf, 150.0 Vpp. The
ion transfer time was 80 µsec and the prepulse storage time
was 5  µsec. Argon (Fuzhou Huaxin Industrial Gases Co.,
Ltd., Fuzhou, China) was applied as the collision gas and the
collision energy were set between 20 and 50 eV to obtain the
fragment ions data. To obtain highly accurate mass values,
external calibration of the Q‑TOF/MS was performed daily
prior to sample injection, and the enhanced quadratic calibration mode was used for the calibration curve.
Neuroprotection of GLGZG in I/R injury
Experimental grouping and treatment. A total of 48 rats
were divided into the three experimental groups, described
above and treatment was performed, as described below.
The experimental animals were grouped as: Sham‑operated
group (n=16), in which the rats were subjected to the surgical
procedure to expose the ICA and ECA, however, no MCAO
was induced and the rats received normal saline; an MCAO
model group (n=16), in which the rats received normal saline
and underwent MCAO surgery; and a GLGZG group (n=16),
in which the rats received GLGZG treatment (7.2 g/kg) and
underwent MCAO surgery. The rats were treated daily for
1 week.
Scoring neurological defects. The neurobehavioral defects
of the rats were quantified using the five‑point scale, as
described above (16), and this evaluation was performed in a
blinded‑manner by Miss. Yuqin Zhang.
2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining. A total
of eight rats from each group were sacrificed using 10% chloral
hydrate and perfused transcardiacally with 0.9% NaCl prior to
decapitation and rapid removal of the brain. The brains were
stored at 20˚C for 5 min and then dissected into six coronal
slices (2 mm) continuously from front to back. The brain tissues
were immersed in 2% TTC staining solution (cat no. T8877;
Sigma‑Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in phosphate‑buffered
saline (pH 7.4; Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology, Haimen,
China), and incubated at 37˚C for 1 h and turned over six times.
A high‑resolution digital camera (IXUS130; Canon, Inc., Tokyo,
Japan) was used to capture images and a Motic Med 6.0 Digital
Medical Image Analysis system (Motic Instruments Inc.,
Richmond, Canada) was used to calculate the infarct volume as
a percentage of the viable cerebral tissue of the entire brain (20).

Cerebral histopathology. A total of eight rats from each
group were sacrificed using 10% chloral hydrate and perfused
transcardiacally with 4% paraformaldehyde solution and
0.9% NaCl (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology), following
which the brains were rapidly removed. The brains were
paraffin‑embedded (Beyotime Institute of Biotechnology),
prior to being dissected into a series of adjacent 5 µm thick
sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (Beyotime
Institute of Biotechnology). Histopathological changes
were observed under a DM4000B light microscope (Leica
Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, China).
Statistical analysis. The data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation. Analysis of variance was performed to
determine significant differences between groups using
SPSS 16.0 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). P<0.05
was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.
Results
Analysis of the compounds in the plasma and brain using
HPLC‑Q‑TOF‑MS. The standard components of GLGZG,
including citrulline, gallic acid, albiflorin, peoniflorin,
liquiritin apioside, liquiritin, isoliquiritin apioside, isoliquiritin,
liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid were
detected by HPLC‑Q‑TOF‑MS (Fig. 1). The result demonstrated no peaks in the chromatograms of the blank plasma
and blank brain tissue homogenate. Citrulline, albiflorin,
peoniflorin, liquiritin apioside, liquiritin, isoliquiritin apioside,
isoliquiritin, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic
acid were present in the plasma from the rat model of MCAO
and the normal rats. Only citrulline, gallic acid, albiflorin,
peoniflorin, liquiritin apioside, liquiritin, liquiritigenin,
isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid were detected in the
brain tissue homogenates from the rat models of MCAO by
HPLC‑Q‑TOF‑MS. However, gallic acid, isoliquiritigenin
and glycyrrhizinic acid were not detected in the brain tissue
homogenate from the normal rat group compared with the rat
model of MCAO. Representative chromatograms of plasma
and brain tissue homogenate are shown in Figs. 2 and 3,
respectively.

LI et al: BLOOD BRAIN BARRIER AND GUALOU GUIZHI GRANULE

1275

A

B

C

Figure 2. Chromatograms of plasma following treatment with Gualou Guizhi granule. (A) Blank plasma, (B) plasma from normal rats and (C) plasma from rat
models of middle cerebral artery occlusion. 1, citrulline: 3, albiflorin; 4, peoniflorin; 5, liquiritin apioside; 6, liquiritin; 7, isoliquiritin apioside; 8, isoliquiritin;
9, liquiritigenin; 10, isoliquiritigenin; 11, glycyrrhizinic acid.

Treatment with GLGZG improves the neurological deficits
and attenuates cerebral infarct volume in rats. The effect
of GLGZG on neurological deficits was evaluated by
measuring the neurological performance using a five‑point
scale, as described above. As shown in Fig. 4, the rats in the
sham‑operated group (score: 0) exhibited no neurological
deficits, while the rats in the MCAO model group exhibited
neurological deficit (score: 1‑3), including circling towards
the contralateral side with reduced mobility, inability to
completely extend the front jaw on the other side, rotating
while crawling and falling to the contralateral side. The rats
in the GLGZG treated group exhibited significantly improved
neurological symptoms between days 1 and 7, particularly
those in the high‑dose group.
The infarct volumes of the rats were also determined to
evaluate the impact of GLGZG treatment for 7 days following
MCAO. As shown in Fig. 5A and B, the mean infraction
volume in the MCAO model group was significantly higher
compared with the sham‑operated group. Treatment with
GLGZG reduced the infarct volume to 12±1.2% compared
with that of the MCAO model group.
Treatment with GLGZG improves cerebral histopathology.
As shown in Fig. 6, in the sham‑operated group, the brain
tissue remained intact, neurons maintained eumorphism and
uniform distribution, cytoplasms were pale pink and abundant
and no inflammatory cell infiltrate was observed. By contrast,
the brain tissues had a larger infarct area, neurons were

disordered and reduced, with increased volume and staining in
the cytoplasms was shallower with vacuolization in the MCAO
model group. However, following treatment with GLGZG, the
infarct area was markedly reduced, the extent of damage was
decreased significantly and cytoplasmic hypervacuolization
was reduced.
Discussion
GLGZG is a well‑known traditional Chinese formula, which
was first recorded in 'Essentials from the Golden Cabinet' in
~210 AD. It is now developed into granules as an easy‑to‑use
form (10). In order to investigate the efficacy and mechanism
underlying GLGZG, our previous studies evaluated the effect
of GLGZG on LPS‑induced BV‑2 murine microglial cells and
demonstrated that GLGZG has an inhibitory effect on the
TLR4/NF‑κ B (14) and the MAPK signaling pathways (15).
The neuroprotective effects of GLGZG on glutamate‑induced
apoptosis in cultured BV‑2 cells was also investigated (16). In
addition, to confirm the results observed in vitro, a reversible
model of focal ischemia (MCAO model) was used to induce
a model of focal brain ischemia in vivo. It was revealed that
GLGZG exerts neuroprotective effects via the modulation
of excitatory amino acid levels and the expression levels of
the NMDA and AMPA receptors (17,18). Although possible
mechanisms have been identified, it is known that the BBB,
a diffusion barrier, is responsible for strictly controlling the
exchanges between the blood and brain compartments (6),

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1272-1278, 2015

1276
A

B

C

Figure 3. Chromatograms of brain tissue homogenate following treatment with Gualou Guizhi granule. (A) Brain tissue homogenate, (B) brain tissue homogenate from normal rats and (C) brain tissue homogenate from rat models of middle cerebral artery occlusion. 1, citrulline; 2, gallic acid; 3, albiflorin;
4, peoniflorin; 5, liquiritin apioside; 6, liquiritin; 9, liquiritigenin; 10, isoliquiritigenin; 11, glycyrrhizinic acid.

whether the BBB changes following cerebral I/R remains to
be elucidated. Whether the BBB alters following cerebral I/R
injury, and which compounds of GLGZG penetrate the BBB,
remain to be fully elucidated.
During I/R, the brain environment may be altered.
Loss of blood supply to the brain results in a cascade of
events throughout the infarcted region, including depletion
of adenosine triphosphate, excitotoxic glutamate efflux, a
neuronal component, ionic imbalance, including increased
intracellular calcium, loss of metabolic function with increased
acidosis, oxidative stress and activation of the inflammatory
processes (8). Ultimately, this causes the destruction and/or
dysfunction of brain cells, which leads to clinically definable
neurological deficits (6).
The present study confirmed the neuroprotective effects of
GLGZG in I/R injury, including decreased neurological defects
and infarct volume, and ameliorated cerebral histopathology.
Together with previous findings, these results suggested that
GLGZG is a promising alternative therapeutic approach.
Under normal physiological conditions, the BBB prevents
the paracellular diffusion of hydrophilic solutes and the efflux
of hydrophobic molecules and drugs from the brain to the
blood by active transport (6). However, the BBB is disrupted
following ischemic stroke and the subsequent onset of reperfusion. This affects the passage of drugs and various metabolites
into the brain (21). Therefore, penetration of the BBB by therapeutic agents is a prerequisite for treatment of central nervous
diseases. The present study aimed to investigate the BBB
permeability of GLGZG using HPLC‑Q‑TOF‑MS analysis to

detect compounds in the brain tissues of normal rats and rat
models of I/R injury in vivo.
The present study synch ronously measured the
compounds of GLGZG in the plasma and brain tissue
from normal and model rats. Citrulline, albiflorin, peoniflorin, liquiritin apioside, liquiritin, isoliquiritin apioside,
isoliquiritin, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid were detected in the blood of normal and model
rats. Citrulline, gallic acid, albiflorin, peoniflorin, liquiritin
apioside, liquiritin, isoliquiritin apioside, isoliquiritin,
liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid
were detected in the brain tissue from model rats, however,
only citrulline, albiflorin, peoniflorin, liquiritin apioside,
liquiritin and liquiritigenin were detected in the brain tissue
from normal rats. Compounds with high lipid solubility and
low relative molecular mass penetrate the BBB more easily
than others (22), and it was demonstrated that the detected
compounds in the brain tissue from normal rats conformed
to these characteristics. However, this was not observed in
the brain tissues from the model rats. Glycyrrhizinic acid,
with a relative molecular mass of 822.92, was detected in
brain tissue from the model rats, but not the normal rats and
gallic acid, isoliquiritigenin and glycyrrhizinic acid were
increased in the brain tissues from the model rats compared
with the normal rats, suggesting that these compounds were
able to penetrate the BBB rapidly and distribute into the brain
tissue as a result of BBB damage.
No previous investigations, to the best of our knowledge,
have demonstrated the penetration of glycyrrhizinic acid into

LI et al: BLOOD BRAIN BARRIER AND GUALOU GUIZHI GRANULE

1277

Figure 4. Effects of treatment with GLGZG on neurological deficits. The
neurological score of the sham‑operated, MCAO group and GLGZG groups
are shown (n=16). The Sham‑operated rats underwent surgery without vessel
occlusion; MCAO rats were treated with saline for 7 days following transient MCAO; GLGZG rats were treated with 7.2 g/kg GLGZG for 7 days
following transient MCAO. Data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (**P<0.01 vs. MCAO and ##P<0.01 vs. sham‑operation). GLGZG, Gualou
Guizhi granule; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion.

A

B

Figure 5. Effects of GLGZG on the size of cerebral infarcts. (A) Representative
images demonstrating the cerebral infarct of the rat brain slices measured
by 2, 3, 5‑triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining (n=8). The black arrows
indicate the ‘infarcted areas’. (B) Infarct volume of the MCAO (model) group
and GLGZG group. The sham‑operated rats underwent surgery without
vessel occlusion; MCAO rats were treated with saline for 7 days following
transient MCAO; GLGZG rats were treated with 7.2 g/kg GLGZG for 7 days
following transient MCAO. Data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (*P<0.01, vs. Model). GLGZG, Gualou Guizhi granule; MCAO, middle
cerebral artery occlusion, Sham, surgery without vessel occlusion.

Figure 6. Effect of treatment with GLGZG on the histopathological changes
of brain tissue following focal cerebral ischemic/reperfusion injury in rats.
Representative images are shown. (hematoxylin and eosin stained; magnification, x200). The Sham‑operated rats underwent surgery without vessel
occlusion; MCAO rats were treated with saline for 7 days following transient
MCAO; GLGZG rats were treated with 7.2 g/kg GLGZG for 7 days following
transient MCAO. GLGZG, Gualou Guizhi granule; MCAO, middle cerebral
artery occlusion.

the brain. A previous study demonstrated that diammonium
glycyrrhizinate ameliorates inflammation in focal cerebral
I/R injury (21). Isoliquiritigenin, a licorice chalconoid, is
known to have vasorelaxant, antioxidant, antiplatelet, antitumor, anti‑allergenic, antiviral and estrogenic properties, and
Zhan and Yang demonstrated that isoliquiritigenin exhibited
protective effects in transient MCAO‑induced focal cerebral
ischemia in rats (23,24). Paeoniflorin, a monoterpene glucoside, suggested to exhibit several pharmacological effects
attenuates ischemia‑induced pathological and behavioral
changes (25‑27). Glycyrrhizin has been associated with
numerous pharmacological effects and has been observed
to have a protective effect on focal cerebral I/R‑induced
inflammation, oxidative stress and apoptosis in rats (28,29).
Additionally, the Institute of Cancer Research reported that
liquiritin exerts a neuroprotective effect against focal cerebral
I/R in male mice (30).
GLGZG contains several herbs and is chemically complex,
with hundreds of components. As mentioned above, certain
bioactive chemicals have been suggested to penetrate the
BBB, enter the brain and collectively exert therapeutic and

1278

MOLECULAR MEDICINE REPORTS 12: 1272-1278, 2015

modulatory effects, providing a beneficial property with
possible clinical use in the treatment of ischemic stroke.
In conclusion, the present study demonstrated that the BBB
permeability of GLGZG increased signiﬁcantly following I/R
injury in vivo, with citrulline, gallic acid, albiflorin, peoniflorin,
liquiritin apioside, liquiritin, liquiritigenin, isoliquiritigenin
and glycyrrhizinic acid being detected in the brain following
MCAO. In addition, GLGZG exhibited a protective effect in
ischemic injury in rats.
Acknowledgements
This study was performed at the State Ley Laboratory of
Chinese Pharmacies of Fujian Provincial Department of
Science and Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Rehabilitation Technology and TCM Rehabilitation Research
Center of the State Administration of Traditional Chinese
Medicine. This study was funded by grants from the Important
Subject of Fujian Province Science and Technology Hall of
China (no. 2012Y0041) and the Fujian province Education
Hall of China (no. JA12176).
References
 1.	Lloyd‑Jones D, Adams RJ, Brown TM, et al: Executive summary:
heart disease and stroke statistics ‑ 2010 update: a report from the
American Heart Association. Circulation 121: 948‑954, 2010.
 2.	Liu M, Wu BO, Wang WZ, Lee LM, Zhang SH and Kong LZ:
Stroke in China: epidemiology, prevention, and management
strategies. Lancet Neurolo 6: 456‑464, 2007.
 3.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): Prevalence
of disabilities and associated health conditions among
adults ‑ United States, 1999. MMWR Morb Mortals Wkly
Rep 50: 120‑125, 2001.
 4.	The World Health Report 2002. World Health Organization.
Geneva, Switzerland, 2002.
 5.	Del Zoppo GJ, Saver JL, Jauch EC, Adams HP Jr and
American Heart Association Stroke Council: Expansion of the
time window for treatment of acute ischemic stroke with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator: a science advisory from
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
Stroke 40: 2945‑2948, 2009.
  6.	Ballabh P, Braun A and Nedergaard M: The blood‑brain barrier:
an overview: structure, regulation, and clinical implications.
Neurobiol Dis 16 : 1‑13, 2004.
 7.	Begley DJ and Brightman MW: Structural and functional
aspects of the blood‑brain barrier. Prog Drug Res 61: 39‑78,
2003.
 8.	Sandoval KE and Witt KA: Blood‑brain bar rier tight
junction permeability and ischemic stroke. Neurobiol Dis 32:
200‑219, 2008.
 9.	Strbian D, Durukan A, Pitkonen M, Marinkovic I, Tatlisumak E,
Pedrono E, et al: The blood‑brain barrier is continuously open
for several weeks following transient focal cerebral ischemia.
Neuroscience 153: 175‑181, 2008.
10.	Zhang ZJ, Jinkui YL, Lin Y, Yang PJ, Hou XM and Yang YW:
Synopsis of Golden Chamber. Macmillan Press, Beijing, China,
pp203‑204, 2008 (In Chinese).
11.	Sun X: Research on formula treating paralysis and spasticity from 'treatise on febrile and miscellaneous diseases'.
Zhongguo Zhong Yi Ji Chu Yi Xue Za Zhi 8: 644‑645, 2010
(In Chinese).

12.	Yang C, Chen L and Tao J: New usage of a classical
formula‑Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction. Liaoning J Tradit Chin
Med 8: 166‑167 2010.
13.	Zhang L and Ai H: Effects of Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction on
c‑fos and c‑jun in epileptic rats. Sichuan Hua Xi Zhong Yi Yao
Yan Jiu Suo 23: 21‑22, 2005.
14.	Hu H, Li Z, Zhu X, Lin R, Lin J, Peng J, Tao J and Chen L: Gua
Lou Gui Zhi decoction suppresses LPS‑induced activation of
the TLR4/NF‑κ B pathway in BV‑2 murine microglial cells. Int
J Mol 31, 1327‑1332, 2013.
15.	Hu H, Li Z, Zhu X, Lin R, Lin J, Peng J, Tao J and Chen L:
GuaLou GuiZhi decoction inhibits LPS‑induced microglial
cell motility through the MAPK signaling pathway. In J Mol
Med 32: 1281‑1286, 2013.
16.	Li ZF, Lin RH, Mao JJ, Hu HX, Zhu XQ, Chen WL and
Chen LD: Protective effect of Gualou Guizhi decoction on
BV‑2 cells injured by glutamate. Journal of Fujian University of
Traditional Chinese Medicine 23: 14‑17, 2013.
17.	Huang J, Tao J, Xue XH, et al: Gua Lou Gui Zhi decoction
exerts neuroprotective effects on post‑stroke spasticity via the
modulation of glutamate levels and AMPA receptor expression.
Int J Mol Med 31: 841‑848, 2013.
18.	Chen X, Li H, Huang M, Huang M, et al: Effect of Gua Lou Gui
Zhi decoction on focal cerebral ischemia‑reperfusion injury
through regulating the expression of excitatory amino acids and
their receptors. Mol Med Rep 10: 248‑254, 2014.
19.	Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S and Cummins R: Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats.
Stroke 20: 84‑91, 1989.
20.	Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Germano SM, Nishimura MC, Davis RL
and Bartkowski HM: Evaluation of 2,3,5‑triphenyltetrazoliumchloride as a stain for detection and quantification of experimental
cerebralin farction in rats. Stroke 17: 1304‑1308, 1986.
21.	Hou SZ, Li Y, Zhu XL, Wang ZY, Wang X and Xu Y: Ameliorative
effects of diammonium glycyrrhizinate on inflammation in focal
cerebral ischemic‑reperfusion injury. Brain Res 1447: 20‑27, 2012.
22.	Weiss N, Miller F, Cazaubon S and Couraud PO: The blood‑brain
barrier in brain homeostasis and neurological diseases. Biochim
Biophys Acta 1788: 842‑857, 2009.
23.	Zhan C and Yang J: Protective effects of isoliquiritigenin in
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion‑induced focal cerebral
ischemia in rats. Pharmacol Res 53: 303‑309, 2006.
24.	Kape R, Parniske M, Brandt S, Werner D: Isoliquiritigenin, a
strong nod gene- and glyceollin resistance‑inducing flavonoid
from soybean root exudate. Appl Environ Microbiol 58: 1705‑1710,
1992.
25.	Liu DZ, Xie KQ, Ji XQ, Ye Y, Jiang CL, et al: Neuroprotective
effect of paeoniflorin on cerebral ischemic rat by activating
adenosine A1 receptor in a manner different from its classical
agonists. Br J Pharmacol 146: 604‑611, 2005.
26.	 Mao QQ, Zhong XM, Feng CR, Pan AJ, Li ZY, et al: Protective
effects of paeoniflorin against glutamate‑induced neurotoxicity in
PC12 cells via antioxidant mechanisms and Ca(2+) antagonism. Cell
Mol Neurobiol 30: 1059‑1066, 2010.
27.	Guo RB, Wang GF, Zhao AP, Gu J, Sun XL and Hu G: Paeoniflorin
protects against ischemia‑induced brain damages in rats via
inhibiting MAPKs/NF‑κ B‑mediated inflammatory responses.
PLoS ONE 7: e49701, 2012.
28.	Kim SW, Lim CM, Lee HK and Lee JK: The use of Stronger
NeoMinophagen C, a glycyrrhizin‑containing preparation, in
robust neuroprotection in the postischemic brain. Anat Cell
Biol 44: 304‑313, 2012.
29.	Gong G, Xiang L, Yuan L, et al: Protective effect of glycyrrhizin,
a direct HMGB1 inhibitor, on focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion‑induced inflammation, oxidative stress, and apoptosis in
rats. PLoS One 9: e89450, 2014.
30.	Sun YX, Tang Y, Wu AL, Liu T, Dai XL, Zheng QS and Wang ZB:
Neuroprotective effect of liquiritin against focal cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion in mice via its antioxidant and antiapoptosis
properties. J Asian Nat Prod Res 12: 1051‑1060, 2012.

