Cytotherapy, 2015; 17: 1090e1103

Early neuroprotective effect with lack of long-term cell replacement
effect on experimental stroke after intra-arterial transplantation of
adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal cells

SEUNG-HUN OH1,*, CHUNGGAB CHOI2,*, DA-JEONG CHANG2, DONG-AH SHIN3,
NAYEON LEE2, IKSOO JEON2, JONG-HYUK SUNG4, HYUNSEUNG LEE5,
KWAN-SOO HONG5, JUNG JAE KO2 & JIHWAN SONG2
1

Department of Neurology, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam, Republic of Korea,
Department of Biomedical Science and CHA Stem Cell Institute, College of Life Science, CHA University, Seongnam,
Republic of Korea, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea,
4
College of Pharmacy, Yonsei University, Incheon, Republic of Korea, and 5Division of Magnetic Resonance, Korea
Basic Science Institute, Ochang, Republic of Korea
2

Abstract
Background aims. Adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (AD-MSCs) have high proliferative capacity and ability to
secrete trophic factors. Although intra-arterial (IA) transplantation of stem cells induces efﬁcient engraftment to the host
brain, it is unclear whether engrafted cells exert their long-term therapeutic effects through a bystander mechanism or a cell
replacement mechanism. Methods. After induction of ischemia in rats by middle cerebral artery occlusion, we transplanted
human AD-MSCs into their carotid arteries with the use of a micro-needle, and we then investigated the therapeutic effects
during the early and late phases of ischemia by means of in vivo magnetic resonance imaging, functional and histological
analyses. Results. During the early phase of cerebral ischemia, IA transplantation of AD-MSCs attenuated inﬂammation and
enhanced endogenous neurogenesis. Transplanted animals showed a marked improvement in functional tests during the
early phase of cerebral ischemia that was less prominent but still signiﬁcant during the late phase of cerebral ischemia.
Although the transplanted cells effectively migrated to the infarct area, only a small number of engrafted cells survived at 8
weeks after transplantation and differentiated into neuronal, glial and endothelial cells. Conclusions. IA transplantation of
human AD-MSCs provides an effective therapeutic modality in a rodent model of stroke, of which the main effects are
mediated by a bystander mechanism at the early phase of ischemia.
Key Words: adipose tissue, intra-arterial, mesenchymal stromal cells, neuroprotection, stroke, transplantation

Introduction
Stroke is one of the major causes of death and
disability worldwide. Except for recanalization therapy within 4.5 h of stroke onset [1], there is no
established treatment for acute stroke [2]. Stem cell
therapy is a promising approach to improve functional deﬁcits in stroke patients, as has been shown
with the use of the rodent stroke model [3]. The
majority of previous experimental studies have
demonstrated that systemically administered adult
stem cells exert a neuroprotective effect on the host
brain by reducing inﬂammation or enhancement of
angiogenesis through a bystander effect rather than

cell replacement [4,5]. Recently, the ﬁrst clinical trial
that used intravenous (IV) administration of bone
marrowederived mesenchymal stromal cells (BMMSCs) was reported to show a trend toward functional improvement during a 5-year-follow-up study
[6,7].
Adipose tissueederived mesenchymal stromal
cells (AD-MSCs) have several advantages over BMMSCs. AD-MSCs are easy to obtain with minimal
invasiveness and are readily cultured to a sufﬁcient
number of cells for autologous transplantation
without ethical issues [8,9]. Under speciﬁc conditions, AD-MSCs have the capacity for differentiation

*These authors contributed equally to this work.
Correspondence: Jihwan Song, DPhil, CHA Stem Cell Institute, CHA University, Room 604, CHA Bio Complex, 335 Pangyo-ro, Bundang-gu, Seongnam-si,
Kyeonggi-do 463-400, Republic of Korea. E-mail: jsong@cha.ac.kr
(Received 28 November 2014; accepted 14 April 2015)
ISSN 1465-3249 Copyright Ó 2015, International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.04.007

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke
into neuronal and glial lineages [10e12]. Moreover,
they secrete multiple trophic factors, including
granulocyte monocyte colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and brainderived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) [13e15], all of
which potentially beneﬁt brain function after a
stroke. Moreover, comparative analysis between ADMSCs and BM-MSCs showed that AD-MSCs have
a higher proliferative activity and a greater production of trophic factors than BM-MSCs [8]. Several
studies showed that intravenous or intracerebral
transplantation of AD-MSCs or adipose tissueederived neuronal progenitors ameliorates functional deﬁcits in the rodent stroke model [8,11].
The delivery mode of stem cells is one of the
major issues for the clinical application of cell therapy
to treat stroke patients [3]. The formation of functional networks between the grafted cells and the host
brain is a prerequisite for achieving a long-term effect
of stem cells in stroke patients [3]. Although IV
administration of stem cells shows promising results
in stroke animal models, nearly 90% of the injected
cells become trapped in the lung, liver or spleen,
which limits their effectiveness in treating brain
injury [16e18]. Intracerebral implantation could
circumvent this problem, but it is methodologically
invasive, especially in the acute phase of stroke when
patients are hemodynamically unstable. In contrast,
intra-arterial (IA) transplantation proximal to the
damaged tissue is an alternative delivery mode for
stem cell therapy, because IA-transplanted cells can
bypass the peripheral ﬁltering organs, thereby
resulting in a higher engraftment rate to the target
organ [19e21]. Several experimental studies have
demonstrated that IA transplantation efﬁciently targets transplanted cells around the infarct lesion, even
with low doses of cells [16e18]. However, blood
ﬂow blockade and intravascular embolism lead to a
mortality rate of approximately 40% when the microcatheter method is used [18]. A recent report of IA
transplantation of stem cells with the use of a microneedle injection method into the carotid artery
showed decreased mortality compared with the
micro-catheter method, without cerebral blood ﬂow
blockade or micro-embolism induction [22].
Although the IA transplantation method can
provide a more efﬁcient delivery route to the target
area in the ischemic brain, the mechanism by which
IA-transplanted cells improve brain function in cerebral ischemia is currently uncertain, because most
previous studies have investigated the effects at only a
single time point [16,18,22]. If cells engrafted
through IA transplantation survive and integrate in
the host brain long-term, functional improvement
may be sustained, or even further increased, at later

1091

stages after transplantation, which would suggest that
the therapeutic effects are largely due to a cell
replacement mechanism. However, if the engrafted
cells do not survive or integrate over the long term,
functional improvement would be limited to the early
stage, which would suggest that the therapeutic effects are largely due to a bystander mechanism. In
this study, we investigated whether IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs with the use of a
micro-needle at 1 day after middle cerebral artery
occlusion (MCAo) can lead to a functional
improvement. To investigate the transplantation effects, we performed histological analyses at different
time points after transplantation.
Methods
Ethics statement
This study was conducted in accordance with the
institutional review board of CHA Bundang Medical
Center on the use of human AD-MSCs (BD2011152D), as well as the CHA University Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee on animal experiment (IACUC090012). Human AD-MSCs were
obtained from elective liposuction of 23-year-old
healthy women, with informed consent.
Preparation and characterization of human AD-MSCs
Isolation and expansion of AD-MSCs were performed as previously described [23]. Brieﬂy, the
liposuction waste tissues were digested through the
use of 250 U/mL of type I collagenase for 90 min at
37 C and centrifuged at 300g for 10 min to obtain
the stromal vascular fraction. The cell suspension
was layered onto Histopaque-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich)
and centrifuged at 840g for 10 min. The supernatant
was discarded, and the cell band buoyant over Histopaque was collected. The retrieved cell fraction
was cultured overnight at 37 C with 5% CO2 in
expansion medium [Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s
medium (DMEM)-HG supplemented with 10%
fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL of penicillin and 100
mg/mL of streptomycin (BioWhittaker)]. The
resulting cell population was maintained for 3 to 5
days to reach 80% to 90% conﬂuence. AD-MSCs
were sub-cultured after reaching 85% conﬂuence
and were used for experiments at passage 5.
For ﬂuorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
analysis, AD-MSCs cultured in expansion medium
for 48 h were washed with phosphate buffered saline
(PBS) and incubated with ﬂuorescein isothiocyanateeconjugated antibodies for human CD44,
CD73, CD34, CD45, HLA-DR (BD Bioscience)
CD90 and CD105 (R&D Systems) for 30 min

1092

S.-H. Oh et al.

at room temperature. We performed reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
for VEGF, BDNF, Nestin, MAP2 and type III btubulin and to evaluate the expression of trophic factors and neuronal markers in human AD-MSCs. The
information for primer sequences for RT-PCR is
shown in the Supplementary Data (Supplementary
Figure S1). The housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as a
loading control.
Rat stroke model
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (n ¼ 96) weighing
280 to 300 g, were used in the experiment. Rats
were housed with free access to food and water ad
libitum for 12-h light-dark cycles throughout the
animal experiments. To induce MCAo in rats, we
followed the method of Longa et al. [24], with some
modiﬁcations. A commercially available siliconcoated 4e0 monoﬁlament (0.37 mm in diameter)
(Doccol Corp) was inserted 18 to 20 mm from the
external carotid artery to occlude the blood ﬂow of
the middle cerebral artery and then was carefully
removed after 90 min for reperfusion. The day after
ischemia, we performed acute neurological assessments of circling behavior and forelimb/hind limb
placement. We only selected rats that exhibited
moderate functional deﬁcits (scores 2e3) for further
experiments. During the procedure, 19 rats died
and 7 rats showed mild functional impairment after
reperfusion; therefore, they were discarded. Finally,
a total of 70 rats were selected for transplantation
experiments (Supplementary Figure S2).
Intra-arterial transplantation of AD-MSCs
To determine the optimal delivery time for human
AD-MSCs to reach the maximal efﬁcacy of cell
engraftment into the host brain, we compared the
cerebral distribution of IA-transplanted cells at three
different transplantation time points (1 day, 3 days
and 7 days after MCAo induction, n ¼ 2 at each time
point). The results showed that IA-transplanted ADMSCs were profoundly found in the host brain in the
1-day group compared with the 3-day and 7-day
groups (Supplementary Figure S3). This result is
consistent with the study of Ishizaka et al. [25], in
which IA transplantation of MSCs at 1 day after
MCAo induction showed the best engraftment rate
in the damaged brain of stroke rats. Therefore, we
decided to treat IA transplantation of AD-MSCs at 1
day after MCAo induction in the present study. At 1
day after MCAo induction, the human AD-MSCs or
sham (DMEM without culture supplements) in a
total volume of 5 mL were carefully infused into the

common carotid artery with the use of a microneedle (33G-Hamilton syringe) for 5 min. Animals
were randomly divided into the AD-MSC group (n ¼
39, 5  105 cells in 5 mL per rat) and a sham group
(n ¼ 31, 5 mL of DMEM treatment). After cell
infusion, the injection site was carefully compressed
with the use of Gelfoam (Pﬁzer Inc) for 10 min. The
pterigopalatine artery was temporally ligated during
the infusion and then was released after cell transplantation. No profound bleeding occurred during
the procedure. The vital signs of all rats were stable
during the procedure. Both AD-MSC and sham
groups were daily injected with cyclosporine A (5
mg/kg intraperitoneally) from the previous day of cell
transplantation and up to 8 weeks of transplantation.
Cell transplantation-related mortality accounts for all
causes of death occurred within 24 h after cell or
DMEM infusion. Total mortality was also scored
throughout the 8-week study period.
Functional tests and the measurement of ﬁnal infarct size
To avoid experimental bias, two investigators
without information on the treatment status of individual animals performed the functional tests independently. For functional tests, we used the rotarod
test and the modiﬁed neurological severity score
(mNSS) test, as described previously [26]. For the
rotarod test, rats were pre-trained under the same
conditions three times a day, for 3 consecutive days,
before MCAo induction to reduce variation among
animals. All rats were placed on the rotarod wheel to
record the time of endurance on the wheel. The rod
speed of the rotarod instrument was set to progressively accelerate from 4 to 40 rpm for 2 min. We
recorded the time (in seconds) that it took for each
animal to fall down from the rotating wheel and
calculated the average time from three trials, once
per week, for 8 weeks after MCAo induction. For the
mNSS test, MCAo-induced rats were tested 1 day
before transplantation and weekly, up to 8 weeks,
after transplantation. In the mNSS test, each rat was
given a score, which was the sum of the individual
neurological test scores. The high score represented
the most severe condition, whereas the low score
represented the normal condition. The inter-group
difference of rotarod and mNSS scores between the
AD-MSC group and the sham group were deﬁned as
a percentage (%) of improvement of rotarod and
mNSS scores in the AD-MSC group, relative to that
of the sham group at each time point.
After the completion of functional testing at 8
weeks after transplantation, the ﬁnal infarct size was
measured in both groups. Because most of the infarct
areas had changed into a cavitary lesion at 8 weeks
after transplantation, we estimated the infarct size as

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke
a percentage of the intact contralateral hemisphere by
use of the following equation: estimated infarct size
(%) ¼ [1(area of remaining ipsilateral hemisphere/
area of intact contralateral hemisphere)]  100. We
also measured the ventricular dilatation ratio as a
percentage of the intact contralateral hemisphere by
use of the following equation: ventricular ratio (%) ¼
(area of ipsilateral ventricular size/area of contralateral ventricular size)  100. The corpus callosum
area was determined with the use of the area of
corpus callosum within 1 mm from the midline
ipsilateral to the infarct side. The areas of interest
were measured with the use of Image J software
(Image J, National Institutes of Health), and the
values were summed on six serial coronal sections
per brain after staining with cresyl violet.
Cell labeling and in vivo magnetic resonance imaging
analysis
Feridexeprotamine sulfate complex was prepared at
a concentration of 2 mg/mL in culture medium
without serum and was then mixed by means of
hand-shaking. After incubation of this medium
containing the Feridexeprotamine sulfate complex
for 30 min at room temperature, equal volumes of
culture medium and the Feridexeprotamine sulfate
complex were added to the cells and incubated for 12
to 16 h at 37 C. Afterward, the medium was
removed and the cells were washed twice with PBS.
Four rats from the AD-MSC group and two rats
from the sham group were used to examine whether
the Feridex-labeled cells had migrated toward the
ischemic region through the use of 4.7-T magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI, BioSpec) with T2- and
T2*-weighted imaging techniques. T2-weighted
images were applied to assess the full extent of
infarct by MCAo induction, and T2*-weighted images were applied to detect AD-MSC migration after
transplantation.
To conﬁrm the distribution of Feridex-labeled
cells, prussian blue (PB) staining was performed in
all rats that underwent in vivo MRI. Tissue sections
were ﬁxed at room temperature in methanol for 30
min, followed by treatment with a solution containing 4% potassium ferrocyanide and 4% HCl. After
boiling, tissues were washed with the use of PBS and
counterstained with fast red. The PB-labeled cells
were examined under a phase-contrast microscope
(Eclipse E600, Nikon).
Immunohistochemistry
For immunohistochemical analysis, rats were transcardially perfused with heparinized saline (0.9%
NaCl), followed by 3.7% formaldehyde. The brains

1093

were ﬁxed overnight in 3.7% formaldehyde at room
temperature and then were transferred to 30% sucrose with shaking for 2 to 3 days at 4 C. The brains
were frozen in embedding medium (O.C.T. compound, Sakura Finetek). Double-label immunoﬂuorescence staining was performed on free-ﬂoating,
40-mm sections. The sections were incubated in
blocking solution that consisted of 5% normal horse
serum (Vector Laboratories) in PBS containing 0.3
% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), for 1 h at room
temperature.
The following primary antibodies were used:
antiehuman-speciﬁc nuclei (hNu) (mouse monoclonal 1:100, Millipore), antiehuman mitochondria
(rabbit polyclonal, 1:250, Millipore), antiehumanspeciﬁc Nestin (mouse monoclonal, 1:250, R&D
Systems), antiehuman-speciﬁc MAP2 (rabbit polyclonal, 1:200, Millipore), anti-NeuN (mouse monoclonal, 1:500, Millipore), anti-glial ﬁbrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) (mouse monoclonal, 1:500, BD
Biosciences), anti-doublecortin (DCX) (rabbit polyclonal, 1:200, Cell Signaling Technology), antilaminin (rabbit polyclonal, 1:100, Abcam),
antiehuman platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule (mouse monoclonal, 1:50, Hybridoma Bank),
ED1 (mouse monoclonal, 1:250, AbDSerotec) and
ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule-1 (Iba-1)
(rabbit polyclonal, 1:250, Wako). After washing with
PBS, the brain sections were incubated for 2 h with the
appropriate ﬂuorescence-conjugated secondary antibodies: goat anti-mouse IgGeconjugated Alexa 488 or
555, and goat anti-rabbit IgG-conjugated Alexa 488 or
555 (1:200, Molecular Probes). The sections were
counterstained with the nuclear marker 40 , 6diamidine-29-phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI).
To detect proliferating cells, we injected 50 bromo-20 -deoxyuridine (BrdU) (50 mg/kg, SigmaAldrich) intraperitoneally three times, with 12-h
intervals before euthanasia was performed. BrdUpositive cells were detected by means of immunohistochemistry through the use of an antibody against
BrdU (1:500, BD Biosciences) after denaturation of
DNA with the use of 1 mol/dm3 HCl for 30 min at
45 C. Fluorescence-labeled specimens were viewed
under a confocal laser-scanning microscope
(LSM510; Carl Zeiss Microimaging, Inc).
At 7 weeks after transplantation of human ADMSCs, 1 mL of ﬂuorogold (FG) (4% solution in
sterile saline; Molecular Probes) dissolved in PBS
was stereotactically injected into the motor cortex
and the thalamus (AP, þ1.5 mm; ML, þ2.0 mm;
DV, 2.0 mm and AP, 1.0 mm; ML, þ1.2 mm;
DV, 6.0 mm from the bregma) ipsilateral to the
transplant in two rats with MCAo induction. Stereotaxic injections were made with the use of a
Hamilton syringe for 5 min with the use of an

1094

S.-H. Oh et al.

Figure 1. Characteristics of human AD-MSCs. (A) FACS analysis showed that human AD-MSCs expressed high levels of MSC markers
(CD44, CD73, CD90 and CD105) and low levels of hematopoietic cell markers (CD34 and CD45) and HLA-DR. (B) On RT-PCR,
human AD-MSCs showed high expression of Nestin and BDNF. GAPDH was used as a loading control.

injection pump. Rats were killed 1 week after FG
injection and were analyzed for the localization of FG
with the use of a confocal microscope.
Statistical analysis
All values are presented as mean  standard error
of mean (SEM). The cell counts in the region of
interest in individual immunostaining studies are
presented as percentage of the total number of
DAPI-positive cells. The statistical signiﬁcance between the two groups for histology and infarct size
data was analyzed by use of the Student’s t-test
(normally distributed values) or Mann-Whitney U
test (non-normally distributed values). The mortality
rate between the two groups was analyzed by use of
the c2 test. Analysis of the functional data was performed by use of the mixed two-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) test. A value of P < 0.05 was
considered signiﬁcant.
Results
Characterization of human AD-MSCs
According to FACS analysis, human AD-MSCs
highly expressed the cell surface markers for typical
MSCs (CD44, CD73, CD90 and CD105) and
exhibited negligible expression of cell surface
markers for hematopoietic stem cells (CD34 and CD
45) (Figure 1A). Nearly 99% of AD-MSCs did not
express HLA-DR. We examined the expression
levels of several trophic factors and neuronal markers
in human AD-MSCs through the use of RT-PCR.
Human AD-MSCs expressed high levels of the
neuronal marker Nestin and the trophic factor
BDNF (Figure 1B).

Functional improvement by IA transplantation of human
AD-MSCs
We evaluated IA transplantation-related mortality at
24 h after transplantation and found that it was not
different between the two groups (AD-MSC group,
n ¼ 5 and sham group, n ¼ 7; P ¼ 0.45), indicating
that there was no fatal adverse effect of IA transplantation of AD-MSCs. The overall mortality,
evaluated during the 8-week study period after
transplantation, was not different between the two
groups (AD-MSC group, n ¼ 9; sham group, n ¼ 10;
P ¼ 0.54). All functional tests were performed in
both groups from the day of MCAo induction until 8
weeks after transplantation. There was no signiﬁcant
difference in the degree of neurological deﬁcits in
functional tests between the AD-MSC group and the
sham group on the day of MCAo induction. All
MCAo rats showed moderate to severe impairment
in the rotarod and mNSS tests. Within the 3-week
period after transplantation, the AD-MSC group
showed a marked improvement in functional deﬁcits
in the rotarod test. Afterward, the differences of
functional improvement in rotarod test scores
slightly decreased but were maintained at 8 weeks
after transplantation (P < 0.05, except for 5 and 8
weeks) (Figure 2A). Within the 2-week period after
transplantation, the AD-MSC group also showed a
marked improvement in functional deﬁcits in the
mNSS test. Afterward, the differences of functional
improvement in mNSS test between the AD-MSC
group and the sham group were maintained at 8
weeks (P < 0.05, Figure 2B). Analysis of the intergroup differences of rotarod and mNSS scores between AD-MSC and sham groups indicated that the
best improvement rate was achieved within 2 or 3
weeks after human AD-MSCs transplantation

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke

A

1095

B

C

Figure 2. Behavioral tests after IA transplantation of AD-MSCs. (A) Effects of IA transplantation of AD-MSCs on rotarod test. (B) Effects
of IA transplantation of AD-MSCs on the mNSS test. (C) Intergroup differences of rotarod and mNSS scores between AD-MSC and sham
groups. Functional improvements were mainly achieved within 2 or 3 weeks after IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs. Day 0 (0 d)
represents the day of MCAo induction in the rats. Data are presented as mean  SEM. Data were analyzed by use of the mixed ANOVA test
(*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).

(Figure 2C), suggesting that the effect of IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs was more pronounced during the early phase of cerebral ischemia,
within 3 weeks after transplantation, compared with
the later phases of cerebral ischemia.
In vivo tracking of IA-transplanted AD-MSCs in MCAo
rats
To trace the IA-transplanted cells in the brain, we
performed in vivo MRI at 3 days, 4 weeks and 8 weeks
after cell transplantation. We focused on the range of
cell movement within the range of 2.76 mm
and 4.36 mm from the bregma in the MRI. Hypointense signals, indicative of the presence of transplanted and migrated cells, were observed at the
peri-infarct area on T2*-weighted images in all
tested animals (n ¼ 4) at 3 days after transplantation
(Figure 3A). Migrating cells were mainly found at the
boundary zone of infarct lesion, from the anterior
1.68 mm to the posterior 0.48 mm from the bregma,
but the hypo-intense signals were minimally detectable
in the infarct core, corpus callosum and other cerebral
hemispheres by MRI. We observed that the hypointense signals decreased at 4 weeks after transplantation and disappeared at 8 weeks after

transplantation in all tested animals. Compared with
the AD-MSC group, there were no hypo-intense signals in the sham group. After completion of the in vivo
MRI study, the animals were transcardially perfused,
and histological evaluation was performed. We performed PB staining on brain sections to conﬁrm that
the hypo-intense lesion detected by MRI actually
represented the transplanted cells. PB staining showed
that Feridex-labeled cells were detected at the periinfarct area at 8 weeks after AD-MSCs transplantation, in which the hypo-intense signals were
found by T2* MRI (Figure 3B). However, the number of PB-positive cells was very low, and the majority
of transplanted cells were found at the peripheral
border of cerebral vessels (Supplementary Figure S4).
To investigate whether IA-transplanted ADMSCs induce pathological changes during the time
course of cerebral ischemia, immunohistochemistry
was performed at 1, 4 and 8 weeks after transplantation. We stained brain sections with anti-hNu
antibody to detect the number of surviving cells in
the host brain through the use of unbiased stereology. One week after transplantation, the hNupositive cells were estimated at 11.5%  3.8% of
the initial transplanted cell population. Cells were
mainly located in the peri-infarct area, and few cells

1096

S.-H. Oh et al.

Figure 3. Detection and characterization of IA-transplanted human AD-MSCs. (A) In vivo MRI at 3 days after IA transplantation of human
AD-MSCs showed that Feridex-labeled cells were widely distributed at the peripheral border of the cerebral infarction in T2-weighted (top)
and T2*-weighted (bottom) images (white arrowheads). The infarct area was visualized as a hyperintense lesion in a T2-weighted image
(top). (B) PB staining at 8 weeks after transplantation conﬁrmed the presence of transplanted Feridex-labeled cells (blue) in the hypo-intense
area on T2*-weighted image of MRI. The black-lined box shows a high magniﬁcation of the PB-stained area. Scale bar: 100 mm. (C) The
number of hNu-positive cells on confocal microscopy was counted with the use of unbiased stereology for the detection of engrafted cells at 1
week, 4 weeks and 8 weeks after human AD-MSC transplantation. Scale bar: 20 mm. *P < 0.05. (D) Confocal microscopy images show the
differentiation of IA-transplanted AD-MSCs in vivo at 8 weeks after transplantation. A small proportion of the transplanted cells were
identiﬁed to co-express markers of mature neurons (MAP2-positive), glial cells (GFAP-positive) and endothelial cells (PECAM-positive)
(white arrowheads). Scale bar: 20 mm.

were found at the adjacent striatum and corpus callosum. The double staining of hNu and Iba-1
showed that approximately 30% of hNu-positive
cells were co-stained with Iba-1, indicating that a
high proportion of transplanted cells was phagocytized by activated microglia (Supplementary
Figure S5). The number of hNu-positive cells gradually decreased during the time course after transplantation. Approximately 3.7%  1.3% and 2.0% 
0.6% of the initial transplanted cell population was
detected at 4 weeks and 8 weeks after transplantation, respectively (Figure 3C). At 8 weeks after

transplantation, a small proportion of hNu-positive
cells were co-localized with hMAP2-, hGFAP- and
hPECAM-positive cells by double immunostaining
(Figure 3D). However, their total numbers were very
low, because less than 10% of the 2% surviving cells
(ie, w0.2% of the initial transplanted cell population) were differentiated at 8 weeks after transplantation. Finally, FG-retrograde labeling showed
that there were no hNu or FG double-positive cells at
8 weeks after transplantation, indicating that the cells
that survived failed to network with the host neurons
(data not shown).

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke

1097

Figure 4. Immunohistochemical analysis on the inﬂammation and scar formation after IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs. The ADMSC group showed lower numbers of Iba-1epositive cells and ED1-positive cells in the ipsilateral peri-infarct area than the sham group at 1
and 4 weeks after transplantation. The AD-MSC group showed lower numbers of GFAP-positive cells in the peri-infarct area than did the
sham group at 1 week and 8 weeks after transplantation. Data are presented as mean  SEM. Data were analyzed by use of the MannWhitney U test (*P < 0.05). Scale bar: 20 mm.

Reduction of inﬂammation and scar formation in the
ischemic region
We also investigated whether IA-transplanted human AD-MSCs reduced inﬂammation through the
use of inﬂammation markers Iba-1 and ED1 at 1, 4
and 8 weeks after cell transplantation. In mixed
ANOVA tests, there was strong interaction between
treatment (AD-MSC versus sham) and time (1
week, 4 weeks and 8 weeks) on Iba-1 histology
(treatment  time, F ¼ 4.24, P ¼ 0.026), indicating
that AD-MSC treatment differentially affected the
histological changes of Iba-1 at different time of
cerebral ischemia. There were fewer Iba-1epositive
cells in the peri-infarct area in the AD-MSC group
than in the sham group at 1 week (61.3%  4.3%
versus 92.6%  3.0%, P < 0.01) and 4 weeks

(63.7%  2.7% versus 81.7%  2.9 %, P ¼ 0.01)
after transplantation (Figure 4). The histological
pattern of ED1 was similar to that of Iba-1 after ADMSC treatment, showing a strong interaction between treatment and time on ED1 histology
(treatment  time, F ¼ 4.32, P ¼ 0.025). There
were fewer ED1-positive cells in the peri-infarct
area in the AD-MSC group than in the sham
group at 1 week (37.0%  3.8% versus 60.6% 
7.1%, P ¼ 0.01) and 4 weeks (25.7%  3.8% versus
56.5%  3.8%, P < 0.01) (Figure 4). Differences in
the number of Iba-1e and ED1epositive cells between the two groups were not found at 8 weeks
after transplantation.
We next investigated whether IA-transplanted
AD-MSCs reduced scar formation through the

1098

S.-H. Oh et al.

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke
use of anti-GFAP antibody at three different time
points after transplantation (Figure 4). In mixed
ANOVA tests, there was no interaction between
treatment and time (treatment  time, F ¼ 0.36,
P ¼ 0.70) with signiﬁcant effect of AD-MSC
treatment (treatment, F ¼ 14.97, P < 0.01) and
different histological time on GFAP histology
(time, F ¼ 42.96, P < 0.001). This ﬁnding indicates that AD-MSC treatment affected the histological changes of glial scar formation at similar
degree, at different time of cerebral ischemia. At 1
week after transplantation, the AD-MSC group
showed reduced astroglial activation in the striatum and in the peri-infarct area, compared with the
sham group (28.3%  2.3% versus 39.2%  3.1%,
P ¼ 0.01). At 4 weeks after AD-MSCs transplantation, there was a slight reduction of GFAPpositive cells in the AD-MSC group compared
with the sham group, but it was not signiﬁcant
(54.1%  3.1% versus 66.3%  5.6%, P ¼ 0.06).
At 8 weeks after transplantation, the AD-MSC
group clearly showed a reduction in GFAPpositive cells in the peri-infarct area, compared
with the sham group (59.8%  4.1% versus 77.0%
 2.9%, P < 0.01).

Increased proliferation and migration of endogenous
neural stem cells after IA transplantation of human ADMSCs
We next investigated whether IA-transplanted ADMSCs enhanced neurogenesis at subventricular
zone (SVZ) with the use of antibodies to detect
BrdU, a proliferating cell marker, and DCX, a
migrating neuroblast marker, at 1, 4 and 8 weeks
after transplantation. In mixed ANOVA tests, the
interaction between treatment and time was suspected on BrdU histology (treatment  time, F ¼
1.76, P ¼ 0.19), indicating that AD-MSC treatment
may differentially affect the histological changes of
endogenous neurogenesis at different time of cerebral ischemia. There were more BrdU-positive cells
in the SVZ of the infarct side in the AD-MSC group
than in the sham group at 1 week after transplantation (49.9%  5.3% versus 29.9%  1.9%,
P < 0.01) (Figure 5A,B). The differences in the
number of BrdU-positive cells between the two
groups were not found at 4 and 8 weeks after
transplantation. Among the BrdU-positive cells,

1099

there were more DCX-positive cells in the ADMSC group compared with the sham group
(43.1%  5.9% versus 24.4%  1.9%, P < 0.01)
(Figure 5A). The differences in the number of BrdU
and DCX double-positive cells between the two
groups were not found at 4 and 8 weeks after
transplantation.
Reduction of the ﬁnal infarct size and corpus callosum
atrophy after IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs
We investigated whether IA-transplanted AD-MSCs
reduced the ﬁnal infarct size at 8 weeks after transplantation. The ﬁnal infarct size was signiﬁcantly
reduced in the AD-MSC group compared with the
sham group (25.2%  2.9% versus 35.6%  3.3%,
P ¼ 0.02) (Figure 6A). The AD-MSC group also
showed a higher corpus callosum area than did the
sham group (0.33  0.02 mm2 versus 0.27 
0.01 mm2, P ¼ 0.04). There were no differences in
the ventricular size or the ventricular dilatation ratio
between the two groups.

Discussion
In the present study, we provide evidence that IAtransplanted human AD-MSCs are able to effectively migrate toward the lesion site and improve
neuronal function in a rat model of cerebral
ischemia. Our serial histological analysis showed that
IA-transplanted AD-MSCs ameliorated early
inﬂammation, enhanced SVZ neurogenesis and
reduced subsequent scar formation. By contrast, we
observed no further functional improvement at the
chronic stage of cerebral ischemia, when relatively
few IA-transplanted cells remained. These data
indicate that the cell replacement effects of IAtransplanted cells were very limited, even though
the initial engraftment was relatively efﬁcient with the
use of the IA approach.
We found that IA transplantation of human ADMSCs into the carotid artery with the use of a microneedle is a feasible and safe approach in a rodent
model of stroke. Despite the advantage of IA transplantation for increased cell homing and engraftment
in the damaged brain tissue, several studies raised
concerns related to the increased mortality caused by
blood ﬂow blockade and embolism of this method
[18]. Chua et al. [22] reported increased risk for

Figure 5. Immunohistochemical analysis on the SVZ neurogenesis after IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs. (A) BrdU-positive cells at
ipsilateral SVZ of cerebral ischemia were more found and migrated toward infarct region in AD-MSC group than in the sham group at 7 days
after MCAo induction. Scale bar: 200 mm. (B) The AD-MSC group showed increased BrdU-positive and BrdU/DCX double-positive cells
in the SVZ of the infarct side compared with the sham group at 1 week after transplantation. Data are presented as mean  SEM. Data were
analyzed by use of the Mann-Whitney U test (*P < 0.05). Scale bar: 20 mm. LV, lateral ventricle.

1100

S.-H. Oh et al.

cerebral blood ﬂow blockade, in which cerebral
blood ﬂow was decreased by 78% when stem cells
were delivered through the use of the catheter
method. By contrast, when stem cells were delivered
through IA with the use of a micro-needle, there was
no increased risk for cerebral blood ﬂow blockade,
which subsequently attenuated post-ischemic
inﬂammation and neuronal cell deaths. We did not
measure cerebral blood ﬂow during micro-needle
injection in this study. However, we observed the
persistent anterograde ﬂow into distal arteries during
microscope-guided micro-needle injection of human
AD-MSCs. In addition, no difference in
transplantation-related mortality was found between
transplantation and sham groups, consistent with a
previous result [22]. We found that the ﬁnal infarct
size was signiﬁcantly smaller in the AD-MSC group
than in the sham group, indicating no aggravation of
cerebral infarct during procedure. Therefore, we
conclude that the micro-needle approach is a feasible
and safe method for IA delivery of stem cells in cerebral ischemia. The clinical application of the IA
approach in human stroke is more realistic than in
the animal stroke model, because percutaneous
transfemoral catheterization of selected cranial arteries with the use of a micro-catheter is already
widely used in clinical practice. We observed that IAtransplanted AD-MSCs were widely distributed
around the infarct lesions. This ﬁnding is supported
by previous studies demonstrating that IA transplantation induces a more widespread distribution of
cells at the ischemic brain lesion with a lower dose of
cells than IV transplantation (4% engraftment of IV
transplanted cells, compared with 11.5% engraftment of IA transplanted cells when examined at 1
week after cell transplantation) [17,18,25].
Compared with IV administration [4,5], IA administration enables the engrafted cells to migrate to the
neighboring areas of damaged tissue and enhance
functional recovery more efﬁciently by trophic factor
secretion and/or cell replacement [25].
The functional recovery in the AD-MSC group
was more pronounced during the early phase of
ischemia, within 2 or 3 weeks after transplantation.
This functional improvements that occur during the
early stages after transplantation would be mediated
by secreted factors from the transplanted cells, such
as VEGF, HGF and BDNF [13e15], which can
modulate signaling pathways that play a role in repair
processes in the host brain [14,27e29]. Histological
examination showed that IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs ameliorated inﬂammation in the
peri-infarct area at 1 and 4 weeks after transplantation. It is well known that the hazardous effects
of neuroinﬂammation mainly occur during the early
phase, from several hours to weeks, of cerebral

ischemia [30,31]. Human MSCs display a strong
immunomodulating effect and thereby enhance
functional recovery in brain injury [4,5,32]. We
observed that IA transplantation of human ADMSCs reduced glial scar formation at the ischemic
boundary zone, which occurs during early tissue
injury and matrix remodeling [33,34]. This antiscarring effect of AD-MSCs is attributable to
reduced astroglial activation in the host brain during
the early phase of cerebral ischemia [35].Our study
showed increased BrdU and DCX double-positive
cells in the SVZ at 1 week after transplantation of
AD-MSCs. After ischemic injury, the proliferation of
neural progenitors in the SVZ is accelerated during
the ﬁrst 2 weeks [36,37]. These newly generated
neuroblasts have the capacity to migrate to the
damaged area in the striatum and to differentiate into
functional neurons [36,38]. The effect of AD-MSCs
on enhanced SVZ neurogenesis is supported by a
study showing that mouse SVZ-derived neural stem
cells undergo neural differentiation when co-cultured
with human AD-MSCs [39].We observed that the
AD-MSCs used in this study can express Nestin and
BDNF. It was also shown previously that human ADMSCs express high levels of neurotrophic factors,
such as BDNF, glial-derived neurotrophic factors
and nerve growth factors [40,41]. Although the evidence for in vivo neuronal differentiation of MSCs
has not been established, it is likely that the neurotrophic factors secreted from MSCs can promote
endogenous neurogenesis in ischemic brains.
Another question that we wanted to address in
this study is whether IA-transplanted cells exert their
effects by a cell replacement mechanism in the
damaged tissue after stroke. In this study, despite
efﬁcient cell delivery into the damaged host brain by
IA transplantation, very few hNu-positive cells survived and differentiated into neurons, glial cells and
endothelial cells at 8 weeks after transplantation.
Furthermore, there was no evidence of the formation
of functional networks between the transplanted cells
and the host neurons by FG retrograde labeling.
Consistent with these histological ﬁndings, the
functional data showed that most of the functional
recovery was achieved during the early phase of
ischemia after transplantation, a time when the cell
replacement effect of transplanted cells would not be
expected. Therefore, we conclude that the successful
engraftment of AD-MSCs into target tissue does not
guarantee their long-term survival or ability to form
functional networks in the host brain during cerebral
ischemia. The low survival rate of human MSCs after
cerebral ischemia has been attributed to the low
differentiation capacity of transplanted cells and/or to
the poor micro-environment of the host brain during
cerebral ischemia [17,18]. We cannot exclude the

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke

1101

Figure 6. Histological analysis on the infarct size and the corpus callosum area after IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs. (A) Cresyl
violet staining showed that the ﬁnal infarct size was signiﬁcantly reduced in the AD-MSC group compared with the sham group at 8 weeks
after transplantation. Scale bar: 3 mm. (B) Cresyl violet staining showed that the corpus callosum area was higher in the AD-MSC group
compared with the sham group. Scale bar: 200 mm. Data are presented as mean  SEM. Data were analyzed by use of the Mann-Whitney U
test (*P < 0.05).

possibility that the relatively low number of transplanted cells (5  105) used in our study, compared
with the numbers used in previous studies (from 1 
106 to 1  107 cells) [25,42], leads to the lower
survival rate of the transplanted cells and the lack of
long-term functional improvement. However, this
possibility is less likely, because the initial distribution of grafted cells was sufﬁcient to produce functional improvement. Because our study involves
xenotransplantation of human stem cells into a rodent model, there is a possibility that immune
rejection can be attributable to the poor survival of
transplanted cells. MSCs have generally immunosuppressive properties with no HLA-DR expression.
However, the immunological impunity of MSCs is
not fully established in vivo. It was shown that MSCs
are rejected after xenotransplantation into the
damaged myocardium [43]. Also, transplantation of
MSCs into a normal rodent brain induced an inﬂammatory response leading to complete rejection
[44]. In the present study, we observed that
approximately 30% of transplanted cells were
phagocytized by inﬂammatory cells within 1 week of
transplantation, even when cyclosporine A was
treated. Further studies are required to investigate
the long-term survival of autologous MSCs that are

obtained from the adipose tissue of patients with
acute stroke.

Conclusions
We demonstrated that IA transplantation of human
AD-MSCs is a safe and effective therapeutic modality for treatment in an animal stroke model. The
main effects of human AD-MSC transplantation
were the early amelioration of neuroinﬂammation,
promotion of SVZ neurogenesis, and reduction of
astrogliosis in the host brain. These early histological
improvements were mediated by a paracrine, or
bystander, mechanism of the engrafted cells. The cell
replacement effects of human AD-MSCs probably
were very limited. We conclude that IA transplantation of human AD-MSCs exerts their therapeutic effects on cerebral ischemia by a paracrine
mechanism, with little to no contribution of a cell
replacement mechanism.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the MRI facility located in the Division of Magnetic Resonance at the Korea Basic

1102

S.-H. Oh et al.

Science Institute (Ochang, Korea). This study was
supported by grants from the Korea Healthcare
Technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health, Welfare & Family Affairs, Republic of Korea (HI11C0981
and HI12C1817) and the Next-Generation BioGreen
21 Program (No. PJ010002012014), the Rural
Development Administration, Republic of Korea.
Disclosure of interests: The authors have no
commercial, proprietary, or ﬁnancial interest in the
products or companies described in this article.

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

References
[1] Katzan IL, Hammer MD, Hixson ED, Furlan AJ, AbouChebl A, Nadzam DM. Utilization of intravenous tissue
plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. Arch Neurol
2004;61:346e50.
[2] Savitz SI, Chopp M, Deans R, Carmichael ST, Phinney D,
Wechsler L. Stem Cell. Therapy as an Emerging Paradigm
for Stroke (STEPS) II. Stroke 2011;42:825e9.
[3] Lindvall O, Kokaia Z. Stem cell research in stroke: how far
from the clinic? Stroke 2011;42:2369e75.
[4] Bacigaluppi M, Pluchino S, Peruzzotti-Jametti L, Kilic E,
Kilic U, Salani G, et al. Delayed post-ischaemic neuroprotection following systemic neural stem cell transplantation
involves multiple mechanisms. Brain 2009;132:2239e51.
[5] Lee ST, Chu K, Jung KH, Kim SJ, Kim DH, Kang KM,
et al. Anti-inﬂammatory mechanism of intravascular neural
stem cell transplantation in hemorrhagic stroke. Brain 2008;
131:616e29.
[6] Bang OY, Lee JS, Lee PH, Lee G. Autologous mesenchymal
stem cell transplantation in stroke patients. Ann Neurol
2005;57:874e82.
[7] Lee JS, Hong JM, Moon GJ, Lee PH, Ahn YH, Bang OY.
A long-term follow-up study of intravenous autologous
mesenchymal stem cell transplantation in patients with
ischemic stroke. Stem Cells 2010;28:1099e106.
[8] Ikegame Y, Yamashita K, Hayashi S, Mizuno H, Tawada M,
You F, et al. Comparison of mesenchymal stem cells from
adipose tissue and bone marrow for ischemic stroke therapy.
Cytotherapy 2011;13:675e85.
[9] Kern S, Eichler H, Stoeve J, Kluter H, Bieback K.
Comparative analysis of mesenchymal stem cells from bone
marrow, umbilical cord blood, or adipose tissue. Stem Cells
2006;24:1294e301.
[10] Anghileri E, Marconi S, Pignatelli A, Cifelli P, Galie M,
Sbarbati A, et al. Neuronal differentiation potential of human
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells. Stem Cells Dev
2008;17:909e16.
[11] Kang SK, Lee DH, Bae YC, Kim HK, Baik SY, Jung JS.
Improvement of neurological deﬁcits by intracerebral transplantation of human adipose tissue-derived stromal cells after
cerebral ischemia in rats. Exp Neurol 2003;183:355e66.
[12] Kang SK, Putnam LA, Ylostalo J, Popescu IR, Dufour J,
Belousov A, et al. Neurogenesis of Rhesus adipose stromal
cells. J Cell Sci 2004;117:4289e99.
[13] Gimble J, Guilak F. Adipose-derived adult stem cells: isolation, characterization, and differentiation potential. Cytotherapy 2003;5:362e9.
[14] Lee ST, Chu K, Jung KH, Im WS, Park JE, Lim HC, et al.
Slowed progression in models of Huntington disease by

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

adipose stem cell transplantation. Ann Neurol 2003;66:
671e81.
Salgado AJ, Reis RL, Sousa NJ, Gimble JM. Adipose tissue
derived stem cells secretome: soluble factors and their roles
in regenerative medicine. Cur Stem Cell Res Ther 2010;5:
103e10.
Li L, Jiang Q, Ding G, Zhang L, Zhang ZG, Li Q, et al.
Effects of administration route on migration and distribution
of neural progenitor cells transplanted into rats with focal
cerebral ischemia, an MRI study. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2010;30:653e62.
Pendharkar AV, Chua JY, Andres RH, Wang N, Gaeta X,
Wang H, et al. Biodistribution of neural stem cells after
intravascular therapy for hypoxic-ischemia. Stroke 2010;41:
2064e70.
Walczak P, Zhang J, Gilad AA, Kedziorek DA, RuizCabello J, Young RG, et al. Dual-modality monitoring of
targeted intraarterial delivery of mesenchymal stem cells after
transient ischemia. Stroke 2008;39:1569e74.
Das AK, Bin Abdullah BJ, Dhillon SS, Vijanari A,
Anoop CH, Gupta PK. Intra-arterial allogeneic mesenchymal stem cells for critical limb ischemia are safe and
efﬁcacious: report of a phase I study. World J Surg 2013;37:
915e22.
Lee PH, Lee JE, Kim HS, Song SK, Lee HS, Nam HS, et al.
A randomized trial of mesenchymal stem cells in multiple
system atrophy. Ann Neurol 2012;72:32e40.
Makkar RR, Price MJ, Lill M, Frantzen M, Takizawa K,
Kleisli T, et al. Intramyocardial injection of allogenic bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells without immunosuppression preserves cardiac function in a porcine model of
myocardial infarction. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther 2005;
10:225e33.
Chua JY, Pendharkar AV, Wang N, Choi R, Andres RH,
Gaeta X, et al. Intra-arterial injection of neural stem cells
using a microneedle technique does not cause microembolic
strokes. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2011;31:1263e71.
Kim WS, Park BS, Sung JH, Yang JM, Park SB, Kwak SJ,
et al. Wound healing effect of adipose-derived stem cells: a
critical role of secretory factors on human dermal ﬁbroblasts.
J Dermatol Sci 2007;48:15e24.
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in
rats. Stroke 1989;20:84e91.
Ishizaka S, Horie N, Satoh K, Fukuda Y, Nishida N,
Nagata I. Intra-arterial cell transplantation provides timingdependent cell distribution and functional recovery after
stroke. Stroke 2013;44:720e6.
Chang DJ, Lee N, Choi C, Jeon I, Oh SH, Shin DA, et al.
Therapeutic effect of BDNF-overexpressing human neural
stem cells (HB1.F3.BDNF) in a rodent model of middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Cell Transplant 2013;22:1441e52.
Cho YJ, Song HS, Bhang S, Lee S, Kang BG, Lee JC, et al.
Therapeutic effects of human adipose stem cell-conditioned
medium on stroke. J Neurosci Res 2012;90:1794e802.
Jeon D, Chu K, Lee ST, Jung KH, Ban JJ, Park DK, et al.
Neuroprotective effect of a cell-free extract derived from
human adipose stem cells in experimental stroke models.
Neurobiol Dis 2013;54:414e20.
van Poll D, Parekkadan B, Cho CH, Berthiaume F,
Nahmias Y, Tilles AW, et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-derived
molecules directly modulate hepatocellular death and
regeneration in vitro and in vivo. Hepatology 2008;47:
1634e43.
Denes A, Thornton P, Rothwell NJ, Allan SM. Inﬂammation
and brain injury: acute cerebral ischaemia, peripheral and
central inﬂammation. Brain Behav Immun 2010;24:708e23.

Intra-arterial AD-MSC therapy in experimental stroke
[31] Iadecola C, Anrather J. The immunology of stroke: from
mechanisms to translation. Nat Med 2011;17:796e808.
[32] Kim JM, Lee ST, Chu K, Jung KH, Song EC, Kim SJ, et al.
Systemic transplantation of human adipose stem cells
attenuated cerebral inﬂammation and degeneration in a
hemorrhagic stroke model. Brain Res 2007;1183:43e50.
[33] Nedergaard M, Dirnagl U. Role of glial cells in cerebral
ischemia. Glia 2005;50:281e6.
[34] Yiu G, He Z. Glial inhibition of CNS axon regeneration. Nat
Rev Neurosci 2006;7:617e27.
[35] Leu S, Lin YC, Yuen CM, Yen CH, Kao YH, Sun CK, et al.
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells markedly attenuate
brain infarct size and improve neurological function in rats.
J Transl Med 2010;8:63.
[36] Arvidsson A, Collin T, Kirik D, Kokaia Z, Lindvall O.
Neuronal replacement from endogenous precursors in the
adult brain after stroke. Nat Med 2002;8:963e70.
[37] Zhang R, Zhang L, Zhang Z, Wang Y, Lu M, Lapointe M,
et al. A nitric oxide donor induces neurogenesis and reduces
functional deﬁcits after stroke in rats. Ann Neurol 2001;50:
602e11.
[38] Kokaia Z, Lindvall O. Neurogenesis after ischaemic brain
insults. Cur Opin Neurobiol 2003;13:127e32.
[39] Kang SK, Jun ES, Bae YC, Jung JS. Interactions between
human adipose stromal cells and mouse neural stem cells
in vitro. Brain Res 2003;145:141e9.
[40] McCoy MK, Martinez TN, Ruhn KA, Wrage PC,
Keefer EW, Botterman BR, et al. Autologous transplants of

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

1103

adipose-derived adult stromal (ADAS) cells afford dopaminergic neuroprotection in a model of Parkinson’s disease.
Exp Neurol 2008;210:14e29.
Jang S, Cho HH, Cho YB, Park JS, Jeong HS. Functional
neural differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived stem
cells using bFGF and forskolin. BMC Cell Biol 2010;11:25.
Kamiya N, Ueda M, Igarashi H, Nishiyama Y, Suda S,
Inaba T, et al. Intra-arterial transplantation of bone marrow
mononuclear cells immediately after reperfusion decreases
brain injury after focal ischemia in rats. Life Sci 2008;83:
433e7.
Grinnemo KH, Månsson A, Dellgren G, Klingberg D,
Wardell E, Drvota V, et al. Xenoreactivity and engraftment
of human mesenchymal stem cells transplanted into infarcted
rat myocardium. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2004;127:
1293e300.
Coyne TM, Marcus AJ, Woodbury D, Black IB. Marrow
stromal cells transplanted to the adult brain are rejected by
an inﬂammatory response and transfer donor labels to host
neurons and glia. Stem Cells 2006;24:2483e92.

Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can
be found at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.04.
007.

