[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.01.017
[Link]
mailto:C.Nijboer@umcutrecht.nl
[Link]
mailto:H.J.C.Bonestroo@umcutrecht.nl
[Link]
mailto:J.Zijlstra@umcutrecht.nl
[Link]
mailto:AKavelaars@mdanderson.org
[Link]
mailto:CJHeijnen@mdanderson.org
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.01.017
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/09699961
Mitochondrial JNK phosphorylation as a novel therapeutic target to inhibit
neuroinflammation and apoptosis after neonatal ischemic brain damage
Cora H. Nijboer a, Hilde J.C. Bonestroo a, Jitske Zijlstra a, Annemieke Kavelaars a,b,1, Cobi J. Heijnen a,b,⁎,1
a Laboratory of Neuroimmunology and Developmental Origins of Disease (NIDOD), University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands
b Department of Symptom Research, Division of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA
a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e  i n f o 
Article history:
Received 27 September 2012
Revised 12 January 2013
Accepted 22 January 2013
Available online 30 January 2013
Keywords:
Cerebral ischemia
Neuroprotection
JNK MAP kinase
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Apoptosis
Neuroinflammation
AP-1
c-Jun
Pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines
Neonatal encephalopathy is associated with high mortality and life-long developmental consequences. Therapeutic
options are very limited. We assessed the effects of D-JNKi, a small peptide c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) MAP kinase inhibitor, on neuroinflammation, mitochondrial integrity and neuronal damage in a neonatal
rat model of ischemic brain damage.
Hypoxic–ischemic (HI) brain injury was induced in postnatal-day 7 rats by unilateral carotid artery occlusion
and hypoxia, and was followed by intraperitoneal D-JNKi treatment.
We demonstrate here for the first time that a single intraperitoneal injection with D-JNKi directly after HI
strongly reduces neonatal brain damage by >85% with a therapeutic window of at least 6 h. D-JNKi treatment
also restored cognitive and motor function as analyzed at 9 weeks post-insult.
Neuroprotective D-JNKi treatment inhibited phosphorylation of nuclear c-Jun (P-c-Jun), and consequently
reduced activity of the AP-1 transcription factor and production of cerebral cytokines/chemokines as determined
at 3 and 24 h post-HI. Inhibition of P-c-Jun by D-JNKi is thought to be mediated via inhibition of the
upstream phosphorylation of cytosolic and nuclear JNK and/or by preventing the direct interaction of phosphorylated
(P-)JNK with c-Jun. Surprisingly, however, HI did not induce a detectable increase in P-JNK in cytosol
or nucleus. Notably, we show here for the first time that HI induces P-JNK only in the mitochondrial
fraction, which was completely prevented by D-JNKi treatment. The hypothesis that mitochondrial JNK activation
is key to HI brain injury was supported by data showing that treatment of rat pups with Sab
KIM1
peptide
, a specific mitochondrial JNK inhibitor, is also neuroprotective. Inhibition of HI-induced mitochondrial
JNK activation was associated with preservation of mitochondrial integrity as evidenced by prevention of
ATP loss and inhibition of lipid peroxidation. The HI-induced increase in apoptotic markers (cytochrome crelease
and caspase 3 activation) as analyzed at 24 h post-HI were also strongly reduced by D-JNKi and the mitochondrial
anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL were upregulated. Neuroprotection was lost after
repeated 0+3 h D-JNKi treatment which was associated with complete inhibition of the second peak of
AP-1 activity and disability to upregulate mitochondrial Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL.
We show here for thefirst time that D-JNKi treatment efficiently protects the neonatal brain against ischemic
brain damage and subsequent cognitive and motor impairment. We propose that inhibition of phosphorylation
of mitochondrial JNK is a pivotal step in preventing early loss of mitochondrial integrity leading to reduced
neuroinflammation and inhibition of apoptotic neuronal loss. Moreover we show the crucial role of
upregulation of mitochondrial anti-apoptotic proteins to maintain neuroprotection.
© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Introduction
The consequences of neonatal encephalopathy include high mortality
and, in the surviving infants, life-long consequences like cerebral
palsy and cognitive deficits (Ferriero, 2004; Perlman and Shah, 2011).
At present, hypothermia is the only clinical intervention available and
additional neuroprotective strategies to combat perinatal brain injury
are urgently needed (Azzopardi et al., 2009; Johnston et al., 2011).
Key players in the pathophysiology of neonatal cerebral injury are
excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, and inflammation leading to apoptotic
and necrotic neuronal death (Grow and Barks, 2002). Upon cellular
Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Symptom Research, Division of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Fax: +1 713 745 3475.
E-mail addresses: C.Nijboer@umcutrecht.nl(C.H. Nijboer),
H.J.C.Bonestroo@umcutrecht.nl(H.J.C. Bonestroo),J.Zijlstra@umcutrecht.nl(J. Zijlstra),
AKavelaars@mdanderson.org(A. Kavelaars),CJHeijnen@mdanderson.org(C.J. Heijnen).
Available online on ScienceDirect (www.sciencedirect.com).
1 These authors contributed equally.
0969-9961/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.01.017
Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Neurobiology of Disease
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ynbdi
(8.0.0.2542.1231384512 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
[Link]
http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/
stress, mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinases, including the c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK), are activated. Activated JNK regulates several
cellular processes like apoptosis, DNA repair and inflammation via
phosphorylation of c-Jun, the dominant component of the AP-1 transcription
factor (Bogoyevitch and Kobe, 2006; Karin and Gallagher,
2005). JNK also phosphorylates non-nuclear proteins, including members
of the Bcl-2 family that reside at the mitochondria and regulate apoptosis
(Dhanasekaran and Reddy, 2008).
JNK activation occurs in a complex consisting of the scaffold protein
JIP1 (JNK-interacting protein 1) which binds JNK and upstream kinases
such as MKK4/7 and MEK-1 (Barr et al., 2002; Bogoyevitch and Arthur,
2008; Bonny et al., 2001). A conserved kinase-interaction motif (KIM)
has been identified in JIP1 and other proteins that interact with JNK.
The JNK-inhibiting peptides L-JNKi and its more stable retro-inverso
peptide D-JNKi have been developed based on the structure of the
KIM of JIP1 (Barr et al., 2002; Bogoyevitch and Arthur, 2008; Bonny et
al., 2001). L-JNKi and D-JNKi are thought to bind JNK thereby competitively
inhibiting JNK interaction with JIP1 as well as with the KIM of upstream
kinases and JNK-substrates, including c-Jun (Barr et al., 2002;
Bogoyevitch and Arthur, 2008; Bonny et al., 2001; Repici et al., 2009).
D-JNKi has been shown to be a powerful neuroprotectant in in
vitromodels of excitotoxicity andin vivomodels of adult cerebral ischemia
(Borsello et al., 2003; Hirt et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2010;
Michel-Monigadon et al., 2010; Wiegler et al., 2008). Previously we
showed a modest neuroprotective effect of repeated L-JNKi administration
(10 mg/kg i.p., 0+3 h post-insult) after neonatal HI in newborn
rats. However,Ginet et al. (2009)showed that repeated D-JNKi
treatment (0.3 mg/kg i.p. at 30 min prior to HI and 3, 5, 8, 12 and
20 h post-HI) failed to reduce HI brain injury in neonatal rats.
The aim of the current study was to determine whether D-JNKi reduces
brain damage and prevents cognitive and motor impairment in
a model of neonatal hypoxic–ischemic brain damage when given as a
single injection at a dose of 10 mg/kg. We also studied the underlying
mechanism of treatment with the D-JNKi peptide on the JNK/AP-1
pathway and on neuroinflammation, mitochondrial integrity and apoptotic
cell death after neonatal HI.
Materials and methods
Animals
Experiments were approved by the UMC Utrecht-animal ethical
committee. Seven-day-old (P7) Wistar rats were anesthetized with
isoflurane (5% induction, 1.5% maintenance in O
2
:N
2
O (1:1)) for 
b5 min during which the right common carotid artery was exposed
and occluded by thermocauterization. Pups recovered for at least 1 h
before undergoing hypoxia for 120 min at 8% O
2
in N
2.
. Sham-controls
underwent anesthesia and incision only. All analyses were performed
in blinded set-up. Pups of both genders were used and we did not observe
any gender differences in any of the measured parameters.
D-JNKi (dqsrpvqpflnlttprkpr-pp-rrrqrrkkrg; all D-amino acids
retro-inverso form; underlined amino acids represent HIV-TAT shuttle
domain) was provided by Xigen SA (Epalinges, Switzerland). Sab
KIM1
peptide (gfeslsvpspldlsgprvva-pp-rrrqrrkkrg; all D-amino acids
retro-inverso form) and scrambled peptide (lpsvfgdvgapsrlpevsls-pprrrqrrkkrg
; all D-amino acids retro-inverso form) were synthesized at
W.M. Keck facility (Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA). Peptides
were dissolved in PBS (vehicle) and administered i.p. at 10 mg/kg or
20 mg/kg.
Histology
Rats were sacrificed by pentobarbital overdose and perfused with
4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Brains were post-fixed and either embedded
in paraffin, or cryoprotected in 30% sucrose in PBS and
embedded in OCT freezing medium (Tissue-Teck, Sakura Finetek
Europe, Zoeterwoude, The Netherlands).
Coronal paraffin sections (8 μm; −3.20 mm from bregma in
adult brain) were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (HE) or with
mouse-anti-MAP2 (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) followed
by biotin-labeled horse-anti-mouse antibody (Vector-Labs, Burlingame
, CA) and revealed using Vectastain ABC kit (Vector-Labs) and
diaminobenzamidine. MAP2 staining was used as an early marker
of neuronal damage at 48 h post-HI and HE staining was used to
study long-term infarct size at 9 weeks post-HI. Full section images
were captured with a Nikon D1 digital camera (Nikon, Tokyo,
Japan). We analyzed HE- or MAP2-stained sections as described previously
(Nijboer et al., 2010, 2011). In short, MAP2-positive area of
ipsi- and contralateral hemispheres was outlined manually with
image processing tools in Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems Inc,
San Jose, CA) and lesion size was calculated by the ratio of ipsilateral
to contralateral areas. Areas of contralateral and ipsilateral hemispheres
were measured on HE-stained sections at 9 weeks post-HI
using Adobe Photoshop and ipsilateral volume loss was calculated
as 1−{ipsi-/contralateral HE-positive area}.
For immunofluorescent double-stainings, coronal frozen sections
(8 μm;−3.20 mm from bregma in adult brain) were incubated with
rabbit-anti-phospho-c-Jun (Ser63II) (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA) and
double-stained with mouse-anti-neuronal nuclei (NeuN) (Millipore,
Darmstadt, Germany), mouse-anti-GFAP (Acris, Herford, Germany) or
rat-anti-CD11b (BD Biosciences Pharmingen, San Jose, CA) followed
by AlexaFluor 488- and 594-conjugated secondary antibodies (both
Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR). Sections were counterstained with
DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) and embedded with Fluorsave (Calbiochem,
Darmstadt, Germany). Fluorescent images were obtained using a Zeiss
Apotome microscope and were processed using ImageJ software
(Rasband WS, ImageJ, U.S. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
USA;http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/,1997–2006).
Cognitive and sensorimotor function
At 7 weeks post-HI,cognitive function wastested in thenovel object
recognition task (NORT) as described (Bevins and Besheer, 2006;
Nijboer et al., 2011). In short, rats were exposed to two identical objects
for 10 min. One hour later, rats were re-exposed to one familiar and a
novel object. Preference for the novel object was calculated as (time
with novel object)/(total time with both objects)×100%.
At 8 weeks post-HI, sensorimotor function was analyzed by determining
paw preference in the cylinder rearing test (CRT) for 3 min.
The preference to use the non-impaired forepaw was calculated as:
(right–left)/(right+left+both)×100% (Nijboer et al., 2010, 2011;
Schallert et al., 2000).
Western blotting
Pups were decapitated at 3 or 24 h post-HI, cerebellum was removed
and left and right hemispheres were frozen in liquid nitrogen.
Hemispheres were pulverized using a liquid nitrogen-cooled mortar
and pestle, and stored at−80 °C. Cytosolic, mitochondrial and nuclear
protein fractions were prepared from pulverized whole contra- and ipsilateral
hemispheres asextensively described previously (Nijboer et al.,
2007). Quality of subcellular fractionation was confirmed by exclusive
presence of COX-IV in mitochondrial, predominant expression of
β-actin in cytoplasmic and histone H1 expression restricted to nuclear
fractions (see Fig. 5 right panel). For loading control, cytosolic protein
membranes were reprobed with β-actin and nuclear protein membranes
were reprobed with histone H1. Mitochondrial protein membranes
were reprobed withβ-actin as COX-IV expression was reduced
after HI and β-actin expression correlated well with loading controls
based on Ponceau S staining.
433 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1755846291)
The same amount of protein for each sample was separated by
SDS-PAGE, transferred to Hybond-C membranes (Amersham,
Buckinghamshire, UK) and incubated with mouse-anti-cytochrome c
(BD Biosciences Pharmingen), rabbit-anti-cleaved-caspase 3, rabbitanti-Bcl-2
, rabbit-anti-Bcl-xL, rabbit-anti-phospho-JNK (Thr183/
Tyr185), rabbit-anti-JNK, rabbit-anti-c-Jun, rabbit-anti-phospho-c-Jun
(Ser63) (all Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA), goat-anti-β-actin, mouseanti-histone
H1 (both Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) and
mouse-anti-COX-IV (Molecular Probes) followed by peroxidaselabeled
secondary antibodies, revealed by enhanced chemiluminescence
(Amersham) and analyzed with a GS-700 Imaging Densitometer
(Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA).
Electromobility shift assays
Electromobility shift assays (EMSA) on nuclear brain extracts of
contra- and ipsilateral hemispheres were performed using 32P labeled
AP-1 (Promega, Madison, WA; sequence 5′-CGCTTGATGAGTCAGCCG
GAA-3′) as described (Nijboer et al., 2008a; van den Tweel et al.,
2006).
Quantitative real time reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR
Total RNA was isolated from pulverized contra- and ipsilateral
hemispheres using TRIzol® (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK). cDNA was synthesized
with SuperScript Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen). The
PCR reaction was performed with iQ5 Real-Time PCR Detection System
(Bio-Rad) using primers for TNF-α (forward: CCCAGACCCTCA
CACTCAGATCAT; reverse: GCAGCCTTGTCCCTTGAAGAGAA), IL-1β
(forward: CTCTGTGACTCGTGGGATGATG; reverse: CACTTGTTGGCTT
ATGTTCTGTCC), MIP2 (forward: TTGTCTCAACCCTGAAGCCC, reverse:
TGCCCGTTGAGGTACAGGAG) and CINC-1/IL-8 (forward: CCAAAA
GATGCTAAAGGGTGTCC; reverse: CAGAAGCCAGCGTTCACCA). Data
were individually normalized to the mean of the relative expression
of β-actin and GAPDH (for primer sequences see Nijboer et al.,
2008a).
ATP measurement
Contra- and ipsilateral hemispheres were homogenized in PBS and
deproteinized by PCA precipitation using a deproteinizing Sample Preparation
Kit according to manufacturer's protocol (Biovision, Mountain
View, CA). Deproteinized samples were neutralized with neutralization
buffer (providedbykit) andPCA wasprecipitated.ATP levels weremeasured
using the ATP colorimetric Assay Kit (Biovision) according to
manufacturer's protocol. In short, the deproteinized samples were diluted
1:1 in ATP assay buffer and ATP reaction mix (both provided by
kit) was added 1:1. Samples were mixed and incubated for 30 min at
RT protected from light after which the optical density was measured
at 570 nm. An ATP standard was used to obtain a reference curve.
Oxidative stress
As a measure of oxidative stress, a TBARS (thiobarbituric acid reactive
substances) assay was used according to manufacturer's protocol
(Oxiselect TBARS Assay Kit; Cell Biolabs, San Diego, CA). In
short, ipsi- and contralateral hemispheres were homogenized in
PBS/0.05% butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), centrifuged at 10,000 g
for 5 min and supernatants were collected. Supernatants were 1:1
mixed with SDS lysis solution (provided by kit) and incubated for
5 min at RT, after which TBA reagent was added (provided by kit).
Samples were incubated for 60 min at 95 °C after which they were
quickly cooled to RT and spun at 1000 g for 15 min. Supernatants
were 1:1 mixed with n-butanol to prevent interference with hemoglobin
, thoroughly vortexed and centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 g.
The butanol fraction was used for absorbance measurement at
532 nm. A MDA standard curve was used as a reference. Samples
were normalized for protein concentration.
Statistical analysis
Data were normally distributed, are presented as mean and SEM,
and were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests.
Results
Neuroprotective effect and therapeutic window of D-JNKi
HI was induced in P7 rats by unilateral carotid artery occlusion
followed by hypoxia. At 48 h post-HI, marked neuronal damage, as analyzed
by loss of microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2), was observed
in the ipsilateral hemisphere (Figs. 1A and B). Intraperitoneal
treatment with 10 mg/kg D-JNKi directly after HI (0 h) resulted in
86±7.7% reduction in MAP2 loss compared to vehicle-treated rats.
When we examined the effect of repeated dosing of D-JNKi (10 mg/kg
at 0 and 3 h after HI) on neonatal HI brain damage, we no longer observed
a significant neuroprotective effect (Figs. 1A and B). The therapeutic
window for treatment with a single dose of D-JNKi was at least
6 h; MAP2 loss was reduced by 70±19.7% and 52±12.8% after a single
D-JNKi injection at 3 or 6 h post-insult respectively (Figs. 1AandB).The
neuroprotective effect was specific for the D-JNKi sequence since treatment
with a scrambled TAT-containing retro-inverso D-peptide (SCR)
did not have any effect on brain damage (Figs. 1AandB).
Effects of D-JNKi treatment on long-term anatomical and behavioral
outcome
The observed neuroprotective effects of 0 h D-JNKi treatment
were long-lasting as HI-induced ipsilateral volume loss determined
at 9 weeks after the insult was markedly reduced in rats treated
with D-JNKi (Fig. 2A).
To determine whether the neuroprotective effects of 0 h D-JNKi
treatment were associated with functional improvements, we
assessed cognitive and sensorimotor function. Cognitive impairment
was measured by using the novel object recognition task (NORT) at
7 weeks post-HI. As anticipated, sham-control rats spent more time
with the novel than the familiar object (Fig. 2B). Vehicle-treated HI
rats did not show any preference (~54%) for the novel object.
D-JNKi-treated rats showed a significant restoration of novel object
preference indicative for improved cognition (Fig. 2B). The total interaction
time with both objects did not differ between the groups.
Additionally, we examined the effect of D-JNKi on lateralizing motor
deficits in the cylinder rearing test (CRT) at 8 weeks post-HI. HI-vehicle
rats showed a significant preference to use their non-impaired paw to
initiate vertical exploration (Fig. 2C). D-JNKi treatment reduced the
HI-induced preference for using the non-impaired forepaw by ~80%
(Fig. 2C). Sham-operated rats did not show any paw preference during
rearing in the CRT.
The data inFig. 2 together show that D-JNKi treatment significantly
improved both motor and cognitive function after HI and that functional
improvements were associated with a large reduction in HI-induced
brain damage.
EffectsofHIandD-JNKionc-Juna nd AP-1 activation and pro-inflammatory
cytokine/chemokine expression
JNK activation is thought to lead to c-Jun phosphorylation and thereby
activation of the transcription factor AP-1, a dimer of which c-Jun is
the main component (Dhanasekaran and Reddy, 2008; Ham et al.,
2000). In line with earlier observations (Benakis et al., 2010; Borsello
et al., 2003; Ginet et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Michel-Monigadon et
al., 2010), HI-induced nuclear P-c-Jun staining was observed in neurons
434 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(8.0.0.2542,671468068 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
in the ipsilateral hemisphereonly andwasnot detectedin the contralateral
hemisphere or in sham-operated brains (Fig. 3A and data not
shown). We did not observe nuclear P-c-Jun staining in astrocytes and
very scarcely in microglia (data not shown). Additionally, Fig. 3B
shows that HI induced an increase in phosphorylated c-Jun (P-c-Jun)
and total c-Jun levels in total brain nuclear fractions at 3 h post-HI.
D-JNKi has been described to prevent activation (phosphorylation) of
JNK and the downstream interaction of P-JNK with its substrates, including
c-Jun (Barr et al., 2002; Bonny et al., 2001). In line with this proposed
mechanism, the HI-induced increase in nuclear P-c-Jun and total
c-Jun was completely prevented by D-JNKi treatment (Fig. 3B).
The data in Fig. 3C demonstrate that the AP-1 transcription factor
shows 2 waves of activation; an early activation peak of AP-1 activation
at 3 h post-insult as described before (Nijboer et al., 2010) and a
second peak of AP-1 activity at 24 h post-insult. Here we demonstrate
that D-JNKi treatment markedly (>92%) reduced the HI-induced increase
in AP-1 activity as determined by EMSA on nuclear extracts
at 3 h post-HI (Fig. 3D). Treatment with D-JNKi only prevented the
first peak of AP-1 activity at 3 h, whereas the second peak at 24 h
after HI was not affected (Fig. 3E). In contrast, when rats were treated
twice with D-JNKi at 0+3 h, AP-1 activity was still completely
inhibited at 24 h post-HI (Fig. 3E).
The JNK/AP-1 pathway is known to regulate expression of several
inflammatory genes. Therefore, we analyzed pro-inflammatory cytokine
and chemokine expression in the brain at 3 and 24 h post-HI.
HI induced a significant upregulation of TNF-α, IL-1β, CINC-1 (IL-8)
and MIP-2 mRNA in the ipsilateral hemisphere at both time points
(Figs. 4A to H). Treatment with D-JNKi completely abrogated the
HI-induced increase in pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokine expression
at 3 h post-HI (Figs. 4A to D), which is line with the strong
reduction in AP-1 activity at this time point after D-JNKi treatment
(Fig. 3D). At 24 h post-insult, TNF-α, IL-1β, CINC-1 and MIP2 mRNA
expression were also all strongly reduced after neuroprotective
D-JNKi treatment, although AP-1 activity was restored at this time
point (Figs. 4EtoH;Fig. 3E). Remarkably, HI-induced TNF-α, IL-1β,
CINC-1 and MIP2 mRNA expression at 24 h post-HI was not reduced
after 0+3 h D-JNKi treatment (data not shown).
Effects of HI and D-JNKi on JNK phosphorylation
It has been described that phosphorylation/activation of c-Jun and
AP-1 activation is mediated by translocation of P-JNK from the cytosol
to the nucleus. D-JNKi is thought to inhibit phosphorylation of cytosolic
JNK by preventing binding of JNK to the JIP1 scaffold and/or
Fig. 1. Neuroprotective effect and therapeutic window of D-JNKi. Rats were subjected to HI at P7 and neuronal damage was measured by analyzing staining for
microtubule-associated-protein 2 (MAP2) in the contra- and ipsilateral hemisphere at 48 h post-insult. A: Ratio ipsi-/contralateral MAP2-positive area at 48 h post-HI in
sham-operated (SHAM) rat pups, vehicle-treated (VEH) HI rat pups, D-TAT-scrambled peptide (SCR)-treated HI rat pups or D-JNKi-treated (D-JNKi) HI littermates. D-JNKi was
given i.p. as a single injection at 0, 3 or 6 h post-HI or double injections at 0+3 h post-insult at a dose of 10 mg/kg. D-TAT-scrambled peptide was given i.p. at 0 h post-HI at
10 mg/kg. No MAP2 loss was observed in the contralateral hemisphere of HI animals or in sham-operated animals. SHAM n=8, VEH n=16, SCR n=8, D-JNKi 0 h, 3 h, 6 h and
0+3 h: all n=8. ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. ns=not significant. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests. B: Representative photographs of
MAP2 staining in sham-operated animals and in HI animals after vehicle, D-TAT-scrambled peptide or D-JNKi treatment.
435 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1315417455)
[Link]
image of Fig. 2
inhibiting interaction of JNK with upstream kinases thereby inhibiting
JNK activation (Borsello et al., 2003; Dhanasekaran and Reddy, 2008;
Repici et al., 2009). To assess whether D-JNKi treatment prevented inhibition
of JNK phosphorylation, we determined the effects of HI and
D-JNKi treatment on JNK phosphorylation in different subcellular
fractions of the brain. Quality of subcellular fractionation was confirmed by Western blot analysis (inset Fig. 5).
Using antibodies against JNK1-3 and phospho-JNK1-3, two bands
corresponding to the 46 (p46) and 54 (p54) kDa JNK isoforms were
detected (Waetzig and Herdegen, 2005). In cytosolic fractions, HI or
HI+D-JNKi did not induce detectable changes in phosphorylated
p46-JNK (P-JNK-p46) as determined at 3 h post-HI (Fig. 5A). Cytosolic
P-JNK-p54 was decreased after HI and this reduction was abolished by
D-JNKi-treatment (Fig. 5B). Total cytosolic JNK-p46 and JNK-p54 levels
did not change after HI or D-JNKi (Figs. 5A and B).
Nuclear P-JNK-p46 and P-JNK-p54 levels were both significantly
decreased at 3 h post-HI (Figs. 5C and D), the time point when we observed
a strong increase in P-c-Jun (Fig. 3B). Concomitantly, total nuclear
JNK levels were decreased after HI as well. Both the decrease in
nuclear P-JNK and total JNK were prevented by D-JNKi treatment.
Importantly, in the mitochondrial fraction HI induced a strong increase
in JNK phosphorylation; mitochondrial P-JNK-p46 increased 4.9
times and P-JNK-p54 increased 6.4 times at 3 h post-HI (Figs. 5Eand
F). D-JNKi almost completely prevented this HI-induced increase in mitochondrial
P-JNK-p46 and P-JNK-p54 (Figs. 5E and F). Total level of mitochondrial
JNK was not changed after HI or D-JNKi (Figs. 5E and F),
indicating that the HI-induced increase in mitochondrial P-JNK was
not due to translocation of P-JNK to the mitochondria.
Effects of D-JNKi on mitochondrial integrity and pro- and anti-apoptotic
proteins
Next, we determined whether the HI-induced increase in P-JNK at
the mitochondria has consequences for mitochondrial functioning. Ischemia
and reperfusion induce mitochondrial damage which is associatedwith
lossof mitochondrial membranepotential (Δψm), lossof ATP,
increased ROS generation and calcium influx (Kroemer et al., 2007).
These processes ultimately lead to opening of the mitochondrial membrane
and release of pro-apoptotic proteins into the cytosol.
Fig. 6A demonstrates that HI induced a significant decrease in cerebral
ATP levels as measured at 3 h post-insult. D-JNKi treatment
completely prevented this HI-induced decrease in ATP (Fig. 6A).
Todetermine the effect of HIand D-JNKion cerebral oxidative stress,
we analyzed TBARS levels, a measure of lipid peroxidation (Feksa et al.,
2006; Nijboer et al., 2011). At 3 h after HI, TBARS were significantly increased
and this increase was inhibited by D-JNKi (Fig. 6B).
Next, we assessed whether the effects of D-JNKi on mitochondrial
functioning also had effects on the apoptotic cascade, and therefore
leakage of mitochondrial cytochrome c to the cytosol and subsequent
caspase 3 activation were determined. As expected, HI induced a
strong increase in the levels of cytosolic cytochrome c and activated
caspase 3 at 24 h post-insult (Figs. 6C and D). D-JNKi treatment at
0 h post-HI almost completely inhibited the HI-induced increase in
cytosolic cytochrome c and caspase 3 activation (Figs. 6C and D). In
line with the loss of neuroprotection, repeated D-JNKi treatment at
0+3 h abolished the reduction of cytochrome c release to the cytosol
and caspase 3 activation as determined at 24 h post-insult (Figs. 6C
and D).
We have previously shown that HI reduces mitochondrial levels of
the anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL at 24 h after the insult
and that neuroprotection by NF-κB inhibition is associated with
upregulation of these anti-apoptotic factors (Nijboer et al., 2008b). In
line with our previous data,Figs. 6E and F show that HI significantly reduced
mitochondrial levels of Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL in vehicle-treated HI animals.
Interestingly, mitochondrial Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL levels were
significantlyincreasedafter treatment with 0 h D-JNKi, whereas repeated
treatment with 0+3 h D-JNKireducedBcl-2 and Bcl-xLto levels similar
to vehicle-treated littermates (Figs. 6E and F).
Effects of Sab
KIM1
, a specific mitochondrial JNK inhibitor, on brain
damage after HI
To further investigate the role of mitochondrial JNK after HI, rats
were treated with the Sab
KIM1
peptide. The Sab
KIM1
peptide
(TAT-containing all D-amino acids retro-inverso peptide) has been developed
as a specific inhibitor of JNK interaction with its mitochondrial
scaffold Sab, thereby specifically reducing binding of JNK to the mitochondria
without affecting nuclear JNK-dependent c-Jun phosphorylation
(Chambers et al., 2011; Wiltshire et al., 2002). Treatment with 10
or 20 mg/kg Sab
KIM1
peptide i.p. immediately after HI reduced neuronal
damage at 48 h post-HI with 36% and 58% respectively (Figs. 7AandB).
Figs. 7CandDshowthatSab
KIM1
strongly reduced HI-induced mitochondrial
P-JNK levels. Noteworthy, Sab
KIM1
treatment also reduced
total levels of mitochondrial JNK which is in line with its mode of action,
i.e. preventing binding of JNK to the mitochondrial scaffold.
Fig. 2.Long-term effects of D-JNKi treatment on behavior and brain damage. Rats were subjected to HI at P7. Brain damage and cognitive and sensorimotor function were analyzed
at 7–9 weeks after HI. A: HI-induced cerebral volume loss in the ipsilateral hemisphere measured on hematoxylin–eosin (HE) stained sections at ~−3.20 mm from bregma at
9 weeks post-HI. Inset shows representative examples of HE staining. ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. B: The novel object recognition task (NORT) was used to test cognitive function
at 7 weeks after HI in sham-operated rats and HI-animals treated with vehicle or D-JNKi. Time spent with the familiar and the novel object was determined during a 5 min test
period and the percentage time spent with the novel object is depicted. ##pb0.01 vs sham; *pb0.05 vs vehicle-treatment. C: Rats were tested in the cylinder rearing test (CRT) to
quantify laterizing sensorimotor deficits at 8 weeks after HI. Use of the left (impaired) and right (non-impaired) forepaw during full rears was recorded over a 3 min test period and
preference (%) for using the non-impaired forepaw is depicted. ###pb0.001 vs sham; ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. For A–C: Sham controls n=8, vehicle n=8, D-JNKi n=12.
Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests.
436 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
( 8.0.0.2542.1600904018 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 3
Discussion
In the neonatal model of severe HI brain injury, we are thefirst
to show the strong neuroprotective effects of JNK inhibition by administration
of the D-JNKi peptide. Neuroprotection by D-JNKi is
long-lasting and very potent with >85% reduction in infarct size
at 9 weeks post-HI. Moreover, neuroprotection by D-JNKi is associated
with improved cognitive and sensorimotor behavior during
young adulthood. The latter data urge for a more in-depth evaluation
on the possibility to use D-JNKi in human asphyxiated
newborns.
In search for the underlying mechanism of the neuroprotective
effect of D-JNKi, we demonstrate for the first time that the cerebral
ischemic insult markedly increased the mitochondrial level of P-JNK
which was completely blocked by D-JNKi. HI did not induce P-JNK in cytosolic
or nuclear fractions. Therefore, we propose that neuroprotection
by D-JNKi is mediated via inhibition of JNK activation at the mitochondria.
In line with this hypothesis, treatment with Sab
KIM1
, a peptide 
inhibiting binding of JNK to mitochondria, also showed potent neuroprotection
after HI.
D-JNKi treatment-induced inhibition of mitochondrial JNK activation
was associated with preservation of mitochondrial integrity as
evidenced by prevention of HI-induced reduction in ATP levels, the increase
of ROS production and cytosolic translocation of mitochondrial
proteins. We propose that protection of the mitochondria prevents
phosphorylation of c-Jun and thus activation of the transcription factor
AP-1 and neuroinflammation and ultimately neuronal death. Furthermore
we show that upregulation of anti-apoptotic proteins at the
Fig. 3.Effects of HI and D-JNKi treatment on phosphorylation of c-Jun and AP-1 activity. P7 rat pups were subjected to HI and were treated with vehicle (VEH) orD-JNKi at 0 h (B, D,
E) or at 0+3 h (E) after the insult. A: Representative photographs of immunofluorescent double-labeling of P-c-Jun (red) with NeuN (green) in contra- (contra) and ipsilateral
(ipsi) hemispheres at 3 h post-HI. The vast majority of P-c-Jun labeling was observed in neurons and staining was limited to the ipsilateral hemisphere. Photographs were taken
in the parietal cortex. B: Levels of total c-Jun and P-c-Jun were quantified in contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i) hemispheres at 3 h post-HI by Western Blot in nuclear fractions. Insets
show representative examples using histone H1 as loading control. Note that antibody against total c-Jun also recognizes phosphorylated c-Jun (upper band). #pb0.05, ###pb0.001
vs sham-operated control levels (SHAM). *pb0.05 and ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. C: Ipsilateral AP-1 activity was determined by EMSA on nuclear brain extracts obtained at
different time points after HI. Inset shows representative examples. Animals n=4–6 per time point. *pb0.05, **pb0.01 vs level in sham-operated (SHAM) animals. D–E: Ipsilateral
AP-1 activity was determined by EMSA on nuclear extracts obtained at 3 h (D) or 24 h (E) post-HI. Insets show representative examples. **pb0.01, ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment.
B–E: No statistically significant differences were observed between contralateral levels of HI-VEH or HI-D-JNKi animals and levels in sham-operated controls. Levels are relative to
levels in sham-operated animals which were put at 1. A.U.: arbitrary units.
437 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.643104336)
[Link]
image of Fig. 4
mitochondria is a secondary crucial step for neuroprotection, which
may depend on restoration of the transcriptional activity of the AP-1
transcription factor after thefirst wave of AP-1 inhibition by D-JNKi.
A single dose of D-JNKi has also been shown to have moderate to
strong (~30–90%) neuroprotective effects in the MCAO model of
ischemic brain damage using adult or P14 rats and in a murine model
of intracerebral hemorrhage (Borsello et al., 2003; Esneault et al.,
2008; Hirt et al., 2004; Michel-Monigadon et al., 2010; Repici et al.,
2007; Wiegler et al., 2008). In these studies, the neuroprotective potential
of D-JNKi was evaluated within 14 days post-insult. We now show
that strong neuroprotection by D-JNKi treatment is maintained until
at least 9 weeks post-HI in the neonatal rat. More importantly, ourfindings
that D-JNKi also protects against the HI-induced loss of cognitive
and motor function demonstrate that preservation of cerebral tissue
by D-JNKi-treatment is associated with preservation of function.
Borsello et al. (2003) demonstrated using an in vitro system that
D-JNKi specifically inhibited both the activation of JNK by MKK4/7
as well as the activation of c-Jun by JNK in a kinase-assay testing 40
different kinases. However, the mechanism via which D-JNKi protects
against brain injury in vivo or against neuronal damage in vitro is still
unclear. For example, Borsello et al. (2003) showed that D-JNKi did
not inhibit phosphorylation of JNK as determined in total cell lysates
after NMDA stimulation of cortical neurons in vitro even though
D-JNKi did have a neuroprotective effect in this model. In vivo,
MCAO even reduced cytosolic P-JNK in the brains of P14 rats and
this reduction was not affected by D-JNKi (Repici et al., 2007). Nevertheless
also in this model D-JNKi was neuroprotective. In our study,
we also observed a reduction in cytosolic and nuclear P-JNK post-HI.
Similarly,Ginet et al. (2009)described a reduction in P-JNK after neonatal
HI in vivo in total brain lysates. However, to our knowledge, we
are thefirst to show that HI induces a strong increase inmitochondrial
P-JNK, which is almost completely abolished by D-JNKi. The increased
level of mitochondrial P-JNK combined with reduced cytosolic and
nuclear levels of P-JNK might indicate that HI induced a translocation
of P-JNK to the mitochondria. Hanawa et al. (2008) suggested that
phosphorylation of JNK results in translocation of P-JNK to the
mitochondria. However, our data do not support the notion of P-JNK
translocating from the cytosol/nucleus to the mitochondria as the
total JNK level in the mitochondrial fraction did not increase after
HI. Therefore, we suggest that D-JNKi inhibits phosphorylation of
JNK which is already present at the mitochondria, possibly by prevention
of the interaction of upstream kinases MKK4/7 with mitochondrial
JNK. In support of our hypothesis, Repici et al. (2009) showed
in cell-free systems that D-JNKi inhibited phosphorylation of JNK by
MKK4/7. An alternative possibility would be that D-JNKi treatment
results in translocation of P-JNK from the mitochondria to the nucleus.
Indeed total levels of nuclear JNK (unphosphorylated and phosphorylated
) are increased after D-JNKi treatment as well. Even
though total JNK levels at the mitochondria do not decrease after
D-JNKi treatment, it is possible that a small fraction of JNK does translocate
to the nucleus without inducing detectable decreases in mitochondrial
JNK.
Interestingly, the neuroprotective effects of treatment with the
Sab
KIM1
peptide, a peptide inhibiting mitochondrial association of
JNK, further highlight the important role of mitochondrial JNK activation
in HI brain injury. Sab is a scaffold protein associated with
the mitochondria and acts as a docking place for activated JNK at
this subcellular compartment (Wiltshire et al., 2002, 2004). Sab contains
two KIMs of which KIM1 is essential for binding of JNK. Based
on this Sab KIM1 motif, the small peptide inhibitor Sab
KIM1
was
designed. Chambers et al. (2011) showed that Sab
KIM1
treatment in
vitro prevented JNK localization to the mitochondria, which was associated
with reduced levels of phosphorylated mitochondrial
Bcl-2 and improved cell survival in a model of anisomycin-induced
cell death in HeLa cells. Importantly, Sab
KIM1
treatment did not impact
JNK-mediated nuclear events, i.e. phosphorylation of c-Jun or
nuclear JNK levels (Chambers et al., 2011). To our knowledge, we
are the first to show the potent neuroprotective effects of Sab
KIM1
in anin vivomodel of brain injury. The Sab
KIM1
data strongly support
our hypothesis that it is the inhibition of JNK phosphorylation at the
mitochondria that is sufficient to obtain neuroprotection as observed
after D-JNKi treatment. Nevertheless, as with any inhibitor, we
Fig. 4. Effects of HI and D-JNKi treatment on neuroinflammation. A–H: Effect of HI and D-JNKi treatment on cytokine/chemokine mRNA expression of TNF-α (A, E), IL-1β (B, F),
CINC-1 (C, G) and MIP2 (D, H) as determined by quantitative real time RT-PCR at 3 h (A–D) and 24 h (E–H) post-HI. Data are normalized for expression of β-actin and GAPDH.
No statistically significant differences were observed between contralateral levels of HI-VEH or HI-D-JNKi animals and levels in sham-operated controls. *pb0.05, **pb0.01,
***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. Sham controls n=4, HI-vehicle n=8, HI-D-JNKi n=10 for both time points. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests.
438 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
( 8.0.0.2542.1474325477 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 5
cannot exclude the possibility that other, potentially off-target effects
, contribute to the observed neuroprotective effects of D-JNKi.
Our data show that prevention of the HI-induced increase in mitochondrial
P-JNK was associated with preservation of mitochondrial
functioning after D-JNKi treatment. D-JNKi prevented the
HI-induced reduction in ATP, the increase in lipid peroxidation and
the release of mitochondrial proteins into the cytosol. In comparison
with earlier data reported by others the absolute cerebral ATP levels
measured in our study were about 2 times higher (Brucklacher et al.,
2002; Gilland et al., 1998; Lowry et al., 1964; Vannucci et al., 1994,
2004). This difference in ATP levels might be due to the termination
methods and the analysis of ATP as we used a commercially available
kit. Most recently,Chavez-Valdez et al. (2012)reported cerebral ATP
levels of 6–8 nmol/mg brain in naive P8–P11 mice, which were quite
similar to our data. Nevertheless, we acknowledge that the ATP
levels we report here as such might not precisely reflect the absolute
ATP concentration in the brainin vivo. Nevertheless, we show a clear
HI-induced reduction in ipsilateral cerebral ATP, comparable to the
study by Gilland et al. (1998), which was completely prevented by
D-JNKi treatment.
In vitroand in vivostudies have indicated that mitochondrial JNK is
involved in regulating mitochondrial integrity, but the exact mechanism
how mitochondrial JNK regulates the apoptotic cascade remains
to be elucidated (Fan et al., 2000; Kharbanda et al., 2000; Schroeter et
al., 2003). There are several potential pathways via which mitochondrial
JNK might regulate mitochondrial integrity. P-JNK can phosphorylate
anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL at the mitochondria, which reduces the
interaction of these anti-apoptotic proteins with pro-apoptotic Bcl-2
family members and thereby facilitates induction of apoptotic cell
death (Fan et al., 2000; Kharbanda et al., 2000; Schroeter et al., 2003).
Since we observed that D-JNKi treatment after HI also led to an increase
in mitochondrial Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL levels, the reduced presence of P-JNK
and the increased levels of anti-apoptotic proteins at the mitochondria
may confer effective neuroprotection.
Additionally, there are some in vitro studies indicating that JNK
might directly regulate bioenergetics within the mitochondria, e.g. via
phosphorylation of pyruvate dehydrogenase and/or components of
the electron transport chain as well as via induction of the inner mitochondrial
transition pore, leading to a collapse of inner membrane potential
, ROS production and loss of ATP production (Chambers and
LoGrasso, 2011; Lee et al., 2002; Schroeter et al., 2003; Zhou et al.,
2008). In vivo, so far the role of mitochondrial JNK has only been describedin
a liver-injury model, in whichit wasshown thatmitochondrialJNK
phosphorylation wasassociated with mitochondrial permeability
transition, a decline in ATP levels and release of cytochrome c,which
could all be reversed by JNK inhibition (Hanawa et al., 2008).
Fig. 5. Effects of HI and D-JNKi on phosphorylation of cytosolic, nuclear and mitochondrial JNK. A–F: At P7 HI was induced in rat pups followed by vehicle-treatment (VEH) or
D-JNKi-treatment at 0 h post-HI. Phosphorylated and total levels of JNK (P-JNK and total JNK) were determined in cytosolic (A: JNK-p46; B: JNK-p54), nuclear (C: JNK-p46; D:
JNK-p54) and mitochondrial (E: JNK-p46; F: JNK-p54) fractions of contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i) hemispheres by Western Blot at 3 h post-HI. Insets show representative examples
using β-actin and histone H1 as loading control. #pb0.05, ##pb0.01, ###pb0.001 vs sham; *pb0.05, **pb0.01, ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. There were no statistically significant
differences in contralateral levels of HI-VEH or HI-D-JNKi animals compared to levels in sham-operated rats. Levels are relative to levels in sham-operated animals which were
put at 1. A.U.: arbitrary units. Sham controls n=4, HI-vehicle n=8, HI-D-JNKi n=10. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests. Right inset: Confirmation
of fractionation quality by Western Blot. Mitochondrial (mitoch), cytosolic (cyto) and nuclear (nucl) fractions of contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i)hemispheres of HI and sham-operated
(SH) animals were analyzed for expression of subcellular fraction-specific markers. Blots show exclusive presence of COX-IV in the mitochondria, predominance of β-actin in the
cytosol and exclusive presence of histone H1 in the nuclear fractions. Note that COX-IV expression was influenced by HI.
439 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
image of Fig. 6
Notably, JNK has been shown to associate with the mitochondrial
outer membrane and does not enter the intermembrane space or matrix
(Zhou et al., 2008). Therefore, direct effects of JNK on proteins
within the mitochondrial matrix or inner membrane seem less likely
than effects of JNK on targets at the outer mitochondrial membrane.
We therefore propose that D-JNKi inhibits JNK-induced effects on targets
at this outer membrane, such as Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL which directly
regulate permeabilization of the outer membrane. Additionally, other
known JNK targets at the outer mitochondrial membrane including
Bad, BimL, Bax, p53 and PARP-1 may also participate in protection
of mitochondrial integrity by D-JNKi (Bogoyevitch and Kobe, 2006;
Dhanasekaran and Reddy, 2008).
Previous studies have shown that FITC- or biotin-labeled D-JNKi
rapidly distributes to the brain within 1 h after i.p. injection and
that within the brain, D-JNKi localizes mainly to neurons (Borsello
et al., 2003; Ginet et al., 2009; Repici et al., 2007). One of the key
mechanisms via which JNK is thought to regulate cellular activity is
via phosphorylation of c-Jun and subsequent AP-1 activation. Several
studies have shown that ischemia-induced cerebral c-Jun activation
takes place primarily in neurons (Benakis et al., 2010; Borsello et
Fig. 6.Effects of HI and D-JNKi treatment on ATP levels, oxidative stress and apoptotic markers. Rat pups were subjected to HI at P7 and were treated with vehicle (VEH) or D-JNKi
at 0 h (A–E) or at 0+3 h (C–F) after the insult. A: ATP colorimetric assay showing ATP levels (nmol/mg brain tissue) as a measure of mitochondrial respiration at 3 h after induction
of HI in contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i) deproteinized brain homogenates of vehicle- and D-JNKi-treated HI rat pups and sham-controls. B: TBARS assay measuring MDA
levels (nmol/mg protein) as a measure of lipid peroxidation at 3 h post-HI in contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i) brain homogenates of rat pups treated withvehicle or D-JNKi directly
after HI and sham-controls. C–D: Cytosolic fractions of contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i) hemispheres were analyzed by Western Blot at 24 h post-HI for expression of cytochrome c
(C) and cleaved (activated) caspase 3 (D). E–F: Mitochondrial brain fractions of both hemispheres were analyzed by Western Blot at 24 h post-HI for expression of Bcl-2 (E) and
Bcl-xL (F). A–F: There were no statistically significant differences in contralateral levels of HI-VEH or HI-D-JNKi animals compared to sham levels. Insets show representative
Western Blots withβ-actin as loading control. A.U.: arbitrary units. #pb0.05 and ###pb0.001 vs contralateral; *pb0.05, **pb0.01 and ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. Sham
controls n=4, HI-vehicle n=8, HI-D-JNKi n=10. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests.
440 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.928590899)
[Link]
image of Fig. 7
al., 2003; Ginet et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2010; Michel-Monigadon et al.,
2010). In line with these studies, we show here that activated c-Jun is
present in neurons in the ipsilateral hemisphere. Importantly, we
show by using brain homogenates that the activation of c-Jun and
the subsequent activation of AP-1 activity is completely inhibited
after D-JNKi treatment, indicating that D-JNKi will inhibit these
processes in all cerebral cell types in which activation takes place,
which will predominantly be neurons. However, we cannot exclude
completely that D-JNKi also affects glial cell types or has additional
peripheral effects.
Subsequent to the inhibitory effects of D-JNKi on AP-1 activation,
the upregulation of AP-1-regulated pro-inflammatory target genes
Fig. 7. Neuroprotective effect of Sab
KIM1
peptide. Rats were subjected to HI at P7 and neuronal damage was measured by analyzing staining for MAP2 in the contra- and ipsilateral
hemisphere at 48 h post-insult. A: Ratio ipsi-/contralateral MAP2-positive area at 48 h post-HI in sham-operated rats (SHAM), vehicle-treated (VEH) HI rat pups, D-TAT-scrambled
peptide (SCR)-treated HI rat pups or SabKIM1-treated (SabKIM1) HI littermates. SabKIM1was given i.p. as a single injection at 0 h post-HI at a dose of 10 or 20 mg/kg. D-TAT-scrambled
peptide was given i.p. at 0 h post-HI at 20 mg/kg. No MAP2 loss was observed in the contralateral hemisphere of HI animals or in sham-operated animals (SHAM). SHAM n=8, VEH
n=9, SCR n=7, Sab
KIM1
10 mg/kg n=11, Sab
KIM1
20 mg/kg n=11. ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests. B: Representative
photographs of MAP2 staining after vehicle, D-TAT-scrambled peptide or Sab
KIM1
treatment. C–D: Phosphorylated and total levels of JNK (P-JNK and total JNK) were
determined in mitochondrial fractions (C: JNK-p46; D: JNK-p54) of contra- (c) and ipsilateral (i) hemispheres by Western Blot at 3 h post-HI. There were no statistically significant
differences in contralateral levels of HI-VEH or HI-Sab
KIM1
animals compared to levels in sham-operated rats. Insets show representative examples usingβ-actin as a loading control. ###pb0.001 vs sham; **pb0.01, ***pb0.001 vs vehicle-treatment. Levels are relative to levels in sham-operated animals which were put at 1. A.U.: arbitrary units. Sham controls
n=5, HI-vehicle n=6, HI-SabKIM1 n=6. Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni post-tests.
441 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
was completely inhibited by D-JNKi treatment at 3 h post-HI. Our
present findings support studies that showed inhibitory effects of
D-JNKi on phosphorylation of c-Jun in an in vitro kinase assay, in
NMDA-challenged cortical neurons, in isolated ischemic brain preparations
and in in vivo studies of MCAO in rodents (Borsello et al.,
2003; Esneault et al., 2008; Hirt et al., 2004; Liu et al., 2010;
Michel-Monigadon et al., 2010; Repici et al., 2007). c-Jun is thought
to be phosphorylated by nuclear P-JNK (Dhanasekaran and Reddy,
2008). However, the HI-induced increase in P-c-Jun coincided with
decreased nuclear P-JNK. In support of our data, Borsello et al. (2003)
showedin vitroin cortical neurons that D-JNKi strongly inhibited nuclear
P-c-Jun levels, whereas nuclear P-JNK levels were not affected. Additionally
, Repici et al. (2007) showed an inhibitory effect of D-JNKi on
P-c-Jun after MCAO without an effect of D-JNKi on P-JNK levels. Therefore
, the question arises how D-JNKi regulates inhibition of phosphorylation
of c-Jun when nuclear P-JNK levels are reduced. One possibility is
that c-Jun is phosphorylated at the cellular location where HI induces
JNK phosphorylation, i.e. the mitochondria. However, we could not detect
P-c-Jun in the mitochondrial fraction (data not shown). Alternatively
, c-Jun can also be phosphorylated by other kinases such as
cyclin-dependent kinases, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases
, VRK1 and p38δ (Besirli and Johnson, 2003; Bessero et al., 2010;
Sevilla et al., 2004). We hypothesize that phosphorylation of c-Jun
after HI is mediated by other kinases than JNK and that inhibition of
P-c-Jun after D-JNKi is an indirect effect of mitochondrial protection
which could prevent activation of these alternative kinase pathways
mentioned above.
Neuroinflammation after HI is an ongoing process with increasing
production of pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokines starting at 3 h
up to 24 h post-insult (Nijboer et al., 2009). Our data show that a single
treatment with D-JNKi was effective to inhibit the HI-induced onset
of cytokine/chemokine mRNA expression. Importantly, inhibition of
neuroinflammation by D-JNKi was long-lasting as also cytokine/
chemokine mRNA expression at 24 h was still completely blocked, although
AP-1 activity was restored at this later time point, which indicates
that cytokine/chemokine production at later time points after HI
is not upregulated when neuroprotection has been initiated early after
the insult. These data further add to our view that preserving mitochondria
integrity is an important upstream step in neuroprotection that
prevents activation of early downstreamnuclear transcriptionalactivity
and subsequent neuroinflammation.
We show here that D-JNKi is a powerful neuroprotectant in a neonatal
model of brain damage. Ginet et al. (2009) evaluated the effect
of D-JNKi in the P7 rat HI model earlier, but these authors showed that
repeated treatment with D-JNKi (0.3 mg/kg i.p. at 30 min prior to HI
and repeated at 3, 5, 8, 12 and 20 h post-HI) was not neuroprotective.
Using the same model, we now clearly demonstrate the marked
neuroprotective effect of a single dose of D-JNKi (10 mg/kg) within
6 h post-insult. However, in line with Ginet et al. (2009), we also 
show that when P7 rats were treated repeatedly with 10 mg/kg
D-JNKi at 0+3 h, the neuroprotective effect was abolished. Our therapeutic
window data show that a single injection of D-JNKi at 3 h
post-HI was strongly neuroprotective, which indicates that it is rather
the double dose within 3 h than the time point as such after HI that reduces
the neuroprotective effect of D-JNKi. Therefore, we conclude that
D-JNKi should only be given once to protect the neonatal brain.
Notably, however, in both the 0 h and 0+3 h treatment schedule,
the first dose of D-JNKi was given directly after HI and thus in both
treatment schedules, mitochondrial phosphorylation of JNK and
AP-1 activity at 3 h post-HI was strongly reduced. Our results on the
effects of D-JNKi and Sab
KIM1
indicate that prevention of mitochondrial
JNK activation can be a crucialfirststep in protecting the mitochondria
by attenuating detrimental events that set off the apoptotic and
inflammatory cascade. The neuroprotective potential of inhibiting
mitochondrial pro-apoptotic signals after neonatal HI was also
shown in our previous studies using the NF-κB inhibitor TAT-NBD
and the mitochondrial p53 inhibitor PFT-μ (Nijboer et al., 2008a,
2011). Our studies together imply that effective neuroprotective
therapies should be targeted firstatmitochondrialprotectionand
canonlyworkeffectivelywhengivenearly,within~6h,afterthe
insult.
An importantfinding in our study is that mitochondrial levels of the
anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL were upregulated after single,
but not after repeated treatment with D-JNKi. These findings indicate
that upregulation of these so-called ‘guards of mitochondrial integrity’
may play a crucial role in maintaining neuroprotection even after the initial
preservation of mitochondrial integrity by reducing mitochondrial
P-JNK. Notably, we have previously shown that neuroprotection can be
lost when anti-apoptotic proteins are not upregulated after HI (Nijboer
et al., 2008b). The inability to upregulate mitochondrial Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL after 0+3 h D-JNKi treatment might be a consequence of
prolonged inhibition of AP-1 transcriptional activity at 24 h post-insult.
Although we propose that the effect of the second D-JNKi dose at 3 h
post-HI is due to the prolonged inhibition of AP-1 activation downstream
of JNK activation, we cannot exclude that potential effects of
D-JNKi on other kinases at this higher dose may contribute as well.
Moreover, we do not have information on the exact pharmacokinetics
of D-JNKi in vivoand therefore, we do not know whether the presumed
protease-resistance of D-JNKi also prevents clearance (via mechanisms
other than degradation) of the peptide. In fact our present data showing
that a second dose of D-JNKi has adverse effects could indicate that the
peptide is rapidly cleared after one gift (early after HI) and that this is
beneficial as it may prevent potential late adverse effects. Alternatively,
the peptide is not cleared and the second injection is sufficient to
reach a toxic dose.
Our previous studies in which we used the L-isomer of the JNK
inhibiting peptide (L-JNKi/TAT-JBD) (Nijboer et al., 2009, 2010)showed
thattreatmentwithL-JNKihadamoremoderateneuroprotectiveeffect
after HI in P7 rats; repeated injection of 10 mg/kg L-JNKi at 0 and 3 h
resulted in ~29% reduction in MAP2 loss. We have additional data that
show a comparable neuroprotective effect (24.1% reduction in MAP2
loss) in rat pups treated with a single dose of L-JNKi at 0 h post-HI. As
several studies showed potent neuroprotection using D-JNKi in MCAO
models using P14 or adult rodents (Benakis et al., 2010; Borsello et
al., 2003; Liu et al., 2010; Repici et al., 2007; Wiegler et al., 2008),
we here wanted to explore the neuroprotective potential of D-JNKi
treatment in the P7 HI model. The data in the present study indeed
show a much stronger neuroprotective effect of D-JNKi (>85%
neuroprotection).
As was discussed above, we suggest that there are two main
mechanisms that contribute to neuroprotection after JNK inhibition;
inhibition of early mitochondrial JNK phosphorylation and the ability
to upregulate mitochondrial anti-apoptotic proteins like Bcl-2 and
Bcl-xL around 24 h post-HI. We have preliminary data showing
that L-JNKi treatment does not significantly inhibit HI-induced JNK
activation at the mitochondria, which is strongly inhibited by
D-JNKi treatment. Furthermore, mitochondrial Bcl-2 or Bcl-xL levels
at 24 h post-HI were not strongly upregulated after L-JNKi treatment
as was observed after D-JNKi treatment. We feel that the differences
in effects of L-JNKi and D-JNKi on mitochondrial JNK activation and
mitochondrial anti-apoptotic proteins levels can explain the differences
in neuroprotective capability. However, it is not clear at the
moment how the configuration of the peptides exactly influences
their capacity to regulate these HI-induced processes.
Ischemic injury in the neonatal brain is described to be a continuum
between apoptotic and necrotic forms of cell death. Mitochondrial
damage, especially induced by calcium, is also operative in necrotic
cell death (Northington et al., 2011). Therefore the great efficacy of
D-JNKi may also be caused by an additional inhibition of necrotic
processes. We propose that inhibiting early upstream mitochondrial
events together with preserving the ability to upregulate mitochondrial
anti-apoptotic proteins might be of great added value for
442 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1872208715)
neuroprotection after neonatal HI and should be a focus of translational
research.
Conclusions
Collectively, our data indicate that the powerful neuroprotective
action of D-JNKi is mediated by inhibition of JNK activity at the mitochondria
, leading to preservation of mitochondrial integrity and
inhibition of neuroinflammation. Perhaps more importantly, the
effects of Sab
KIM1
peptide treatment showed that specific inhibition
of mitochondrial JNK association as such, is sufficient to strongly reduce
HI brain damage. Specifically inhibiting mitochondrial JNK activation
might develop into a promising therapy for newborns
suffering from cerebral ischemia to effectively prevent development
of neonatal encephalopathy. As JNK is involved in numerous developmental
processes, the use of the more specific Sab 
KIM1
peptide
that targets JNK inhibition at the mitochondrial subcellular compartment
will probably be preferred as a safe neuroprotective strategy
over D-JNKi to avoid or reduce putative side-effects. The present
data warrant further studies to determine both acute and long term
safety of D-JNKi and Sab
KIM1
to support the potential clinical translation
of thesefindings.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European Commission: Seventh
Framework Program, contract no. HEALTH-F2-2009-241778: Neurobid.
We thank Xigen SA (Epalinges, Switzerland) for providing D-JNKi
peptide.
References
Azzopardi, D.V., Strohm, B., Edwards, A.D., Dyet, L., Halliday, H.L., Juszczak, E., Kapellou,
O., Levene, M., Marlow, N., Porter, E., Thoresen, M., Whitelaw, A., Brocklehurst, P.,
2009. Moderate hypothermia to treat perinatal asphyxial encephalopathy. N.
Engl. J. Med. 361, 1349–1358.
Barr, R.K., Kendrick, T.S., Bogoyevitch, M.A., 2002. Identification of the critical features
of a small peptide inhibitor of JNK activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 10987–10997.
Benakis, C., Bonny, C., Hirt, L., 2010. JNK inhibition and inflammation after cerebral
ischemia. Brain Behav. Immun. 24, 800–811.
Besirli, C.G., Johnson Jr., E.M., 2003. JNK-independent activation of c-Jun during neuronal
apoptosis induced by multiple DNA-damaging agents. J. Biol. Chem. 278,
22357–22366.
Bessero, A.C., Chiodini, F., Rungger-Brandle, E., Bonny, C., Clarke, P.G., 2010. Role of the
c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway in retinal excitotoxicity, and neuroprotection by
its inhibition. J. Neurochem. 113, 1307–1318.
Bevins, R.A., Besheer, J., 2006. Object recognition in rats and mice: a one-trial nonmatching-to-sample
learning task to study ‘recognition memory’. Nat. Protoc. 1, 
1306–1311.
Bogoyevitch, M.A., Arthur, P.G., 2008. Inhibitors of c-Jun N-terminal kinases: JuNK no
more? Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1784, 76–93.
Bogoyevitch, M.A., Kobe, B., 2006. Uses for JNK: the many and varied substrates of the
c-Jun N-terminal kinases. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 70, 1061–1095.
Bonny, C., Oberson, A., Negri, S., Sauser, C., Schorderet, D.F., 2001. Cell-permeable peptide
inhibitors of JNK: novel blockers of beta-cell death. Diabetes 50, 77–82.
Borsello, T., Clarke, P.G., Hirt, L., Vercelli, A., Repici, M., Schorderet, D.F., Bogousslavsky,
J., Bonny, C., 2003. A peptide inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase protects against
excitotoxicity and cerebral ischemia. Nat. Med. 9, 1180–1186.
Brucklacher, R.M., Vannucci, R.C., Vannucci, S., 2002. Hypoxic preconditioning increases
brain glycogen and delays energy depletion from hypoxia–ischemia in
the immature rat. Dev. Neurosci. 24, 411–417.
Chambers, J.W., Lograsso, P.V., 2011. Mitochondrial c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling
initiates physiological changes resulting in amplification of reactive oxygen
species generation. J. Biol. Chem. 286, 16052–16062.
Chambers, J.W., Cherry, L., Laughlin, J.D., Figuera-Losada, M., Lograsso, P.V., 2011. Selective
inhibition of mitochondrial JNK signaling achieved using peptide mimicry of
the Sab kinase interacting motif-1 (KIM1). ACS Chem. Biol. 6, 808–818.
Chavez-Valdez, R., Martin, L.J., Flock, D.L., Northington, F.J., 2012. Necrostatin-1 attenuates
mitochondrial dysfunction in neurons and astrocytes following neonatal
hypoxia–ischemia. Neuroscience 219, 192–203.
Dhanasekaran, D.N., Reddy, E.P., 2008. JNK signaling in apoptosis. Oncogene 27,
6245–6251.
Esneault, E., Castagne, V., Moser, P., Bonny, C., Bernaudin, M., 2008. D-JNKi, a peptide
inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal kinase, promotes functional recovery after transient
focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Neuroscience 152, 308–320.
Fan, M., Goodwin, M., Vu, T., Brantley-Finley, C., Gaarde, W.A., Chambers, T.C., 2000.
Vinblastine-induced phosphorylation of Bcl-2 and Bcl-XL is mediated by JNK and
occurs in parallel with inactivation of the Raf-1/MEK/ERK cascade. J. Biol. Chem.
275, 29980–29985.
Feksa, L.R., Latini, A., Rech, V.C., Wajner, M., Dutra-Filho, C.S., de Souza Wyse, A.T.,
Wannmacher, C.M., 2006. Promotion of oxidative stress by L-tryptophan in cerebral
cortex of rats. Neurochem. Int. 49, 87–93.
Ferriero, D.M., 2004. Neonatal brain injury. N. Engl. J. Med. 351, 1985–1995.
Gilland, E., Puka-Sundvall, M., Hillered, L., Hagberg, H., 1998. Mitochondrial function
and energy metabolism after hypoxia–ischemia in the immature rat brain: involvement
of NMDA-receptors. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 18, 297–304.
Ginet, V., Puyal, J., Magnin, G., Clarke, P.G., Truttmann, A.C., 2009. Limited role of the c-
Jun N-terminal kinase pathway in a neonatal rat model of cerebral hypoxia–
ischemia. J. Neurochem. 108, 552–562.
Grow, J., Barks, J.D., 2002. Pathogenesis of hypoxic–ischemic cerebral injury in the term
infant: current concepts. Clin. Perinatol. 29, 585–602.
Ham, J., Eilers, A., Whitfield, J., Neame, S.J., Shah, B., 2000. c-Jun and the transcriptional
control of neuronal apoptosis. Biochem. Pharmacol. 60, 1015–1021.
Hanawa, N., Shinohara, M., Saberi, B., Gaarde, W.A., Han, D., Kaplowitz, N., 2008.
Role of JNK translocation to mitochondria leading to inhibition of mitochondria
bioenergetics in acetaminophen-induced liver injury. J. Biol. Chem. 283,
13565–13577.
Hirt, L., Badaut, J., Thevenet, J., Granziera, C., Regli, L., Maurer, F., Bonny, C., Bogousslavsky,
J., 2004. D-JNKI1, a cell-penetrating c-Jun-N-terminal kinase inhibitor, protects
against cell death in severe cerebral ischemia. Stroke 35, 1738–1743.
Johnston, M.V., Fatemi, A., Wilson, M.A., Northington, F., 2011. Treatment advances
in neonatal neuroprotection and neurointensive care. Lancet Neurol. 10,
372–382.
Karin, M., Gallagher, E., 2005. From JNK to pay dirt: jun kinases, their biochemistry,
physiology and clinical importance. IUBMB Life 57, 283–295.
Kharbanda, S., Saxena, S., Yoshida, K., Pandey, P., Kaneki, M., Wang, Q., Cheng, K., Chen,
Y.N., Campbell, A., Sudha, T., Yuan, Z.M., Narula, J., Weichselbaum, R., Nalin, C., Kufe,
D., 2000. Translocation of SAPK/JNK to mitochondria and interaction with Bcl-x(L)
in response to DNA damage. J. Biol. Chem. 275, 322–327.
Kroemer, G., Galluzzi, L., Brenner, C., 2007. Mitochondrial membrane permeabilization
in cell death. Physiol. Rev. 87, 99–163.
Lee, I., Bender, E., Kadenbach, B., 2002. Control of mitochondrial membrane potential
and ROS formation by reversible phosphorylation of cytochrome c oxidase. Mol.
Cell. Biochem. 234–235, 63–70.
Liu, J.R., Zhao, Y., Patzer, A., Staak, N., Boehm, R., Deuschl, G., Culman, J., Bonny, C.,
Herdegen, T., Eschenfelder, C., 2010. The c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) inhibitor
XG-102 enhances the neuroprotection of hyperbaric oxygen after cerebral ischaemia
in adult rats. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 36, 211–224.
Lowry, O.H., Passonneau, J.V., Hasselberger, F.X., Schulz, D.W., 1964. Effect of ischemia
on known substrates and cofactors of the glycolytic pathway in brain. J. Biol. Chem.
239, 18–30.
Michel-Monigadon, D., Bonny, C., Hirt, L., 2010. c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway inhibition
in intracerebral hemorrhage. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 29, 564–570.
Nijboer, C.H., Groenendaal, F., Kavelaars, A., Hagberg, H.H., van Bel, F., Heijnen, C.J., 2007.
Gender-specific neuroprotection by 2-iminobiotin after hypoxia–ischemia in the
neonatal rat via a nitric oxide independent pathway. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
27, 282–292.
Nijboer, C.H., Heijnen, C.J., Groenendaal, F., May, M.J., van Bel, F., Kavelaars, A., 2008a.
Strong neuroprotection by inhibition of NF-kappaB after neonatal hypoxia–
ischemia involves apoptotic mechanisms but is independent of cytokines. Stroke
39, 2129–2137.
Nijboer, C.H., Heijnen, C.J., Groenendaal, F., May, M.J., van Bel, F., Kavelaars, A., 2008b. A
dual role of the NF-kappaB pathway in neonatal hypoxic–ischemic brain damage.
Stroke 39, 2578–2586.
Nijboer, C.H., Heijnen, C.J., Groenendaal, F., van Bel, F., Kavelaars, A., 2009. Alternate
pathways preserve tumor necrosis factor-alpha production after nuclear
factor-kappaB inhibition in neonatal cerebral hypoxia–ischemia. Stroke 40,
3362–3368.
Nijboer, C.H., van der Kooij, M.A., van Bel, F., Ohl, F., Heijnen, C.J., Kavelaars, A., 2010.
Inhibition of the JNK/AP-1 pathway reduces neuronal death and improves behavioral
outcome after neonatal hypoxic–ischemic brain injury. Brain Behav. Immun.
24, 812–821.
Nijboer, C.H., Heijnen, C.J., van der Kooij, M.A., Zijlstra, J., van Velthoven, C.T., Culmsee,
C., van Bel, F., Hagberg, H., Kavelaars, A., 2011. Targeting the p53 pathway to protect
the neonatal ischemic brain. Ann. Neurol. 70, 255–264.
Northington, F.J., Chavez-Valdez, R., Martin, L.J., 2011. Neuronal cell death in neonatal
hypoxia–ischemia. Ann. Neurol. 69, 743–758.
Perlman, M., Shah, P.S., 2011. Hypoxic–ischemic encephalopathy: challenges in outcome
and prediction. J. Pediatr. 158, e51–e54.
Repici, M., Centeno, C., Tomasi, S., Forloni, G., Bonny, C., Vercelli, A., Borsello, T.,
2007. Time-course of c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation after cerebral ischemia
and effect of D-JNKI1 on c-Jun and caspase-3 activation. Neuroscience
150, 40–49.
Repici, M., Mare, L., Colombo, A., Ploia, C., Sclip, A., Bonny, C., Nicod, P., Salmona, M.,
Borsello, T., 2009. c-Jun N-terminal kinase binding domain-dependent phosphorylation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 4 and mitogen-activated protein
kinase kinase 7 and balancing cross-talk between c-Jun N-terminal kinase and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase pathways in cortical neurons. Neuroscience 159,
94–103.
Schallert, T., Fleming, S.M., Leasure, J.L., Tillerson, J.L., Bland, S.T., 2000. CNS plasticity
and assessment of forelimb sensorimotor outcome in unilateral rat models of
443 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(8.0.0.2542.914409033 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
stroke, cortical ablation, parkinsonism andspinalcordinjur y. Neuropharmacology
39, 777–787.
Schroeter, H., Boyd, C.S., Ahmed, R., Spencer, J.P., Duncan, R.F., Rice-Evans, C., Cadenas, E.,
2003. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)-mediated modulation of brain mitochondria
function: new target proteins for JNK signalling in mitochondrion-dependent apoptosis.
Biochem. J. 372, 359–369.
Sevilla, A., Santos, C.R., Barcia, R., Vega, F.M., Lazo, P.A., 2004. c-Jun phosphorylation by
the human vaccinia-related kinase 1 (VRK1) and its cooperation with the N-
terminal kinase of c-Jun (JNK). Oncogene 23, 8950–8958.
vandenTweel,E.R.,Kavelaars,A.,Lombardi,M.S.,Groenendaal,F.,May,M.,Heijnen,
C.J., van Bel, F., 2006. Selective inhibition of nuclear factor-kappa B activation
after hypoxia/ischemia in neonatal rats is not neuroprotective. Pediatr. Res. 59, 232–236.
Vannucci, R.C., Yager, J.Y., Vannucci, S., 1994. Cerebral glucose and energy utilization during
the evolution of hypoxic–ischemic brain damage in the immature rat. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 14, 279–288.
Vannucci, R.C., Towfighi, J., Vannucci, S., 2004. Secondary energy failure after cerebral hypoxia–ischemia in the immature rat. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 24, 1090–1097.
Waetzig, V., Herdegen, T., 2005. Context-specific inhibition of JNKs: overcoming the dilemma
of protection and damage. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 26, 455–461.
Wiegler, K., Bonny, C., Coquoz, D., Hirt, L., 2008. The JNK inhibitor XG-102 protects from
ischemic damage with delayed intravenous administration also in the presence of recombinant
tissue plasminogen activator. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 26, 360–366.
Wiltshire, C., Matsushita, M., Tsukada, S., Gillespie, D.A., May, G.H., 2002. A new c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK)-interacting protein, Sab (SH3BP5), associates with mitochondria.
Biochem. J. 367, 577–585.
Wiltshire, C., Gillespie, D.A., May, G.H., 2004. Sab (SH3BP5), a novel mitochondrialocalized
JNK-interacting protein. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 32, 1075–1077.
Zhou, Q., Lam, P.Y., Han, D., Cadenas, E., 2008. c-Jun N-terminal kinase regulates mitochondrial
bioenergetics by modulating pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in primary
cortical neurons. J. Neurochem. 104, 325–335.
444 C.H. Nijboer et al. / Neurobiology of Disease 54 (2013) 432–444
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1333565070)
