Journal of Neuroscience Research 93:1250–1257 (2015)

Blood as the Carrier of Ischemic Tolerance
in Rat Brain
Petra Bonova* and Miroslav Gottlieb
Institute of Neurobiology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Kosice, Slovak Republic

This study provides clear evidence that the factor inducing tolerance to ischemia is transmitted via the circulating
blood. By using the remote ischemia and the crosscirculation model, the tolerance to ischemia was transmitted from donor to recipient. For this study, the following
experimental groups were designed: I, sham control
group; II, group of tolerant hindlimb tourniquet-treated
rats; III, positive control group; IV, control for crosscirculation influence; preconditioned animals: V, tolerant
animals subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO); VI, tolerant animals cross-circulated with SHC,
followed by MCAO; VII, SHC animals cross-circulated
with tolerant animals and subsequently subjected to
MCAO; VIII, tolerant animals cross-circulated with ischemic rats, followed by MCAO; IX, SHC animals crosscirculated with ischemic animals and subjected to
MCAO; postconditioned animals: X, ischemic animals
treated with a remote limb tourniquet; XI, ischemic animals cross-circulated with SHC control rats; and XII,
ischemic animals cross-circulated with tolerant rats.
Results confirmed that remote ischemia induced reduction of infarct volume in the preconditioned (V, 60%) as
well as in the postconditioned group (X, 52%). Significant
diminution was also observed in group XII (56.6%). In the
preconditioned group, decreased infarct volume was
detected in groups VI and VII (about 65%) and in group
IX (about 50%). The greatest infarct reduction (84%) was
induced by the presence of ischemic blood in a tolerant
rat before ischemia induction. In summary, the factor
inducing tolerance to ischemia is generated by remote
ischemia and by ischemia itself; from the site of origin to
the rest of the body, it is transported by the systemic
blood circulation and can be transferred from animal to
animal. The effect of conditioning with two different ischemic events (brain and hindlimb ischemia) led to a cumulative, stronger tolerance response. VC 2015 Wiley Periodicals,

numbers also reflect the intense effort to find a solution to
eliminate stroke outcome in experimental as well as in
clinical practice. The huge number of clinical trials targeting the prevention and treatment of stroke and cerebrovascular disease (in the Stroke Trials Registry of The
Internet Stroke Centre at Washington University School
of Medicine) provides convincing evidence of this.
Recently, the phenomenon of ischemic tolerance
has gained attention as an attractive strategy for improving
stroke outcome. In general, tolerance to an ischemic condition could be initiated by a sublethal dose of a “harmful
agent” applied before (preconditioning), during (perconditioning), or after (postconditioning) the lethal ischemic
insult itself. This phenomenon is protective in organ
ischemia of multiple animal species, which implies that
the underlying mechanism is strongly conserved. Moreover, the identity of the harmful agent has varied significantly, beginning with short mechanical ischemic insults
(Kitagawa et al., 1990, 1991; Zhao et al., 2006), followed
by pharmacological treatment and chemical agent application (Ferguson and Stone, 2008; Lee et al., 2008; DellaMorte et al., 2009; Wu et al., 2009), electroacupuncture
(Jin et al., 2013), sports activity (Chen et al., 2007), hypothermia (Yenari and Han, 2012), hypoxia (Sharp et al.,
2004), and others, terminating with clinically very attractive remote conditioning (Zhao et al., 2012).
Despite the wild variety of conditioning options,
the underlying mechanism of transport to the target
organ, the mechanism of action, and the identity of the
tolerance-inducing signal remain unclear. With remote
conditioning the signal transfers from the remote organ
(usually a limb) to the brain easily and effectively, overcoming natural barriers. There are three main theories
about the protective signal transmission, although it
should be noted that they are not mutually exclusive. The
first theory involves humeral factors acting via the

Inc.

Key words: brain ischemia; ischemic tolerance; tolerance-inducing factor; cross-circulation; remote tolerance

Statistical screening from January, 2014, reveals that
the stroke prevalence among the U.S. population over 20
years of age was 6.8 million, i.e., 2.8%. Projections show
that, by 2030, an additional 3.4 million people over 18
years of age will have had a stroke, a 20.5% increase in
prevalence from 2012 (Go et al., 2014). These alarming
C 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
V

Contract grant sponsor: Slovak Grant Agencies (VEGA); Contract grant
number: 2/0012/15; Contract grant number: 2/0045/15.
*Correspondence to: Petra Bonova, Institute of Neurobiology, SAS,
Soltesovej 4/6, Kosice SK-040 01, Slovak Republic.
E-mail: kravcukova@saske.sk
Received 7 November 2014; Revised 20 January 2015; Accepted 9
February 2015
Published online 18 March 2015 in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI: 10.1002/jnr.23580

Blood Role in Neuroprotection

1251

Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the experimental design. I, Sham control
group; II, group of tolerant animals, hindlimb tourniquet-treated rats;
III, positive control group; IV, control for cross-circulation influence.
Preconditioned animals: V, tolerant animals subjected to MCAO; VI,
tolerant animals cross-circulated with SHC, followed by MCAO; VII,
SHC animals cross-circulated with tolerant animals and subsequently

subjected to MCAO; VIII, tolerant animals cross-circulated with
ischemic rats, followed by MCAO; IX, SHC animals cross-circulated
with ischemic animals and subjected to MCAO. Postconditioned animals: X, ischemic animals treated with a remote limb tourniquet; XI,
ischemic animals cross-circulated with SHC control rats; XII, ischemic
animals cross-circulated with tolerant rats.

systematic circulation; the second theory involves neurogenic transmission, including muscle afferents and the
autonomic nervous system; the last theory involves the
effect of circulating immune cells (Hess et al., 2013).
To determine the mechanism of action and the
identity of the tolerance-inducing signal, this work examines the hypothesis that circulating blood could be the
carrier of the signal responsible for induction of tolerance
against ischemia in the brain. We developed an isovolemic continuous blood cross-circulation model for mutual
exchange, in total, of half of the blood volume between
two rats, i.e., between the donor of tolerance and the
recipient. Remote hindlimb preconditioned and postconditioned rats transiently subjected to ischemia were used
to induce production of the factor responsible for induction of brain tissue tolerance. The rats survived for 1 day
as a result of maximal infarct volume. Especially in the
preconditioned group, this model demonstrates that blood
is a carrier of the tolerance mediator and excludes some
humoral and neural factors, such as changes in blood flow
in the site of injury or direct neurogenic transmission.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The experiments were carried out in accordance with the protocol for animal care approved by the Slovak Health Committee (1998) and the European Communities Council Directive
(86/609/EEC). Every effort was made to minimize animal suffering and to reduce the number of animals used. Adult albino
Wistar rats weighing 270–320 g were maintained on a 12-hr
light/dark cycle and given food and water ad libitum. Food was
withdrawn 1 day before surgery.

Journal of Neuroscience Research

Design of the Experiment
The following experimental groups were used (Fig. 1): I,
sham control group (n 5 5); II, group of tolerant animals consisting of rats subjected to remote ischemic conditioning
(n 5 5); III, positive control group consisting of animals subjected to a 90-min middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO;
n 5 10); IV, control group for cross-circulation influence
involving sham-operated control animals (SHC) mutually
cross-circulated and subjected to MCAO (n 5 6); preconditioned animals: V, tolerant hindlimb ischemia-treated animals

1252

Bonova and Gottlieb

Fig. 2. Diagram of the blood cross-circulation model. ECA of blood
donor and external jugular vein of blood recipient mutually connected
with a system of polyurethane cannulae. Arrows show the direction of
blood flow. CCA, common carotid artery; ICA, internal carotid
artery; EJV, external jugular vein.

subjected to MCAO (n 5 6); VI; tolerant animals crosscirculated with SHC, followed by MCAO (n 5 6); VII, SHC
animals cross-circulated with tolerant animals and subsequently
subjected to MCAO (n 5 8); VIII, tolerant animals crosscirculated with ischemic rats, followed by MCAO (n 5 6); IX,
SHC animals cross-circulated with ischemic animals and subjected to MCAO (n 5 6); postconditioned animals: X, ischemic
animals treated with remote limb tourniquet (n 5 6); XI, ischemic animals cross-circulated with SHC control rats (n 5 6); and
XII, ischemic animals cross-circulated with tolerant hindlimb
ischemia-treated rats (n 5 6).
Blood Cross-Circulation Model
Two rats were mutually cross-circulated under isoflurane
anesthesia (1%) with a system of polyurethane tubing filled with
saline (Fig. 2). Tubes were used for cannulation of the right jugular vein (size 3 fr, ID 0.6 mm, OD 1 mm, length 45 mm) and
right external carotid artery (ECA) in the direction from the incision to the common carotid artery bifurcation (size 2 fr, ID
0.4 mm, OD 0.7 mm, length 13 mm). The jugular vein and
ECA cannulae were bridged between rats by a system of polyurethane cannulae (size 3 fr, length 40 mm) and short silicon tube
connectors (size 5 fr, 7 fr, length 5 mm). Rats were heparinized
15 min before cross-circulation by intravenous application of
heparin (250 U/kg), and subsequently the cannulae were linked
for 30 min. The beginning of cross-circulation was visually verified by the blood replacing the saline and at the end of the process by the bleeding resulting from disconnection of the silicone
connectors on the jugular vein cannula. Local cerebral blood
flow (LCBF) was measured during the entire surgical procedure,
including the cross-circulation period, with a laser Doppler flowmeter (PeriFlux System 5000; Perimed AB, Jarfalla, Sweden; Fig.
3). A 407 probe with an adequate holder was situated on the skull
over the MCA (5 mm lateral and 1 mm posterior to bregma).
The duration and suitability of the cross-circulation
model were verified by intravenous injection of Evans blue dye
(120 mg/kg) to the donor rat before the cannulae linked it with
the recipient (Fig. 3A). During the cross-circulation, blood
samples from both rats were collected at 10-min intervals up to
40 min, and the plasma was processed (centrifugation at

Fig. 3. Representative schematic of the changes in local cerebral blood
flow in animals subjected to preischemic tolerance induction and subsequent preischemic blood cross-circulation (group VIII; A) and rats
cross-circulated after the MCA occlusion (group XII; B).Tolerance
induction by hindlimb ischemia did not affect MCA blood flow or
mutual blood cross-circulation (CC). Right common carotid artery
occlusion (CCAo) reduced LCBF to approximately 50% of the baseline, and additional MCAO further decreased LCBF to approximately
20%. LCBF was normalized after the MCA release (MCAr).

12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 C). The Evans blue content in the
blood plasma was evaluated spectrophotometrically (620 nm).
The appropriate time of cross-circulation was selected with
respect to the balance of Evans blue content in both rats and
minimizing the influence of the anesthetics.
Tolerance Induction
To induce tolerance in experimental groups, a modified
hindlimb tourniquet model was used (Hu et al., 2012). Briefly,
right hindlimb ischemia was induced for three cycles of 5 min
by placing an elastic rubber band tourniquet on the proximal
part of the limb, followed by an intervening 5-min reperfusion
during which the tourniquet was untied. The procedure was
performed in three cycles beginning 1 hr before cerebral
ischemia in the preconditioned group (i.e., 30 min before
cross-circulation) and in three cycles 30 min after MCAO in
the postconditioned group. A pulse sensor was placed to indicate the femoral artery’s location and reperfusion.
Transient MCAO
Transient focal ischemia was induced by MCAO in rats
by using the intraluminal filament technique adapted from the
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Blood Role in Neuroprotection
rat model (Longa et al., 1989). Rats were anesthetized with 4%
isoflurane in an anesthetic chamber and maintained during surgery
with 1–1.5% isoflurane via a rodent mask. Body temperature was
maintained at 37 C with a heating pad. MCAO was carried out
for 90 min by inserting a 4-0 nylon monofilament via the right
ECA into the internal carotid artery to block the origin of the
MCA. Sham-operated controls were surgically treated the same as
the ischemic group, but the MCA was not occluded. Normothermic conditions (approximately 37 C) were maintained by a
feedback-controlled heating pad during all surgical procedures.
The severity of MCA occlusion was confirmed by measuring
LCBF with a laser Doppler flowmeter. Only rats with blood flow
reduced by more than 80% were used for the experiments (Fig. 3).
Neurological deficits were assessed in each animal on a
numerical scale of 0–4 at 1 hr and 24 hr of postischemic reperfusion. The scoring system used is from Bederson et al. (1986):
0, no detectable deficits; 1, forelimb flexion and torso turning
to the contralateral side when lifted by the tail; 2, same behavior
as grade 1 with decreased resistance to a lateral push, leaning to
the contralateral side; 3, same behaviour as grade 2 with unilateral circling to the contralateral side spontaneously or when the
rat is held by the tail; 4, no spontaneous walking and a
depressed level of consciousness. Rats with a neurological deficit of less than 2 on the first day were excluded from the study.
Determination of Infarct Volume
After 1 day, surviving rats were deeply anesthetized with
chloral hydrate and decapitated. The brains were removed, cut
into 2-mm-thick slices by a rodent brain matrix (RBM 4000C;
ASI Instruments, Warren, MI), immersed in a 1% solution of
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride in phosphate-buffered
saline, and incubated at 37 C for 15–20 min. After a subsequent
fixation in 10% formalin, brain sections were scanned with a
high-resolution scanner (HP Scanjet; Hewlett-Packard, Palo
Alto, CA), and images were processed in ImageJ (NIH,
Bethesda, MD) for the final infarct volume calculation. The
nonischemic hemisphere, ischemic hemisphere, and infarct
areas of each brain section were measured in a blinded manner,
and the average infarct area (square millimeters) was calculated
by the formula (infarct area on the anterior surface 1 infarct
area on the posterior surface)/2. Infarct volumes (cubic millimeters) were calculated by summing all the section areas and
multiplying by the slice thickness. The corrected infarct volume
to compensate for brain edema was calculated by applying the
formula (nonischemic volume/ischemic volume) 3 infarct volume (Callaway et al., 2000).
Statistical Analysis
Data are expressed as mean 6 SEM. Statistical analysis was
by one-way ANOVA, followed by the Dunnett post hoc test
and t-test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

RESULTS
Cross-Circulation Model Evaluation and
Determination of Cross-Circulation Period
In this model, two animals were mutually crosslinked by a system of polyurethane cannulae. MCA blood
Journal of Neuroscience Research

1253

Fig. 4. Determination of the cross-circulation period. Graphically
processed results of time-dependent spectrophotometric evaluation of
Evans blue dye content in blood of Evans blue-injected donor and
saline-injected recipient animal during the cross-circulation. ***P <
0.001.

flow was monitored during the blood cross-circulation to
avoid local tissue hypoperfusion. Local cerebral blood
flow was 96% 6 3.7% of the baseline (Fig. 3); i.e., those
measurements confirmed no significant changes in MCA
blood flow this time.
MCA occlusion after cross-circulation between two
control rats (group IV; Fig. 5) confirmed no differences in
the range of infarct volumes compared with the positive control group; i.e., the mutual blood cross-circulation between
the two animals did not influence the building of tolerance
against ischemia. The infarct volume was established as
238.5 6 38.3 mm3. Neurological deficit of cross-circulated
rats subjected to brain ischemia did not differ significantly
compared with positive control (group IV; Fig. 5C).
The suitability of the model and cross-circulation
timing was verified and confirmed with Evans blue dye
injected into the donor animal. The cross-circulation
between donor and recipient was visually confirmed by
the bluish tint of the recipient animal. Moreover, the
results of spectrophotometric analysis of plasma Evans
blue content in both rats confirmed the patency of the
system. However, after 20 min of cross-circulation, a loss
of significant difference in plasma dye content was
observed. A large variance of the data from this time
period led to establishing 30 min of cross-circulation as
sufficient for mutual total blood volume exchange (half
dilution with partner’s blood). During this time, the
Evans blue dye concentration in the plasma of both rats
reached 2.48 6 0.002 to 2.48 6 0.01 mg/ml (Fig. 4).
Neuroprotective Effect of Remote Ischemia
Preconditioning and Postconditioning
This part of the study was designed to prove the
neuroprotective effect of limb ischemia. In both models

1254

Bonova and Gottlieb

of conditioning, repeated hindlimb tourniquet led to a
noticeable reduction in infarct volume and to a significant
improvement of neurological deficit caused by MCAO
(Fig. 5). In the preconditioned group (V), ischemic tissue
was evaluated as 94 6 22 mm3; i.e., tourniquet preconditioning reduced stroke core volume by about 60% compared with positive control (234.5 6 19.9 mm3). In the
postconditioned group (X), this reduction in the infarct
core was lower but still significant (P 5 0.0025). The volume of the infarct was established as 111.8 6 30.5 mm3,
reduced by about 52% compared with the positive control. Hindlimb tourniquet-treated animals without subsequent ischemia (group II) were TTC negative and did
not differ from the SHC (group I).
Blood as the Carrier of Ischemic Tolerance in Rat
Brain
Preischemic tolerance transmission. This part
of the study was designed to prove the hypothesis that the
factor inducing tolerance to ischemia is transmitted via
the circulating blood. Our experiments clearly confirm
that enrichment of sham control animals with the blood
of tolerant rats (group VII) led to significant protection of
the brain against focal ischemia and neurological deficit
improvement. As shown in Figure 5, the infarct volume
in this group reached 81.9 6 31.4 mm3, which was comparable to the range of neuroprotection in the crosscirculation free hindlimb ischemia preconditioned group
subjected to MCAO (94 6 22 mm3, group V). Moreover,
a significant reduction in brain infarct volume in control
animals cross-circulated with MCAO rats was observed
(group IX.). The range of ischemic core volume after 1
day of recirculation was calculated as 117.7 6 37.6 mm3
(about a 50% reduction compared with the positive
control).
In partner rats (group VI) that were preconditioned,
half dilution of their blood with the blood of sham operated animals did not reduce their ability to protect brain
tissue against an ischemic condition. The range of brain
damage was established as 106.4 6 30.6 mm3. The strongest brain tissue protection was observed in tolerant,
tourniquet-treated animals cross-circulated with ischemic
rats (group VIII). In this group, the infarct volume
declined by about 84% (37.2 6 23.8 mm3) compared
with the positive control. On the other hand, neurological deficit in those rats was not significantly improved
after a 1-day reperfusion because of a large variance in the
data.
Postischemic tolerance transmission. The
hypothesis that circulating blood could be the carrier of
the signal responsible for induction of tolerance against
ischemic condition in the brain was also confirmed in
postconditioned animals. In this part of the experiment,
rats subjected to a 90-min occlusion of the MCA were
subsequently cross-circulated with sham (group XI) operated or hindlimb tourniquet-treated (tolerant, group XII)
animals (Fig. 5B). The results showed that postischemic
enrichment of tolerant blood (group XII) led to a signifi-

cant reduction in infarct to 101.8 6 27.2 mm3 (about
56.6%) compared with positive control animals. This
decline in core volume was comparable to that in the
group consisting of cross-circulation-free postischemic
tourniquet-treated animals (111.8 6 23.6 mm3, group X).
Postischemic transfusion of blood from sham operated
animals (group XI) also led to infarct size reduction; however, this reduction was not significant (175.2 6 10 mm3).
DISCUSSION
This article summarizes several novel, highly attractive
findings and provides the first evidence that systemic
blood circulation transmits the information leading to
induction of tolerance to an ischemic condition (tolerance-inducing factor; TIF) from the site of origin (hindlimb) to the brain. Our results contribute to a better
understanding of how the protective effect of remote
muscle ischemia–reperfusion is evoked and transmitted to
the distant target organ on the systemic level. We developed a functional model of mutual blood crosscirculation between two animals applicable for this type
of experimental study. The potential of this model lies in
omitting recipient blood hemodilution and the minimal
impact on the nature of the donor and recipient blood
and blood compartments and the minimal influence on
cerebral blood flow.
We have shown that the TIF is effectively generated
by limb ischemia and induces protection of brain tissue
against ischemic condition in preconditioned and postconditioned groups. This TIF is the part of the circulating
blood of the donor, limb ischemia-treated animal and
provided full tolerance to lethal ischemic stress for the
brain tissue of the blood recipient (control animal). Aside
from the hindlimb ischemia, brain ischemia itself generates a TIF. Blood transfusion from an ischemia-treated
animal to a control rat led to a build-up of tolerance to
subsequent MCAO. Moreover, when “ischemic” blood
was applied to a tourniquet-treated animal, tolerance to
MCAO was the greatest, more than 50% stronger compared with the tourniquet-preconditioned group. Thus,
we conclude that those stimuli could be cumulative to
build tolerance and could promote a stronger and more
effective tolerance response. The explanation for this beneficial effect leading to brain infarct reduction comes from
the nature of preconditioning-induced ischemic tolerance. The brain is equipped with a remarkable capacity to
mount self-protective programs that are tuned to limit the
deleterious effects of ischemia, endogenous neuroprotection (Iadecola and Anrather, 2011). These protective programs can be evoked by sublethal stimuli that are not
harmful, but they ensure the readiness of cells for lethal
ischemic conditions; i.e., those programs provide ischemic tolerance. For regular development of ischemic tolerance, both sublethal stimulus and lethal ischemia must be
included (Kirino, 2002). The deleterious effect of ischemic conditioning depends on several factors. The most
important and mutually cross-linked parameters are 1)
degree and duration of lethal ischemia, 2) intensity of
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Blood Role in Neuroprotection

Fig. 5. Brain infarct volume determination. A: Representative photographs of 2-mm-thick brain slices of groups studied. B.C: Graphically
evaluated range of infarct volumes (in mm3) of all groups studied.
Evaluation of neurological deficit score of all groups studied after 1 hr
and 24 hr of postischemic reperfusion. I, Sham control group; II,
group of tolerant, hindlimb tourniquet-treated rats,; III, positive control group; IV, control for cross-circulation influence. Preconditioned
animals: V, tolerant animals subjected to MCAO; VI, tolerant animals
cross-circulated with SHC, followed by MCAO; VII, SHC animals

Journal of Neuroscience Research

1255

cross-circulated with tolerant animals and subsequently subjected to
MCAO; VIII, tolerant animals cross-circulated with ischemic rats, followed by MCAO; IX, SHC animals cross-circulated with ischemic
animals and subjected to MCAO. Postconditioned animals: X, ischemic animals treated with a remote limb tourniquet; XI, ischemic animals cross-circulated with SHC control rats; XII, ischemic animals
cross-circulated with tolerant rats. CC, cross-circulation; *P < 0.05,
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. [Color figure can be viewed in the
online issue, which is available at wileyonlinelibrary.com.]

1256

Bonova and Gottlieb

stimuli inducing ischemic tolerance, and 3) timing of the
stimuli application. From our results, we can suppose that
limb as well as brain ischemia led to evocation of the TIF
(carried by blood circulation) that was able to activate the
endogenous neuroprotection mechanism in the TIF
recipient and to save cells against the subsequent damaging impact of MCAO. Confirmation that the TIF is transported in blood was also reflected in the postconditioned
group. Postischemic transfusion of tolerant blood into an
ischemic rat led to a significant infarct size reduction
comparable to that of hindlimb tourniquetpostconditioned animals. A slight reduction in infarct volume resulting from postischemic cross-circulation with
control animals could be caused by the half blood volume
dilution. From our previous studies (Gottlieb et al., 2003;
Kravcukova et al., 2010; Bonova et al., 2013a,b) with
postischemic blood, tissue glutamate level, and glutamate
efflux from brain to blood, we assume that these reductions could be linked to the rapid decrease in blood and
tissue glutamate levels in a relatively early stage of postischemic reperfusion resulting from dilution of ischemic
blood and blood with a low glutamate content.
There is no explicitly recognized final common
pathway of neuroprotection explaining how the protective effect of remote muscle ischemia–reperfusion is generated and transmitted to the distant target organ. The
present study provides information about the crucial role
of systemic blood circulation in its transmission to the target organ.
In previous studies dealing with myocardial and
brain ischemia, authors have suggested an influence of the
autonomic nervous system (Gho et al., 1996; Malhotra
et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2012; Wei et al., 2012). Afferent
neurons receive and transmit information from the
peripheral organs or tissues to the central nervous system.
They are stimulated by some humeral mediators that are
known to be released in ischemic muscle (Kerendi et al.,
2005; Shimizu et al., 2009; Zhou et al., 2011). Local muscle ischemia may lead to release of autocoids (bradykinin,
adenosine, and opioids), which may locally activate nerve
afferents (described above) or enter the systemic circulation with alternate immune mechanisms (Weber et al.,
2010). It is well known that inflammatory pathways are
crucially involved in evocation of neuroprotective mechanisms that lead to ischemic tolerance (Narayanan et al.,
2013). Several studies have reported an influence of
immune cells (reduced neutrophil activation to endothelium, inflammatory gene expression) in building tolerance
to ischemic stress mediated by limb ischemia (Konstantinov et al., 2004; Shimizu et al., 2010).
The model of blood cross-circulation in the present
study allows a better understanding of how the protective
effect of remote muscle ischemia–reperfusion is generated
and transmitted to the brain. We suppose that, in the process of TIF production, all of the theories described above
should be included and cross-linked, whereas, for its
transport to the target organ, only the blood is responsible. However muscle ischemia initiates a series of neurogenic and blood-born pathways, we clearly confirm that

the final product of hindlimb ischemia that initiates neuroprotection (TIF) is carried by circulating blood. We still
do not know the identity of the TIF. Nevertheless, limb
ischemia may first affect the blood circulation and the
function of various blood cells, including T cells, macrophages, and neutrophils, which are closely associated with
brain inflammation (Gelderblom et al., 2009; GarciaBonilla et al., 2014). Moreover, the nature of the blood–
brain barrier and the abilities of the systematic circulation
predispose us to assume that the TIF is a low-molecularweight molecule that can circulate in the organism and
easily (passively or actively) cross the natural barriers from
the place of origin to the target organ. Therefore, we will
turn our focus to screening of blood low-weight molecules in our next experiments. Our hypothesis is supported by the findings of Shimizu et al. (2009). Those
authors found that plasma dialysate obtained with 15-kDa
cutoff dialysis membrane protected an isolated perfused
heart and cardiomyocytes in vitro; i.e., the protective
effect should be generated by molecules less than 15 kDa.
In conclusion, this study confirms that the factor
inducing tolerance to ischemic conditions is generated by
a hindlimb ischemia and by brain ischemia itself. It is
transported from the site of origin to the rest of the body,
i.e., to the ischemia-targeted organ, by the systemic blood
circulation. Moreover, this study demonstrates that this
TIF can be transferred from animal to animal, which is a
highly attractive result from the clinical point of view.
This study also shows that conditioning with brain and
limb ischemia leads to a cumulative, stronger tolerance
response. Thus, identification of this TIF and, subsequently, its pharmacological definition would pave the
way to improving the menace of stroke prevalence in the
future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of members of the working group at the Institute of Neurobiology, SAS, under the leadership of Dr. Burda.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors have no conflicts of interest related to this
work.
REFERENCES
Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski
H. 1986. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model
and development of a neurologic examination. Stroke 17:472–476.
Bonova P, Burda J, Danielisova V, Nemethova M, Gottlieb M. 2013a.
Delayed postconditioning reduces postischemic glutamate level and
improves protein synthesis in brain. Neurochem Int 62:854–860.
Bonova P, Burda J, Danielisova V, Nemethova M, Gottlieb M. 2013b.
Development of a pattern in biochemical parameters in the core and
penumbra during infarct evolution after transient MCAO in rats. Neurochem Int 62:8–14.
Callaway JK, Knight MJ, Watkins DJ, Beart PM, Jarrott B, Delaney PM.
2000. A novel, rapid, computerized method for quantitation of neuronal damage in a rat model of stroke. J Neurosci Methods 102:53–60.
Journal of Neuroscience Research

Blood Role in Neuroprotection
Chen HI, Hsieh SY, Yang FL, Hsu YH, Lin CC. 2007. Exercise training
attenuates septic responses in conscious rats. Med Sci Sports Exercise
39:435–442.
Della-Morte D, Dave KR, DeFazio RA, Bao YC, Raval AP, PerezPinzon MA. 2009. Resveratrol pretreatment protects rat brain from cerebral ischemic damage via a sirtuin 1-uncoupling protein 2 pathway.
Neuroscience 159:993–1002.
Ferguson AL, Stone TW. 2008. Adenosine preconditions against ouabain
but not against glutamate on CA1-evoked potentials in rat hippocampal
slices. Eur J Neurosci 28:2084–2098.
Garcia-Bonilla L, Benakis C, Moore J, Iadecola C, Anrather J. 2014.
Immune mechanisms in cerebral ischemic tolerance. Front Neurosci 8:
44.
Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, Behrens D, Choe CU, Siler
DA, Arumugam TV, Orthey E, Gerloff C, Tolosa E, Magnus T. 2009.
Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell accumulation in
stroke. Stroke 40:1849–1857.
Gho BC, Schoemaker RG, van den Doel MA, Duncker DJ, Verdouw
PD. 1996. Myocardial protection by brief ischemia in noncardiac tissue.
Circulation 94:2193–2200.
Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ,
Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, Franco S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern
SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, Kissela BM, Kittner
SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Mackey RH, Magid DJ,
Marcus GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd,
Moy CS, Mussolino ME, Neumar RW, Nichol G, Pandey DK,
Paynter NP, Reeves MJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN,
Virani SS, Wong ND, Woo D, Turner MB. 2014. Heart disease and
stroke statistics—2014 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 129:e28–e292.
Gottlieb M, Wang Y, Teichberg VI. 2003. Blood-mediated scavenging
of cerebrospinal fluid glutamate. J Neurochem 87:119–126.
Hess DC, Hoda MN, Bhatia K. 2013. Remote limb perconditioning
[corrected] and postconditioning: will it translate into a promising treatment for acute stroke? Stroke 44:1191–1197.
Hu S, Dong H, Zhang H, Wang S, Hou L, Chen S, Zhang J, Xiong L.
2012. Noninvasive limb remote ischemic preconditioning contributes
neuroprotective effects via activation of adenosine A1 receptor and
redox status after transient focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Brain Res
1459:81–90.
Iadecola C, Anrather J. 2011. Stroke research at a crossroad: asking the
brain for directions. Nat Neurosci 14:1363–1368.
Jin Z, Liang J, Wang J, Kolattukudy PE. 2013. Delayed brain ischemia
tolerance induced by electroacupuncture pretreatment is mediated via
MCP-induced protein 1. J Neuroinflammation 10:63.
Kerendi F, Kin H, Halkos ME, Jiang R, Zatta AJ, Zhao ZQ, Guyton
RA, Vinten-Johansen J. 2005. Remote postconditioning. Brief renal
ischemia and reperfusion applied before coronary artery reperfusion
reduces myocardial infarct size via endogenous activation of adenosine
receptors. Basic Res Cardiol 100:404–412.
Kirino T. 2002. Ischemic tolerance. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 22:
1283–1296.
Kitagawa K, Matsumoto M, Tagaya M, Hata R, Ueda H, Niinobe M,
Handa N, Fukunaga R, Kimura K, Mikoshiba K, et al. 1990. “Ischemic
tolerance” phenomenon found in the brain. Brain Res 528:21–24.
Kitagawa K, Matsumoto M, Kuwabara K, Tagaya M, Ohtsuki T, Hata
R, Ueda H, Handa N, Kimura K, Kamada T. 1991. “Ischemic toler-

Journal of Neuroscience Research

1257

ance” phenomenon detected in various brain regions. Brain Res 561:
203–211.
Konstantinov IE, Arab S, Kharbanda RK, Li J, Cheung MM,
Cherepanov V, Downey GP, Liu PP, Cukerman E, Coles JG,
Redington AN. 2004. The remote ischemic preconditioning stimulus
modifies inflammatory gene expression in humans. Physiol Genomics
19:143–150.
Kravcukova P, Danielisova V, Nemethova M, Burda J, Gottlieb M.
2010. Delayed postconditioning reduces glutamate concentration in
brain after transient global ischemia in rat. FENS Abstr 5:016.015.
Lee JJ, Li L, Jung HH, Zuo Z. 2008. Postconditioning with isoflurane
reduced ischemia-induced brain injury in rats. Anesthesiology 108:
1055–1062.
Liu R, Yuan H, Yuan F, Yang SH. 2012. Neuroprotection targeting
ischemic penumbra and beyond for the treatment of ischemic stroke.
Neurol Res 34:331–337.
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. 1989. Reversible middle
cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20:84–91.
Malhotra S, Naggar I, Stewart M, Rosenbaum DM. 2011. Neurogenic
pathway mediated remote preconditioning protects the brain from transient focal ischemic injury. Brain Res 1386:184–190.
Narayanan SV, Dave KR, Perez-Pinzon MA. 2013. Ischemic preconditioning and clinical scenarios. Curr Opin Neurol 26:1–7.
Sharp FR, Ran R, Lu A, Tang Y, Strauss KI, Glass T, Ardizzone T,
Bernaudin M. 2004. Hypoxic preconditioning protects against ischemic
brain injury. NeuroRx 1:26–35.
Shimizu M, Tropak M, Diaz RJ, Suto F, Surendra H, Kuzmin E, Li J,
Gross G, Wilson GJ, Callahan J, Redington AN. 2009. Transient limb
ischaemia remotely preconditions through a humoral mechanism acting
directly on the myocardium: evidence suggesting cross-species protection. Clin Sci 117:191–200.
Shimizu M, Saxena P, Konstantinov IE, Cherepanov V, Cheung MM,
Wearden P, Zhangdong H, Schmidt M, Downey GP, Redington AN.
2010. Remote ischemic preconditioning decreases adhesion and selectively modifies functional responses of human neutrophils. J Surg Res
158:155–161.
Weber SA, Watermann N, Jossinet J, Byrne JA, Chantrey J, Alam S, So
K, Bush J, O’Kane S, McAdams ET. 2010. Remote wound monitoring
of chronic ulcers. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed 14:371–377.
Wei D, Ren C, Chen X, Zhao H. 2012. The chronic protective effects
of limb remote preconditioning and the underlying mechanisms
involved in inflammatory factors in rat stroke. PloS One 7:e30892.
Wu X, Qian Z, Ke Y, Du F, Zhu L. 2009. Ginkgolide B preconditioning protects neurons against ischaemia-induced apoptosis. J Cell Mol
Med 13:4474–4483.
Yenari MA, Han HS. 2012. Neuroprotective mechanisms of hypothermia
in brain ischaemia. Nat Rev Neurosci 13:267–278.
Zhao H, Sapolsky RM, Steinberg GK. 2006. Interrupting reperfusion as
a stroke therapy: ischemic postconditioning reduces infarct size after
focal ischemia in rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 26:1114–1121.
Zhao H, Ren C, Chen X, Shen J. 2012. From rapid to delayed and
remote postconditioning: the evolving concept of ischemic postconditioning in brain ischemia. Curr Drug Targets 13:173–187.
Zhou Y, Fathali N, Lekic T, Ostrowski RP, Chen C, Martin RD, Tang
J, Zhang JH. 2011. Remote limb ischemic postconditioning protects
against neonatal hypoxic–ischemic brain injury in rat pups by the
opioid receptor/Akt pathway. Stroke 42:439–444.

