Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Free Radical Biology and Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/freeradbiomed

Original Contribution

The neuroprotective properties of the superoxide dismutase mimetic
tempol correlate with its ability to reduce pathological glutamate
release in a rodent model of stroke
Preeti Dohare a, María C. Hyzinski-García a, Aarshi Vipani a, Nicole H. Bowens a,
Julia W. Nalwalk a, Paul J. Feustel a, Richard W. Keller Jr. a, David Jourd’heuil b,
Alexander A. Mongin a,n
a
b

Center for Neuropharmacology and Neuroscience, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY 12208, USA
Center for Cardiovascular Sciences, Albany Medical College, Albany, NY 12208, USA

art ic l e i nf o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 18 March 2014
Received in revised form
2 July 2014
Accepted 26 August 2014
Available online 16 September 2014

The contribution of oxidative stress to ischemic brain damage is well established. Nevertheless, for
unknown reasons, several clinically tested antioxidant therapies have failed to show beneﬁts in human
stroke. Based on our previous in vitro work, we hypothesized that the neuroprotective potency of
antioxidants is related to their ability to limit the release of the excitotoxic amino acids glutamate and
aspartate. We explored the effects of two antioxidants, tempol and edaravone, on amino acid release in
the brain cortex, in a rat model of transient occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCAo). Amino acid
levels were quantiﬁed using a microdialysis approach, with the probe positioned in the ischemic
penumbra as veriﬁed by a laser Doppler technique. Two-hour MCAo triggered a dramatic increase in the
levels of glutamate, aspartate, taurine, and alanine. Microdialysate delivery of 10 mM tempol reduced
the amino acid release by 60–80%, whereas matching levels of edaravone had no effect. In line with these
data, an intracerebroventricular injection of tempol but not edaravone (500 nmol each, 15 min before
MCAo) reduced infarction volumes by 50% and improved neurobehavioral outcomes. In vitro assays
showed that tempol was superior at removing superoxide anion, whereas edaravone was more potent at
scavenging hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radical, and peroxynitrite. Overall, our data suggest that the
neuroprotective properties of tempol are probably related to its ability to reduce tissue levels of the
superoxide anion and pathological glutamate release and, in such a way, limit progression of brain
infarction within ischemic penumbra. These new ﬁndings may be instrumental in developing new
antioxidant therapies for treatment of stroke.
& 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Stroke
Oxidative stress
Antioxidants
Superoxide anion
Glutamate release
Neuroprotection
Free radicals

Introduction
Stroke is a loss of brain functions due to interruption of cerebral blood ﬂow. In a majority of clinical cases, strokes are initiated by

Abbreviations: aCSF, artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid; BHT, butylated hydroxytoluene;
Cx43, connexin 43; DCPIB, 4-[(2-butyl-6,7-dichloro-2-cyclopentyl-2,3-dihydro-1oxo-1H-inden-5-yl)oxy]butanoic acid; DHK, dihydrokainate; DHR123, dihydrorhodamine 123; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; DPPH, 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl;
DTNB, 5,50 -dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid); DTT, dithiothreitol; 18-αGA, 18α-glycyrrhetinic acid; icv, intracerebroventricular; MCA, middle cerebral artery; MCAo,
middle cerebral artery occlusion; MEM, minimal essential medium; SDS, sodium
dodecyl sulfate; SIN-1, 3-morpholinosydnonimine; SOD, superoxide dismutase;
L-SOS, l-serine O-sulfate; TBARS, thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances; tPA, tissue
plasminogen activator; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; VRAC, volumeregulated anion channel; xCT, cystine/glutamate antiporter
n
Corresponding author. Fax: þ 518 262 9052.
E-mail address: mongina@mail.amc.edu (A.A. Mongin).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.08.029
0891-5849/& 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

thrombotic or embolic occlusion of one of the major blood vessels in
the brain; however, they may also develop from the rupture of a
blood vessel (hemorrhagic stroke) or a complete shutdown of
cerebral circulation such as in cardiac arrest [1]. Stroke represents
the fourth leading cause of death in the United States and the second
leading cause of mortality worldwide and is the leading cause of
adult long-term disability in the industrialized nations [2,3]. Despite
the large impact on public health, there is only one drug, tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA), that is currently approved for acute
stroke treatment in the United States. Yet, because of a relatively
short therapeutic window and numerous contraindications, tPA has
been historically used in no more than 3–5% of stroke patients [4].
Numerous clinical trials that tested other neuroprotective treatments
showed no clinical beneﬁts in stroke patients, leaving a large unmet
need for the development of new therapeutic interventions [5].
In the ischemic brain, cessation of oxygen and glucose supplies leads
to a very rapid depolarization of neural cells followed by a massive

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

release of numerous neurotransmitters via several transport mechanisms [6,7]. The excitatory neurotransmitters glutamate and aspartate
cause activation of highly abundant ionotropic receptor channels. These
receptors propagate the rapid onset of tissue depolarization and directly
(the NMDA receptor subtype) or indirectly (majority of AMPA and
kainate receptors) contribute to a lasting increase in cytosolic Ca2þ
levels and cell damage and death, termed excitotoxicity [8,9]. The
pathological rise in [Ca2þ ]i sets in motion multiple damaging cascades
culminating in either rapid ischemic cell death via necrosis or delayed
cell death via apoptosis and the apoptosis-like process called parthanatos [6,10,11].
One of the critical events leading to the excitotoxic demise of
neuronal cells is oxidative stress—a redox imbalance stemming
from the increased production of reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) in the ischemic tissue
(reviewed in [12–14]). ROS cascades in stroke begin with formation of the superoxide anion (O2  ), which is produced in mitochondria as a result of one-electron reduction of oxygen, but also
in several additional enzymatic reactions carried by NADPH
oxidases, xanthine oxidase, and others. O2  is dismutated to
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), either enzymatically or spontaneously.
In the presence of transition metals, H2O2 decomposition yields
the potent oxidant hydroxyl radical (OH). In a parallel RNS
cascade, ischemia upregulates levels of the free radical signaling
molecule nitric oxide (NO) and several intermediates of its
degradation. Most importantly, NO combines in a rate-limiting
reaction with O2  generating the oxidant peroxynitrite (ONOO  ),
which damages cells on its own or via secondary formation of OH
and other toxic intermediates [6,14–16]. ROS and RNS production
is thought to lie downstream of the NMDA receptors because
activation of these receptors and ensuing cytosolic Ca2 þ overload
increase mitochondrial formation of O2  and H2O2 and stimulate
several enzymes producing ROS and RNS [6,12,17]. Oxidative,
nitrosative, and nitrative damage harms and kills neuronal cells
via widespread damage to enzymes, DNA, and lipids. The major
role for ROS and RNS in stroke pathology was conﬁrmed in
numerous animal studies employing antioxidants and free radical
scavengers or manipulating expression levels of enzymes that
produce or degrade ROS and RNS (see for example [18–23] and
reviews [12,13,17]).
The extensive preclinical data on the role of free radicals and
oxidative stress in ischemic brain damage have led to several
clinical trials. Two of these trials, which were conducted in Japan,
demonstrated modest clinical beneﬁts of the antioxidant edaravone in stroke patients [24,25]. In contrast, several other trials
performed elsewhere showed no neuroprotective properties for
other antioxidant molecules [13,26,27]. These unsuccessful studies
included the most extensive clinical trial to date, SAINT II, which
tested the nitrone spin trapping agent NXY-059, or Cerovive [28].
The failure of SAINT II came as a big disappointment and solidiﬁed
skepticism about the clinical utility of antioxidants as neuroprotective agents [29,30]. The reasons for the clinical failure of
NXY-059 continue to be debated [5,31].
In the present study we investigated a new hypothetical
mechanism that may determine the efﬁcacy of antioxidants in
stroke. As mentioned above, the traditional view is that oxidative
stress represents one of the terminal steps of ischemic tissue
damage, downstream of activation of glutamate receptors and
elevation of intracellular Ca2 þ concentrations. Our recent in vitro
and in vivo studies suggest that exogenous and endogenous
oxidants, particularly H2O2, can also exert “upstream” effects and
promote pathological glutamate release from glial and neuronal
cells via opening of glutamate-permeable membrane channels
[32–35]. Here, we used the well-established rodent model of
stroke induced by microﬁlament occlusion of the middle cerebral
artery (MCAo), to correlate effects of antioxidants on ischemic

169

glutamate release and their ability to reduce ischemic tissue
damage. For this purpose, we selected two antioxidants, tempol
and edaravone, based on previous animal studies and clinical data
(see Discussion for details and references). Our new data may
contribute to the understanding of the limited clinical efﬁcacy of
some of the previously tested antioxidant agents and provide a
blueprint for selecting more effective prototypical drugs for future
clinical studies.

Materials and methods
All animal procedures in this study were in strict adherence to the
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals as adopted by the
U.S. National Institutes of Health and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Albany Medical College
(Animal Care and Use Protocols 907433, 11-02003, and 11-07002).
Reagents
4-Hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine 1-oxyl (tempol), 18αglycyrrhetinic acid (18-αGA), L-serine-O-sulfate potassium salt
(L-SOS), butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO), hypoxanthine, xanthine oxidase (bovine milk, grade III),
and dithiothreitol (DTT) were obtained from Sigma–Aldrich
(St Louis, MO, USA). 4-[(2-Butyl-6,7-dichloro-2-cyclopentyl-2,
3-dihydro-1-oxo-1H-inden-5-yl)oxy]butanoic acid (DCPIB), dihydrokainate, edaravone, and 3-morpholinosydnonimine chloride
(SIN-1) were purchased from R&D Systems/Tocris (Ellisville, MO,
USA). Radiolabeled amino acids D-[3H]aspartate, L-[3H]glutamate,
and L-[14C]cystine were acquired from PerkinElmer/New England
Nuclear (Boston, MA, USA). All cell culture reagents were from Life
Systems/Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). All other chemicals, unless
otherwise speciﬁed, were from Sigma–Aldrich and of the highest
purity available.
Animal model of cerebral ischemia and implantation of microdialysis
probes
Male Sprague–Dawley rats (Taconic Farms, 230–270 g) were
used in all microdialysis and neuroprotection experiments. Animals were maintained on a 12/12-h light/dark cycle and allowed
free access to food and water. Anesthesia was induced with 5%
isoﬂurane in 30% O2/balance N2 and maintained through surgical
procedures with 1.75–2.25% isoﬂurane under constant observation. To prevent excessive ﬂuid secretion in the respiratory system
and gastrointestinal tract, 0.04 mg/kg atropine sulfate was given
via intramuscular injection. Animals were kept hydrated with
hourly intraperitoneal injections of 1 ml physiological saline. Body
and brain temperatures were maintained between 36.5 and 37.5 1C
using a heating pad and were measured with two probes placed
rectally and in the temporalis muscle, respectively.
MCAo was performed using an intraluminal suture technique as
originally developed by Longa et al. [36]. The right common carotid
artery and bifurcation of the external carotid and the internal
carotid arteries were exposed via incision on the neck. The external
carotid artery was coagulated and a standardized 4-0 microﬁlament
with a poly-D-lysine coated tip of 0.41 or 0.43 mm diameter (Doccol
Corp., Sharon, MA, USA) was inserted via a stump of the external
carotid artery into the internal carotid artery up to 19–20 mm from
the bifurcation to occlude the origin of the MCA. After 120 min of
ischemia, cerebral blood ﬂow was restored by retracting the suture.
The surgical wound was closed and the animal was allowed to
recover in a temperature-controlled environment with the external
temperature 26 1C. A similar surgical procedure was performed in
the sham-operated group, except the suture was inserted and

170

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

immediately withdrawn from the vessel without advancing it to the
MCA origin.
In the microdialysis experiments, two symmetrical bilateral
probes (CX-I Series, 0.22  2-mm membrane, 50,000 kDa molecular weight cutoff, Eicom Corp., San Diego, CA, USA) were lowered
into the cortex through small burr holes,  4 h before initiation of
ischemia (see experimental design diagram in Fig. 1). Probe
placement was done using a stereotaxic frame (David Kopf
Instruments, Tujunga, CA, USA). The position of the probes was
2 mm anteroposterior, 5 mm lateral from bregma, and 2.6 mm
down from dura [37]. Artiﬁcial cerebrospinal ﬂuid (aCSF) was
perfused at a ﬂow rate of 2 ml/min throughout the experiment. The
composition of the aCSF was as follows (in mM): 120 NaCl, 2.7 KCl,
1 MgSO4, 1.2 CaCl2, 25 NaHCO3, 0.05 ascorbic acid (pH 7.3).
Microdialysis samples were collected every 20 min after a 1- to
1.5-h stabilization period using a CMA 470 refrigerated fraction
collector (CMA Microdialysis, Holliston, MA, USA). Cerebral blood
ﬂow was measured using a MoorLAB laser Doppler sensor
mounted next to the microdialysis probe (  1–2 mm) and acquisition module (Moor Instruments, Axminster, Devon, UK). The laser
Doppler readings were used to ensure proper reduction of the
blood ﬂow rate to the levels that are expected in the ischemic
penumbra. If blood ﬂow was reduced by less than 80% (20% of the
preischemia values), animals were excluded from analysis on the
basis of incomplete ischemia. After completion of ischemia and
reperfusion in microdialysis experiments animals were euthanized
with an overdose of sodium pentobarbital, and brains were

extracted and stained for early ischemic brain damage as described
below.
For intracerebroventricular (icv) delivery of antioxidants or
vehicle, animals were placed into a stereotaxic frame. The injecting cannula was lowered through the burr hole into the right
ventricle (from bregma, 0.8 mm anteroposterior, 1.5 mm lateral,
5.3 mm below the dura) and the tested agents (500 nmol each)
were injected at a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/min into the lateral ventricle
over a period of 5 min. In vehicle controls, an identical volume of
DMSO was delivered at the same rate. Fifteen minutes after the
drug injection, cerebral ischemia was induced as described above.
Collection and analysis of microdialysate samples
Microdialysate samples were collected every 20 min throughout
the experiment and refrigerated using a CMA 470 fraction collector
(CMA Microdialysis) and analyzed ofﬂine. Amino acid levels in each
sample were determined by reverse-phase HPLC using an Agilent
1200 HPLC setup and Eclipse XDB-C18 column (both from Agilent
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Precolumn derivatization was
performed with a freshly prepared mix of o-phthalaldehyde and
2-mercaptoethanol in 0.4 M sodium tetraborate buffer (pH 9.5). The
amino acid derivatives were eluted with solvent containing 30 mM
NaH2PO4, 1% tetrahydrofuran, 30 mM sodium acetate, 0.05% sodium
azide, and increasing concentrations of HPLC-grade methanol
(10–30%). Fluorescent signal was measured using a programmable
1200 Series ﬂuorescence detector (Agilent). Amino acid standards

Fig. 1. Effects of the antioxidants tempol and edaravone on microdialysate levels of glutamate and aspartate in rat cortex before, during, and after transient occlusion of the
middle cerebral artery (MCAo). (A) Experimental design and schematic representation of positions of microdialysis probes and laser Doppler probe in the MCAo experiments.
Shaded gray (inner area) and light blue (outer area) regions approximately correspond to the ischemic core and penumbra, respectively. (B) Dynamics of cerebral blood ﬂow
(CBF) in all three experimental groups. CBF was quantiﬁed using a laser Doppler probe and then normalized to the average CBF values before MCAo. (C) Microdialysate levels
of glutamate on ischemic and nonischemic (contralateral) sides of the brain. Vehicle (2% DMSO), 10 mM tempol, or 10 mM edaravone was added into the aCSF as indicated.
The data are the mean values 7 SE in 9 or 10 animals per group. (D) Integral values of the intraischemic glutamate release in the experiments presented in (C). npo 0.05,
DMSO vs tempol; #p o 0.05, tempol vs edaravone. (E) Microdialysate levels of aspartate on ischemic and contralateral sides of the brain. n ¼9 or 10 per group. (F) Integral
values of intraischemic aspartate release in the experiments presented in (E). np o0.05, DMSO vs tempol; #p o 0.05, tempol vs edaravone.

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

(L-alanine, L-aspartate, L-glutamate, and taurine) were processed in
the same fashion and used to identify amino acid peaks and
calculate concentrations of individual amino acids in the samples.
To quantify the integral amino acid release during cerebral ischemia, we summed amino acid concentrations in all MCAo samples
collected on the ischemic side of the brain and subtracted from the
resulting value a sum of amino acid release values in samples
collected on the contralateral (nonischemic) side of the brain.

Quantiﬁcation of infarction volumes
Brain infarction volumes were quantiﬁed at 72 h after initiation
of ischemia (or at a comparable time in the sham-operated animals)
utilizing the 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining
technique [38]. After completion of the last behavioral analysis, all
animals were euthanized with an overdose of sodium pentobarbital. Brains were gently removed and sliced into 2-mm-thick sections
using a metal matrix (Kent Scientiﬁc, Torrington, CT, USA). Slices
were incubated in 2% solution of TTC in saline phosphate for 30 min
at 37 1C. The red-colored region represents the viable tissue, and the
infarcted area remains unstained [38]. The images of each section
were captured with a digital scanner and analyzed using ImageJ
software (http://imagej.nih.gov/ij/) [39]. Total infarction volumes
were calculated based on values of the infarcted area in ﬁve slices
per brain and their known thickness by a person who was blinded
to the type of treatment. To correct for brain edema, infarction
volumes were additionally quantiﬁed according to the following
formula: (volume of the contralateral hemisphere)  (volume of
the viable tissue in ischemic hemisphere) [40]. Brain edema values
were calculated as the difference between the total volumes of
contralateral and ischemic hemispheres in analyzed slices.

Behavioral evaluation of neurological deﬁcits
Neurological deﬁcits were evaluated in all of the experimental
groups 24, 48, and 72 h after initiation of ischemia using two
complementary techniques described below. To maintain consistency and avoid bias, behavioral testing was performed by the
same observer who was blinded to the treatment type.
The ﬁrst evaluation was done according to the method of
Garcia et al. [41]. Animals were scored in six categories: (1) spontaneous activity, (2) symmetry in the movement of four limbs,
(3) forepaw stretching, (4) climbing, (5) body proprioception, and
(6) response to vibrissae. The ﬁnal score was the sum of six
individual subscores. The maximum possible score was 18, corresponding to the absence of neurological deﬁcits. Lower scores
represented negative outcomes.
The second evaluation was done within a few minutes of the
ﬁrst battery of behavioral exams and involved the modiﬁed
adhesive removal test. This technique was ﬁrst introduced in rats
by Schallert et al. [42] to measure sensorimotor asymmetries. It is
now increasingly used in both rats and mice to quantify behavioral
outcomes in animal stroke models [43]. Brieﬂy, rats were removed
from their cages and two 5-mm-wide tape sleeves, which were
made from 3 M Post-It adhesive paper, were placed around the
forepaws on both the “ischemic” and the “nonischemic” side of the
body. Animals were then returned to their home cages and the
time taken to remove each sleeve was recorded. For simplicity, in
this article we present summed times taken to remove both
sleeves. The cutoff time for each measurement was set at 2 min.
If animals were unable to remove the adhesive on their own, they
received assistance from the experimenter.

171

5,50 -Dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB) assay of sulfhydryl
groups in vivo
The total content of sulfhydryl (–SH) groups in postischemic
tissue was measured using DTNB (Ellman's reagent). This assay
was performed as originally developed by Ando and Steiner [44],
with modiﬁcations. Animals were subjected to 2-h MCAo as
described above. After an additional 2-h reperfusion, the animals
were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital, followed by
a transcardial perfusion with physiological saline. Brains were
carefully removed and  300 mg of cortical tissue was isolated
from the lateral cortex on both the ischemic and the contralateral
side of the brain from the areas anatomically corresponding to
core and penumbra. The tissue samples were homogenized in
10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) including 2 mM EDTA,
using a small-sample homogenizer, PRO2000 (Pro Scientiﬁc,
Oxford, CT, USA). The homogenates were further diluted twofold
in 20 mM Trizma–HCl buffer (pH 8.1) containing 3 mM DTNB,
2 mM EDTA, and 2% SDS. After 30 min incubation at room
temperature, the resulting absorbance of newly formed colored
2-nitro-5-thiobenzoate anion was measured at 412 nm using a
BioTek ELx800 microplate reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT, USA). The
amount of free thiols in the sample was calculated using a molar
absorption coefﬁcient of 1.415  104 M  1 cm  1 and additionally
veriﬁed using a standard curve generated with known concentrations of DTT. All data were normalized to the total protein content
determined by a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientiﬁc/
Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) using bovine serum albumin as a
standard according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Preparation of primary cultures of astrocyte and microglial cells
Primary astrocyte cultures and microglial cells were prepared
from brain cortical tissue of newborn Sprague–Dawley rats as
previously described [34,45]. One-day-old pups were euthanized by
rapid decapitation and cortical tissue was dissected from meninges,
hippocampi, and basal ganglia and minced with small scissors.
Cortical cells were extracted using a 1:1 mixture of optimized
MEM and recombinant protease TrypLE (both Life Technologies/
Invitrogen) in the presence of bovine pancreatic DNase I (1 mg/ml,
Sigma–Aldrich) at 37 1C. Cells were transferred to minimal essential
medium containing 10% heat-inactivated horse serum, 50 U/ml
penicillin, and 50 mg/ml streptomycin. Cells were plated on poly-Dlysine-coated T75 culture ﬂasks (Techno Plastic Products, Trasadingen, Switzerland) at a density of  200,000 cells/ﬂask for pure
astrocyte cultures or 1–1.3 million cells/ﬂask to produce mixed glial
cultures. The cultures were grown for 2–3 weeks in a humidiﬁed
atmosphere of 5% CO2/95% air at 37 1C. The purity of astrocyte
cultures was routinely veriﬁed with staining for the astrocyte marker
glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) with monoclonal anti-GFAP
antibody (Sigma–Aldrich, G3893) and reached Z98%. Microglial
cells were additionally puriﬁed from the mixed glial cultures by
intensive shaking of T75 ﬂasks on a titer plate shaker. The resulting
cell suspensions were replated in poly-D-lysine-coated 24-well plates
in Opti-MEM additionally containing B27 supplement (Life Technologies/Invitrogen) and used for glutamate transport experiments
within 24 h.
Measurement of glutamate release in rat primary astrocytes
For amino acid transport experiments astrocytes were
replated on 18  18-mm coverslips or in 12-well multiwell
culture plates. Glutamate release assays were performed as
described in detail elsewhere [46]. Brieﬂy, cultured astrocytes
in 12-well plates were preloaded for 3 h with a nonmetabolized
analog of L-glutamate, D-[3H]aspartate (4 mCi/ml), which was

172

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

added to the standard culture medium. D-Aspartate is taken
inside cells and released via essentially the same transport
mechanisms as the endogenous glutamate. After preloading,
extracellular isotope was washed from astrocytes with warm
basal medium containing (in mM) 135 NaCl, 3.8 KCl, 1.2 MgSO4,
1.3 CaCl2, 1.2 KH2PO4, 10 D-glucose, and 10 Hepes (pH adjusted
to 7.4 with NaOH) and additionally preincubated for 10 min at
37 1C in the same medium. To test for activation of various
glutamate transport pathways, astrocytes were exposed to
several types of experimental media as follows. To induce
glutamate release via VRAC, cells were exposed for 10 min to
hypoosmotic medium, in which osmolarity was decreased 30%
by reducing NaCl concentration, whereas all other components
remained the same as in the basal medium. To trigger opening
of Cx43 hemichannels, astrocytes were incubated for 20 min in
calcium/magnesium-free (CMF) medium from which CaCl2 and
MgSO4 were omitted and 50 μM EDTA was added. After completion of the incubation, extracellular medium was collected
into scintillation vials to measure the amount of extracellular
3
D-[ H]aspartate. The cells were further lysed in a solution
containing 2% SDS plus 8 mM EDTA to determine the quantity
of the remaining intracellular isotope. Ecoscint A scintillation
cocktail (National Diagnostics) was added to each sample and
radioactivity levels in all fractions were measured using a TriCarb 2900 TR liquid scintillation analyzer (PerkinElmer). The
rate of D-[3H]aspartate release was calculated as the ratio of
extracellular 3H label and the total isotope load (sum of the
releases and intracellular 3H counts). Antioxidants and glutamate transport inhibitors were present in the reaction medium
in the concentrations indicated under Results and in the ﬁgure
legends.
In a few experiments presented in Fig. 6, the kinetics of
3
D-[ H]aspartate release were explored with high temporal resolution using a Lucite perfusion system. In these experiments,
astrocytes grown on 18  18-mm coverslips were preloaded
with D-[3H]aspartate overnight, the extracellular isotope was
removed by several washes, and the coverslips were transferred
to a perfusion chamber. Cells were superfused with the basal or
hypoosmotic medium (for composition see above). Oxidative
stress was induced by adding a hypoxanthine and xanthine
oxidase mix as described under Results and for Fig. 6.
One-minute superfusate fractions were collected and analyzed
for 3H-labeled amino acid content. The release rates were
normalized to amino acid content inside the cells and calculated
as described in detail elsewhere [46].

Measurement of activity of glial GLT-1 glutamate transporter
To measure the activity of the glutamate transporter GLT-1 we
used primary microglial cells. Although GLT-1 is the dominant
glutamate transporter in astrocytes in situ, it is functionally
downregulated in astrocytic cultures, but remains expressed in
primary microglia [47,48]. To discriminate between GLT-1 and
other modes of glutamate uptake we used the selective GLT-1
blocker 1 mM dihydrokainate. The conditions of this assay were
validated in our previous study [46]. Puriﬁed microglial cells were
plated in 24-well plates, washed of culture medium, and preincubated in basal medium for 20 min at 37 1C. Transport measurements were initiated by replacing the basal medium with medium
additionally containing 1 mCi/ml L-[3H]glutamate and 2 mM unlabeled L-glutamate and tested compounds as speciﬁed in the text
and ﬁgure legends. The uptake reaction was terminated with three
consecutive washes with excess basal medium at room temperature. Microglial cells were lysed using 2% SDS þ 8 mM EDTA. The
glutamate uptake rates were calculated by measuring the 3H
content in cells and normalizing the uptake values to the speciﬁc
activity of the isotope and protein content in wells.
Cell-free assay of total antioxidant capacity
with 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH)
We compared the antioxidant capacity of tempol and edaravone
using the commonly utilized cell-free DPPH assay [49]. Various
concentrations of antioxidants were added to the solution of 100 mM
DPPH prepared in 80% methanol. The reaction mixtures were incubated at 37 1C for 30 min and changes in absorbance at 490 nm were
measured using a BioTek ELx800 absorbance microplate reader.
Lucigenin assay of the superoxide-scavenging activity
Superoxide-scavenging activity of antioxidants was determined
using a lucigenin assay in a cell-free medium, which was modiﬁed
from [50]. Various concentrations of antioxidants were incubated
with 100 mM lucigenin and the superoxide-producing mixture of
300 mM hypoxanthine and 10 mU/ml xanthine oxidase in 100 mM
Trizma buffer (pH 7.6) for 30 min at 37 1C. Cumulative chemiluminescence was measured 30 times at 60-s intervals using a
Victor3 multilabel plate reader (PerkinElmer). To ensure the
speciﬁcity of the superoxide signal, control experiments were
additionally performed in the absence of xanthine oxidase or in
the presence of superoxide dismutase (SOD; 200 U/ml).

Assay of activity of astrocytic cystine/glutamate heteroexchanger

Amplex red assay of H2O2 scavenging

The plasmalemmal cystine/glutamate heteroexchanger (xCT)
does not accept D-aspartate as a substrate, whereas cytosolic L-[3H]
glutamate is rapidly metabolized by astroglial cells. Therefore, we
used L-[14C]cystine to measure the xCT activity in cultured astrocytes. The conditions of this assay were optimized and thoroughly
validated in our previous study [46]. Brieﬂy, astrocytes grown in
12-well plates were preincubated in the basal medium and then
transferred into LiCl medium for xCT assays. The composition of
the LiCl medium was similar to that of the basal medium, with the
exception that NaCl was replaced with LiCl to suppress activity of
the Na þ -dependent amino acid transporters, and 0.5 mM acivicin
was added to inhibit γ-glutamyl transpeptidase. The pH of the
medium was adjusted with CsOH. Cells were incubated for 30 min
at 37 1C with 0.1 μCi/ml L-[14C]cystine (  1 μM). The reaction was
terminated by several washes with ice-cold LiCl medium and total
14
L-[ C]cystine accumulation was determined using scintillation
counting as described above and normalized to protein content
determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay.

Hydrogen peroxide-scavenging capacity was measured using
the Amplex red reagent (Sigma–Aldrich) in a cell-free system
according to the manufacturer's instructions. Various concentrations of antioxidants were incubated with 25 mM H2O2, 100 mM
Amplex red reagent, and 250 mU horseradish peroxidase in
phosphate-buffered saline for 10 min at room temperature. The
resulting absorbance was measured at 570 nm using a BioTek
ELx800 microplate reader (BioTek). H2O2-scavenging activity was
calculated by comparing the resulting absorbance values to those
generated with known concentrations of H2O2.
Preparation of rat brain synaptosomes
Synaptosomes were prepared from the forebrains of male
Sprague–Dawley rats (150–180 g) according to the method of
F. Hajos [51] with modiﬁcations described elsewhere [52]. Forebrain tissue was manually homogenized in ice-cold 0.32 M sucrose
solution containing 5 mM Hepes (pH 7.4) in a Potter–Elvehjem

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

tissue grinder with a Teﬂon pestle. Synaptosomes were isolated
using density gradients of sucrose solutions. The ﬁnal pellets
obtained were synaptosomes, which were resuspended in basal
medium to a protein concentration of 10–12 mg/ml and were
allowed to restore their ionic gradients by incubating with continuous agitation at 37 1C for 1 h.
2-Thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances (TBARS) assay
of the hydroxyl radical-scavenging activity
The ability of antioxidants to prevent hydroxyl radical-driven
oxidation was determined using a TBARS assay according to the
method of Ohkawa et al. [53]. This assay measures the formation of
lipid peroxides, typically in biological membranes. Intact synaptosomes (0.5 mg protein/ml) were preincubated with various concentrations of antioxidants for 15 min at 37 1C in the basal medium. Lipid
peroxidation was then initiated by the addition of 7.5 μM Fe2SO4 plus
1.5 mM ascorbic acid and was carried out for 30 min at 37 1C. The
reaction was terminated by transferring the synaptosomal suspension onto ice followed by a 3-min centrifugation at 18,000g (0–4 1C).
Pellets were dissolved in 1 ml of a solution containing 0.25%
thiobarbituric acid, 2% SDS, and 5% trichloroacetic acid and boiled
for 15 min in a water bath. After the samples cooled, the absorbance
was measured at 531 nm using a Victor3 multilabel plate reader. The
concentration of TBARS was calculated using a molar extinction
coefﬁcient of 1.5  105 M  1 cm  1.
Determination of antioxidant activity using peroxynitrite-dependent
oxidation of dihydrorhodamine 123 (DHR123)
Peroxynitrite (ONOO  ) scavenging activity was measured using
DHR123, which is readily oxidized to highly ﬂuorescent rhodamine 123 by the intermediate products of peroxynitrite decomposition [54,55]. In this study, we used SIN-1 as the peroxynitrite
generator in a cell-free medium. Various concentrations of antioxidants were incubated with DHR123 (10 mM) in the presence of
1 mM SIN-1 for 30 min at 37 1C. Formation of rhodamine 123 was
measured using a Victor3 multilabel plate reader and the excitation and emission wavelengths of 530 and 590 nm, respectively.
Statistical analyses
All data are presented as mean values 7 SE, with n referring to
individual animals or independent experiments within each
experimental group. Experimental groups were compared using
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with either Tukey's or
Fisher's least signiﬁcant difference (LSD) post hoc analysis for
multiple comparisons. When treatment effects were analyzed over
several time points (such as for blood-ﬂow measurements and in
behavioral experiments) we utilized repeated-measures ANOVA
with effects of time, treatment, and their interaction with Fisher's
LSD post hoc test. Origin 8.1 (Origin Laboratories, Northampton,
MA, USA), Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA), or
Statistica 10.0 (StatSoft, Tulsa, OK. USA) was used for all statistical
calculations. A probability of p o0.05 was considered statistically
signiﬁcant for all comparisons.

Results
Tempol but not edaravone decreases pathological release
of glutamate and aspartate in the ischemic penumbra
To test the hypothetical connection between oxidative stress and
release of the excitatory neurotransmitters glutamate and aspartate
in ischemic brain, we sampled extracellular amino acid levels using

173

microdialysis in conjunction with local delivery of antioxidant
compounds via the microdialysis probe. To ensure equilibration of
tested compounds between microdialysis probe and brain tissue,
they were delivered 1 h before initiation of ischemia and throughout
the duration of each experiment (see summary of experimental
design in Fig. 1A). We placed one microdialysis probe in the cortical
tissue corresponding to the ischemic penumbra and another on the
contralateral side of the brain. The contralateral probe served as a
nonischemic internal control and allowed us to check for potential
nonspeciﬁc effects of all tested compounds. The proper placement of
the ischemic probe within the penumbral area was conﬁrmed in
each animal by monitoring relative changes in blood ﬂow using a
laser Doppler sensor. Positioning of the microdialysis and the laser
Doppler probes and the outline of the experimental design are
depicted in Fig. 1A. The targeted reduction of blood ﬂow was 80%
(20% of the preischemic levels) immediately after initiation of MCAo
(Fig. 1B). After completion of ischemia the blood circulation was
completely restored in all tested groups and no difference was
identiﬁed between treatments (Fig. 1B).
In the vehicle-treated animals, initiation of MCAo triggered an
8-fold increase in microdialysate levels of glutamate and an
approximately 14-fold rise in the levels of aspartate on the
ischemic side of the brain (Figs. 1C and E). The excitatory amino
acid concentrations peaked approximately 40 min after the onset
of ischemia. This was followed by a gradual decrease and then
complete return to baseline levels upon restoration of the blood
ﬂow. We observed a partial recovery of amino acid levels during
ischemia in the majority of, but not all, animals. This paradoxical
reversal of pathological amino acid release may be related to small
compensatory changes in the blood ﬂow rates seen in the ischemic
penumbra (see Fig. 1B).
We next tested the effects of two antioxidants, tempol and
edaravone, on amino acid release in ischemic tissue. The SOD
mimetic tempol, added into the microdialysate ﬂuid at the concentration of 10 mM, potently reduced the intraischemic release of
glutamate and aspartate (Figs. 1C and E). Note that the interstitial
concentration of delivered drugs was lower than in microdialysate
and decreased with distance from the probe. In contrast to tempol,
edaravone (also 10 mM) had no effect on the levels of either amino
acid (Figs. 1C and E). To quantitatively compare the release values
for each amino acid, we next calculated the integral amino acid
levels during ischemia. As seen in Figs. 1D and F, the effect of
tempol on glutamate and aspartate levels was statistically signiﬁcant, compared to both the vehicle and the edaravone groups.
Importantly, we found no effects of either antioxidant on the
microdialysate glutamate and aspartate values on the nonischemic
side of the brain (see contralateral traces in Figs. 1C and E).
Furthermore, neither tempol nor edaravone signiﬁcantly altered
cerebral blood ﬂow rates during MCAo, as measured by laser
Doppler probe (Fig. 1B).
Effects of tempol and edaravone on the intraischemic levels of taurine
and alanine
In addition to glutamate and aspartate, we measured dynamic
changes in the levels of two other amino acids, taurine and
alanine, in the same microdialysate samples. Unlike the excitatory
amino acids, which are enriched in synaptic vesicles, taurine and
alanine are abundant in the cytosol. Therefore, information on
microdialysate levels of taurine and alanine can be instrumental in
examining different mechanisms and sources of amino acid
release. For example, pathological activation of the anion channel
VRAC, which is poorly selective, has been linked to the release of
all four amino acids that were measured in our assays [35,56,57].
As shown in Fig. 2A, MCAo led to substantial increases in the
microdialysate concentrations of taurine. As in the case of the

174

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

excitatory amino acids, tempol but not edaravone caused partial
normalization of the intraischemic taurine values (Figs. 2A and B).
Similar results were obtained for alanine. Alanine concentration was
rapidly elevated during MCAo, and this effect was attenuated by
tempol but not edaravone (Figs. 2C and D). Despite the overall
similarities, the kinetics of release for taurine and alanine differed
from glutamate and aspartate in at least two respects. Alanine levels
continued to steadily rise during ischemia (Fig. 2C). Additionally,
neither taurine nor alanine levels normalized to their baseline values,
even 2 h after blood ﬂow restoration (Figs. 2A and C). These
differences are probably explained by the diverse reuptake mechanisms, such as kinetics and density of relevant amino acid transporters.
Effects of tempol and edaravone on brain infarction volumes
and neurological deﬁcits after MCAo
To investigate if there was a correlation between the effects of
antioxidants on intraischemic release of excitatory amino acids and

neurological outcomes, we studied the effects of tempol and
edaravone on MCAo-induced brain damage. For this purpose, the
antioxidants were stereotactically injected into a lateral ventricle at
the single bolus dose of 500 nmol, 15 min before initiation of a 2-h
ischemia. This mode of delivery was chosen over systemic application to ensure that the intracerebral concentrations of drugs were
equal and not affected by the differences in the blood–brain barrier
permeability for either compound or alterations in systemic delivery during ischemia. After completion of ischemia, rats were
allowed to survive for 3 days with daily neurobehavioral evaluation.
After the last behavioral test, the animals were euthanized and the
extent of ischemic brain damage was quantiﬁed using a TTC
staining technique. Representative TTC-stained serial coronal sections from all experimental groups are shown in Fig. 3A. Compared
to the vehicle-treated animals, animals treated with tempol showed
a 55% reduction in the mean brain infarction volumes (151.7739.6
vs 333.3724.4 mm3, po0.01, Supplementary Fig. 1A) and 50%
smaller infarction volumes when corrected for brain edema

Fig. 2. Effects of tempol and edaravone on microdialysate levels of taurine and alanine before, during, and after 2-h MCAo. (A) Microdialysate levels of taurine on ischemic
and contralateral sides of the brain; n¼ 9 or 10 per group. (B) Integral values of the intraischemic taurine release in the experiments presented in (A). np o0.05, DMSO vs
tempol. (C) Microdialysate levels of alanine on ischemic and contralateral sides of the brain; n ¼9 or 10 per group. (D) Integral values of intraischemic alanine release in the
experiments presented in (C). npo 0.05, DMSO vs tempol.

Fig. 3. Neuroprotective properties of tempol and edaravone assessed as drug-dependent reduction in infarction volumes at 72 h and neurological deﬁcits at 24, 48, and 72 h
after completion of 2-h MCAo. In these experiments 5 μl of vehicle (DMSO), tempol (500 nmol), or edaravone (500 nmol) was injected into the lateral ventricle 15 min before
initiation of ischemia. Sham-operated animals were subjected to the same surgical procedures without MCAo. The experimental design is depicted in the diagram on the top.
(A) Representative images of ﬁve serial sections from the same brain (top to bottom) prepared 72 h after reversible MCAo and stained with TTC. (B) Average infarction
volumes corrected for brain edema in sham-operated animals (n¼ 6) and animals injected with vehicle (n¼ 12), tempol (n¼11), or edaravone (n ¼9) as indicated. N.D.,
infarction not detected. nnp o 0.01, tempol vs either DMSO or edaravone. (C) Neurobehavioral scores in the same treatment groups presented in (B). The score of 18
corresponds to no deﬁcits. nnp o 0.01, sham vs all ischemia groups; #po 0.05, tempol vs edaravone. (D) Average times taken to remove adhesive tape from forepaws.
nnnp o 0.001, sham vs all treatment groups; #p o 0.05, tempol vs DMSO; ##p o 0.01, tempol vs edaravone.

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

(po0.01, Fig. 3B). Tempol reduced brain edema by 66%
(39.4714.61 vs 116.0725.88, po0.05, Supplementary Fig. 1B). In
contrast, edaravone was completely ineffective at reducing ischemic
brain damage and did not have a signiﬁcant effect on brain edema
values (Fig. 3B and Supplementary Fig. 1). Because hyper- and
hypothermia are known to affect ﬁnal infarction values (reviewed in
[58]), it is important to know that body temperature was maintained with thermosensor-regulated heating pad and did not differ
between all animal groups, before and during MCAo (data not
shown). In sham-operated animals infarction was not detected
(Figs. 3A and B).
To further validate the neuroprotective properties of tempol, all
experimental groups were subjected to two types of behavioral
evaluation. We ﬁrst quantiﬁed motor and sensory deﬁcits using a
testing technique developed by Garcia et al. [41] (see Materials and
methods for detailed description). In our experiments, shamoperated animals had no behavioral deﬁcits. Compared to shams,
all MCAo groups demonstrated strong and statistically signiﬁcant
neurological deﬁcits (po0.001), which persisted for the 3-day
duration of the experiment (Fig. 3C). Tempol treatment produced a
trend toward behavioral improvements, compared to both vehicleand edaravone-treated groups. Edaravone treatment produced no
evidence for protection, and this was consistent with the results of
TTC staining. Because of the relatively low sensitivity of this test, we
additionally examined motor and sensory deﬁcits using the modiﬁed adhesive removal test (see Materials and methods). This test is
more sensitive and can be successfully used to detect neurological
deﬁcits in rodents up to 6 weeks after MCAo surgeries [43]. As
shown in Fig. 3D, vehicle-treated MCAo animals took much longer to
remove adhesive tape from their forepaws compared to shamoperated rats (po0.001, DMSO vs sham for the entire 3-day testing
period). Tempol treatment dramatically reduced the time required
for adhesive removal (po0.05 tempol vs DMSO, po0.01 tempol vs
edaravone). Animals in the edaravone-treated group showed no
improvements and were not different from vehicle controls (Fig. 3D).
Do tempol and edaravone directly affect glutamate release
in glial cells?
The simplest explanation for differential efﬁcacy of two antioxidants is the possibility that one of them (tempol) directly
blocks intraischemic amino acid release, independent of its antioxidant activity. To test this hypothesis we examined the direct
effects of both compounds on glutamate release in primary
astrocyte cultures. The focus on glia is based on the prevailing
idea that glial cells represent a major source of excitatory amino
acid release in stroke [7,59,60]. In cerebral ischemia, glia, primarily
astrocytes, may release glutamate via several transport pathways:
(i) reversal of the glia-speciﬁc glutamate transporter GLT-1;
(ii) activation of glutamate-permeable VRAC channels; (iii) opening of connexin hemichannels, which in astrocytes are constituted
by Cx43; and (iv) enhanced activity of xCT [61–64]. Three of these
transport pathways—VRAC, Cx43 hemichannels, and xCT—were of
primary interest because they are activated or positively modulated by oxidative stress. GLT-1 was also tested because of its
known contribution to glutamate release in the ischemic core [65].
To activate VRAC we triggered astrocytic swelling by placing
cells in hypoosmotic medium (Fig. 4A). This treatment led to a
severalfold increase in the release of preloaded D-[3H]aspartate
(nonmetabolized analog of L-glutamate). Neither tempol nor
edaravone affected swelling-activated D-[3H]aspartate efﬂux when
tested at 1 and 10 mM (i.e., up to the highest concentration used in
the microdialysis experiments). In contrast, the potent VRAC
blocker DCPIB completely abolished hypoosmotic D-[3H]aspartate
release (Fig. 4A). The effect of DCPIB was consistent with literature
ﬁndings [66] and conﬁrmed the speciﬁcity of this assay.

175

To trigger opening of connexin hemichannels, we exposed
primary astrocytes to CMF medium (Fig. 4B). Our recent study
validated that this treatment stimulates glutamate (D-[3H]aspartate) release that is exclusively mediated by the Cx43 protein [46].
Again, tempol was completely ineffective at inhibiting Cx43induced amino acid release, whereas edaravone showed partial
inhibition, but only when tested at the highest concentration,
10 mM (Fig. 4B). As a positive control we used 18α-GA, a known
blocker of connexin hemichannels [46]. At the concentration of
10 μM 18α-GA completely suppressed the effect of CMF medium
on astrocytic D-[3H]aspartate release, again conﬁrming the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of this approach.
We next examined whether antioxidants have a direct effect on
the cystine/glutamate antiporter, which supplies cells with cystine
(oxidized cysteine) in exchange for intracellular glutamate. Oxidative stress and proinﬂammatory cytokines activate this system,
primarily via changes in expression levels [64,67]. To isolate the
xCT activity from other amino acid transporters, we measured
astrocytic uptake of L-[14C]cystine under conditions described
under Materials and Methods and validated in our preceding work
[46]. As shown in Fig. 4C, tempol did not affect L-[14C]cystine
transport rates. Edaravone signiﬁcantly blocked L-[14C]cystine
uptake, but only when used at the concentration of 10 mM. As a
positive control, we utilized the xCT blocker 1 mM L-SOS [68],
which suppressed transport rates by  80%, conﬁrming that L-[14C]
cystine uptake is primarily mediated by the xCT.
Finally, we measured the effects of tempol and edaravone on
the activity of the GLT-1 glutamate transporter in microglia. These
cells take up glutamate via two transporters, GLT-1 and GLAST,
which can be discriminated by using the well-known GLT-1
inhibitor dihydrokainate (DHK) [48]. As shown in Fig. 4D, DHK
blocked glutamate uptake by 40–50%, which was consistent with
previous studies [46,48]. Tempol showed no effect on microglial
glutamate uptake at all concentrations tested, suggesting it does
not affect the GLT-1 activity (Fig. 4D). Edaravone was not effective
at the 1 mM concentration, but suppressed glutamate transport
when added to the experimental medium at 10 mM (Fig. 4D).
To summarize, when tested in vitro, one of the antioxidants,
edaravone, showed partial “off-target” inhibition of Cx43 hemichannels, xCT, and GLT-1, when used at the highest concentration
of 10 mM (Figs. 4B, C, and D). This effect was not seen in vivo,
probably owing to dilution during the process of microdialysate
delivery. In contrast, tempol produced no off-target effects on any
of the pathologically relevant glutamate release pathways. By
comparing in vitro data to the effects of the antioxidants on
microdialysate amino acid levels in vivo (Figs. 1 and 2), we can
conclude that the in vivo effects of tempol are probably speciﬁc
and related to its antioxidant properties.
Quantitative comparison of the antioxidant capacities of tempol
and edaravone in vitro
Because we found a paradoxical difference in the effects of two
antioxidants on excitatory amino acid release in vivo, we decided
to directly compare the antioxidant capacity of tempol and
edaravone in vitro, under conditions allowing for side-by-side
evaluation and exposure to “individual” ROS and RNS. We started
with a generic test for total antioxidant capacity, which is based on
oxidation of the colored free radical molecule DPPH (see Materials
and methods). In this cell-free assay, tempol and edaravone
showed very similar antioxidant potency, with edaravone being
slightly more effective (Fig. 5B). This was somewhat surprising
because edaravone produced no effect in microdialysis and neuroprotection experiments. Therefore, we expanded the scope
of our in vitro study and evaluated the relative potency of both
antioxidants against several major ROS and RNS, which are

176

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

thought to be critical for ischemic tissue damage. Speciﬁcally, we
focused on the upstream ROS superoxide radical and on the
products of O2  conversions: H2O2, OH, and ONOO  [6,13] (see
diagram in Fig. 5A).
In the next set of experiments, we used hypoxanthine and xanthine
oxidase to generate O2  and the O2  -induced lucigenin chemiluminescence as readout. Tempol scavenged O2  in a dose-dependent
manner and at 1 mM reduced the lucigenin signal almost completely
(Fig. 5C). These ﬁndings are consistent with known properties of
tempol as a superoxide dismutase mimetic [69]. In striking contrast,
edaravone failed to show any effect on O2  levels (Fig. 5C). As a control,
we measured lucigenin signal when xanthine oxidase was omitted
from the reaction mix, or in the presence of SOD. Under these
conditions lucigenin chemiluminescence was completely inhibited
(Fig. 5D), conﬁrming the speciﬁcity of the O2  signal in our assay.
The relative H2O2-scavenging capacity was tested with exogenous
H2O2 and an Amplex red H2O2 assay. At variance with the results
obtained for O2  , edaravone strongly and dose-dependently scavenged H2O2 with an EC50 of E30 μM, whereas tempol produced
very weak scavenging activity seen only at the maximal tested
concentration of 1 mM (Fig. 5E).
We further measured the antioxidant capacity of edaravone
and tempol against OH-driven lipid oxidation. OH is a potent
biological oxidant that is formed during catalytic decomposition of

H2O2. To accomplish this, we quantiﬁed lipid peroxidation in rat
brain synaptosomes in the presence of the OH-generating combination of Fe2 þ and ascorbate. Lipid peroxides were detected as
TBARS [53]. As shown in Fig. 5F, in this detection system, 1 mM
tempol and edaravone strongly reduced lipid peroxidation, to the
same extent as 10 μM BHT. BHT was used as a positive control
because it is well known for its ability to terminate free radical
reactions in the lipid phase. At a lower concentration of 100 μM,
edaravone was more potent than tempol (Fig. 5F).
Finally, we performed a side-by-side comparison of the two
antioxidants for their ability to prevent oxidation induced by the
pathologically relevant ONOO  and its decomposition products. To
this end, we monitored the oxidation of dihydrorhodamine 123 in
the presence of the ONOO  donor SIN-1, which reﬂects the
reaction of DHR123 with the products of the ONOO  decomposition [54,55]. In a cell-free system, edaravone prevented DHR123
oxidation with near-complete inhibition at concentrations
Z30 μM (Fig. 5G). Tempol was only partially effective, and the
incomplete (  50%) inhibition by this agent appeared to saturate
at concentrations Z 100 μM.
In summary, our data on antioxidant capacity clearly show that
tempol and edaravone have quite similar total antioxidant activities when compared under “ideal” conditions in a DPPH assay
performed in methanol. However, when tested in vitro against a

Fig. 4. Evaluation of direct effects of tempol and edaravone on four oxidant-sensitive transport systems contributing to release of glutamate and aspartate in primary
cultures of astrocytes and microglia. (A) Effects of tempol and edaravone (1 or 10 mM) on glutamate (D-[3H]aspartate) release via volume-regulated anion channel (VRAC).
VRAC was activated by exposure to hypoosmotic medium. The VRAC blocker 20 μM DCPIB was used as a positive control. Data are the mean values of six independent
experiments. nnnp o 0.001 vs basal medium; ###p o 0.001 vs release in swollen cells. (B) Effects of antioxidants on D-[3H]aspartate release via connexin-43 hemichannels
(Cx43). Cx hemichannels were activated by incubation in CMF medium. The Cx43 blocker 10 μM 18-αGA was used as a positive control. Data are the mean values of six
experiments. nnnp o 0.001 vs basal medium; ##p o 0.01 and ###p o 0.001 vs release induced by CMF medium. (C) Effect of antioxidants on function of the cystine/
glutamate antiporter (xCT). The xCT activity was measured as uptake of 1 mM L-[14C]cystine. The xCT blocker 1 mM L-SOS was used as a positive control. Data are the mean
values of three experiments. nnp o 0.01 and nnnp o 0.001 vs basal medium. (D) Effect of antioxidants on the glutamate transporter GLT-1. The GLT-1 activity was measured
as uptake of L-[3H]glutamate. The GLT-1 blocker 1 μM DHK was used as a positive control. Data are the mean values of ﬁve experiments. nnnp o0.001 vs basal uptake.

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

177

variety of pathologically relevant ROS and RNS, tempol was
inferior to edaravone with one clear exception: its ability to
decrease levels of the superoxide anion.

These results unequivocally show that O2  does not directly regulate
glutamate transport but rather acts via formation of H2O2.

Superoxide does not directly activate glutamate release in cultured
glial cells

Ex vivo SH-group assay for comparing antioxidant capacity of tempol
and edaravone in the ischemic tissue

As shown in the previous sections, tempol but not edaravone
prevented pathological amino acid release in vivo. Because we found
the preferential ability of tempol to reduce levels of the O2  radical,
we hypothesized that O2  activates or potently modulates the
release of glutamate via one or several transport pathways. To test
this hypothesis, we exposed cultured astrocytes used as a cell model
to the O2  -generating mix of hypoxanthine and xanthine oxidase. To
further mimic pathological conditions, we additionally exposed cells
to hypoosmotic medium to trigger cell swelling because it is known
that stroke causes swelling of astrocytes [70]. In this experimental
paradigm, hypoxanthine/xanthine oxidase did not affect the release
of the glutamate analog D-[3H]aspartate in nonswollen cells but
dramatically upregulated its inﬂux when oxidative stress was combined with hypoosmotic medium (Fig. 6A). The observed results
closely resembled the previously published effects of H2O2 in
cultured astrocytes and in vivo [33,35]. Because xanthine oxidase
also produces H2O2, we conducted additional control experiments. In
these experiments, O2  and H2O2 were scavenged by addition of
SOD or catalase, respectively. As seen in Fig. 6B, catalase, but not SOD,
completely reversed the effect of hypoxanthine/xanthine oxidase.

The paradoxical disconnect between the results of experiments
performed in vivo and in vitro made it difﬁcult to decipher the
potential mechanism (or mechanisms) of tempol neuroprotection in
the MCAo model. We speculated that edaravone, although generally
a more potent antioxidant, either was not equilibrated throughout
the brain tissue or did not penetrate as effectively inside the
intracellular compartment, compared to tempol. To test this idea,
we measured total levels of sulfhydryl (–SH) groups inside tissue
samples, which were isolated from the ischemic cortex. We compared the obtained values to SH-group content in matching samples
from the contralateral brain. In tissues, a large fraction of the SH
groups in proteins and low-molecular-weight peptides, such as
glutathione, is normally maintained in a reduced state. In ischemia,
decline in the total SH-group content reﬂects intracellular oxidation
by numerous ROS and RNS (see for example [71]). Here, we
quantitatively analyzed SH-group levels after 2-h MCAo followed
by 2 h of reperfusion. We reasoned that at this time we would see
oxidative damage that occurred during both ischemia and reperfusion. We also expected that antioxidants delivered intracerebroventricularly would still be present inside the brain tissue. As shown in

Fig. 5. Assays of the antioxidant scavenging activity of tempol and edaravone in model oxidant-generating systems in vitro. (A) Simpliﬁed diagram depicting sources of
reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species in the ischemic brain. (B) Total antioxidant capacity of tempol and edaravone measured using a DPPH assay. Data are the mean
values of three independent experiments. (C) Effects of antioxidants on levels of O2  that was generated by 3 mU of xanthine oxidase (XO) in the presence of 300 μM
hypoxanthine (HX) and quantiﬁed using a lucigenin assay (n¼ 4). (D) As a control for the speciﬁcity of O2  signal, lucigenin assays were additionally performed in the
absence of XO or in the presence of SOD (200 U/ml) (n¼ 4). nnnp o0.001 vs HX þ XO. (E) The H2O2-scavenging capacity of antioxidants measured in solution of 25 μM H2O2
with an Amplex red assay (n¼ 3). (F) Effects of antioxidants on hydroxyl radical-induced lipid peroxidation in the presence of 7.5 μM Fe2 þ and 1.5 mM ascorbate and
quantiﬁed using a TBARS assay (n ¼4). nnnpo 0.001 vs control; ##p o0.01 and ###po 0.001, antioxidants vs Fe2 þ þ ascorbate alone; @@p o0.01, tempol vs edaravone. The

OH and lipid peroxide scavenger 10 μM BHT was used as a positive control. (G) Effects of antioxidants on oxidation of DHR123 in the presence of the peroxynitrite donor
1.5 mM SIN-1 (n ¼3).

178

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate, which triggers
downstream degradative processes. Oxidative, nitrosative, and
nitrative stresses are thought to play a terminal role in tissue
damage. The ﬁndings of this work and our previous studies
[32–35] point to a more complex picture and suggest that
oxidative stress also acts upstream of glutamate release and
ampliﬁes brain damage via stimulation of one or several glutamate
release pathways. Thus, we propose the existence of a pathological
feed-forward “loop” that involves excitatory amino acids and
ROS/RNS, as graphically depicted in Fig. 8 and discussed below.
Evidence that oxidative stress can modulate glutamate release
in stroke

Fig. 6. Hydrogen peroxide but not superoxide anion potently stimulates glutamate
release in primary astrocyte cultures. (A) Kinetics of D-[3H]aspartate release from
primary astrocytes superfused with the mix of 3 mU/ml xanthine oxidase (XO) and
300 μM hypoxanthine (HX), which produces both O2  and H2O2. To mimic
pathological swelling, cells were additionally exposed to hypoosmotic medium
(HYPO; 30% reduction in medium osmolarity) (n ¼5 or 6). nnnpo 0.001, HYPO vs
HYPO in combination with HX þ XO. (B) The nature of the ROS contributing to the
stimulation of D-[3H]aspartate release was tested by adding SOD (200 U/ml) or
catalase (15 μg/ml). The integral release values during 10-min periods either before
cellular swelling (minutes 11–20) or during swelling (minutes 21–30) were
measured as described under Materials and methods (n¼ 5/group). nnp o 0.01 vs
HYPO alone; ###p o0.001, HYPO þ catalase vs HYPO þ X/XO or HYPO þ HX/XO
þ SOD.

Fig. 7, we found a moderate but signiﬁcant reduction in the SH-group
content on the ischemic side of the brain.
We found that edaravone recovered SH-group content on the
ischemic side of the brain (p o0.01), whereas tempol did not
produce statistically signiﬁcant improvements (Fig. 7). These
results are critical for the interpretation of the present work
because they indicate that edaravone exerts higher antioxidant
capacity in vivo, but paradoxically fails to attenuate glutamate
release and brain damage.

Discussion
The neuroprotective properties of antioxidants in animal models of stroke have been proven beyond a doubt (reviewed in
[12,13]). Yet, failure of several antioxidants and free radical
scavengers in clinical trials created an uncertainty about the utility
of antioxidant strategies in human stroke [29,30]. These clinical
setbacks highlight a need to improve our understanding of the
molecular mechanisms that determine the efﬁcacy of individual
antioxidants in the ischemic tissue. The traditional point of view is
that ischemia initiates injurious cascades via the anoxic release

Prior studies in the ﬁeld indicate that anoxic depolarization of
brain tissue in stroke triggers a massive release of glutamate and
other neurotransmitters (see for example [61,72–74]). Pathological
release of glutamate is thought to be largely mediated by two
mechanisms: activation of glutamate-permeable anion channels
and the reversed operation of glial glutamate transporters, although
other release routes may also contribute. The ﬁrst of these pathways, anion channels, are believed to be activated by cellular
swelling, which represents one of the hallmarks of cerebral ischemia [60,70]. In vitro, cell swelling causes opening of the chloride/
anion channel termed VRAC [62]. In vivo, nonselective VRAC
blockers, including SITS, NPPB, DNDS, and tamoxifen, potently
reduce glutamate release in the ischemic core and penumbra
[61,65,74,75]. These ﬁndings have been conﬁrmed with the more
selective VRAC inhibitor DCPIB [76]. Importantly, systemic delivery
of the blood–brain barrier-permeative tamoxifen, or intracerebroventricular injection of DCPIB, strongly reduces infarction volumes
in rodent models of transient and permanent cerebral ischemia
[76–78]. The alternative route for release, astrocytic glutamate
transporter GLT-1, is thought to be prevalent in the ischemic core,
where severe disruption of transmembrane ionic gradients causes
the transporter to operate in a reverse mode [61]. This second
release mechanism is unlikely to serve as a target for therapeutic
intervention. Inhibition of GLT-1 can cause undesirable effects in
healthy tissue and ischemic penumbra, where the “normal” mode
of GLT-1 activity keeps glutamate levels low [65,79].
The novel ﬁnding of the present work is the prominent link
between oxidative stress and glutamate release in ischemic penumbra. These ﬁndings may provide an opening for designing new
neuroprotective strategies. Our prior in vitro and in vivo studies
established that oxidative stress may strongly enhance glutamate
release owing to positive modulation of VRAC. Exogenous and
endogenous ROS H2O2 strongly increases glutamate release in
primary rat astrocytes and primary rat microglia, when VRAC is
activated by cellular swelling [33,34]. Similar effects have been
observed with SIN-1, the chemical donor generating the RNS
peroxynitrite [32]. Critically, H2O2 stimulates the endogenous
glutamate release via VRAC in vivo, as measured with a microdialysis approach [35]. Because both cellular swelling and oxidative
and nitrosative stress do occur in the ischemic tissue (reviewed
in [13,14,70,80]), the ROS/RNS-dependent ampliﬁcation of the
excitatory amino acid release in stroke is plausible. Our present
data with the SOD mimetic tempol, which dramatically reduces
glutamate release in the clinically relevant penumbral tissue,
strongly support this idea. The caveat is that the broad-spectrum
antioxidant edaravone failed to limit glutamate release in MCAo
when delivered in compatible quantities via the same route. This
ﬁnding is clearly at odds with the effects of H2O2 (which is
scavenged by edaravone) on glutamate release in previously published model experiments in vitro and in vivo [33–35]. This
discrepancy may be interpreted in two ways. Either H2O2 is not a
prevalent ROS that stimulates glutamate release in stroke, or

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

Fig. 7. Comparison of the antioxidant capacity of tempol and edaravone in vivo
based on their ability to prevent oxidation of tissue sulfhydryl groups. Five
microliters of tempol (500 nmol), edaravone (500 nmol), or vehicle (DMSO) was
injected into the lateral ventricle 10 min before MCAo. After 2-h MCAo plus 2-h
reperfusion, the animals were euthanized and their cortical tissue was processed
for determination of the SH-group content (DTNB assay) (n¼ 5 for sham and n¼6
for all ischemia groups). np o 0.05 and nnp o 0.01, as indicated.

Fig. 8. Working model that integrates the traditional view of the role of oxidative
stress in ischemic tissue damage and the new ﬁndings of the link between
oxidative stress and pathological glutamate release. Anoxic glutamate release is
thought to initiate tissue damage via activation of ionotropic glutamate receptors
(NMDA-R) and increases in cytosolic [Ca2 þ ], which lead to terminal oxidative and
nitrosative damage of neuronal cells. The relevant pathways are targeted by broadspectrum antioxidants, such as edaravone. New ﬁndings of this study suggest that
oxidative stress also acts upstream of pathological glutamate release via stimulation of glutamate permeability pathways by a yet-unidentiﬁed ROS intermediate
(X, see text for detailed discussion). Ampliﬁcation of glutamate release by the O2  derived ROS propagates tissue damage in the ischemic penumbra and is preferentially targeted by the SOD mimetic tempol.

ischemic glutamate release originates from a different cellular
compartment (not astrocytes) or involves a different transport
mechanism (not VRAC) in penumbral tissue. Additional work will
be needed to discriminate between these two possibilities, but this
matter is secondary to the discovery that the extracellular glutamate levels are potently modulated by oxidative stress.
The superoxide-scavenging properties of tempol determine
its superior protection against ischemic injury
We analyzed several potential differences between actions
of tempol and edaravone, which may help to explain the high

179

neuroprotective potential of tempol. The ﬁrst question was whether
tempol has off-target effects and directly blocks one or several
glutamate release mechanisms in the ischemic tissue. As already
mentioned, the ischemic glutamate release in the penumbra is thought
to be largely mediated by VRAC, which is selectively blocked by DCPIB
[65]. The selectivity of DCPIB was, however, questioned in our recent
work, which established that, in addition to VRAC, this compound also
blocks Cx43 hemichannels and the glial glutamate transporter
GLT-1 [46]. Keeping these more recent ﬁndings in mind, we further
tested if tempol or edaravone directly inhibits four pathologically
relevant glutamate permeability pathways. We focused our attention
on VRAC, connexin hemichannels, and the cystine/glutamate antiporter, because these glutamate release mechanisms are thought to be
active in hypoxia and ischemia and can be directly or indirectly
activated by oxidative stress [33,63,64]. Additionally, we tested the
effects of tempol and edaravone on GLT-1, which contributes to
glutamate release in the ischemic core and is inhibited by oxidative
and nitrosative stress [81]. As summarized in Fig. 4, in the absence of
oxidative stress, tempol showed no direct actions on any of the abovementioned glutamate release pathways, thus ruling out the most
obvious off-target actions.
An alternative possibility was that we did not achieve therapeutic levels of edaravone in vivo, even though both tempol and
edaravone were delivered in identical dosages and via the same
route bypassing the blood–brain barrier. This concern was
addressed in experiments in which we indirectly quantiﬁed the
degree of oxidative stress by measuring tissue levels of reduced
thiol groups. As in numerous previous studies (see for example
[71,82]), we observed the reduction of SH-group content in the
ischemic tissue. The effect that we found was somewhat smaller
than in the previous publications because our assays were done at
a very early reperfusion time. Edaravone signiﬁcantly recovered
tissue SH-group content, conﬁrming that it does diminish oxidative stress. This was qualitatively similar to ﬁndings of a recent
study in which the same antioxidant was delivered systemically
[82]. The inability of edaravone to protect brain tissue against
ischemic damage was at odds with prior in vivo studies but can
probably be explained by different dosage and route of delivery
(see references and discussion below). Interestingly, icv injection
of tempol did not restore SH-group levels in the ischemic tissue,
even if this compound was highly effective in all other assays. This
is probably due to the difference in the free radical-scavenging
properties of the two antioxidants as discussed below.
To explore if the dramatic differences between the effects of
tempol and edaravone in vivo are determined by their speciﬁc
antioxidant properties, we compared side by side the ability of
these two compounds to scavenge several pathologically relevant
ROS and RNS in vitro. Tempol and edaravone demonstrated similar
total antioxidant capacity, when tested under the “ideal” conditions of the DPPH assay. When probed against individual ROS and
RNS, edaravone was superior to tempol in scavenging H2O2 and
ONOO  (or products of its decomposition) and blocking formation
of lipid peroxides. In contrast, tempol dose-dependently reduced
reactions driven by O2  , whereas edaravone failed to do so. This
effect is entirely consistent with the known superoxide dismutase
mimetic activity of tempol and other structurally similar nitroxide
compounds [69]. Weak scavenging of H2O2 and ONOO  may
explain the inability of tempol to protect SH groups, which are
readily oxidized by these ROS and RNS [83]. Overall, this additional
information suggests that the mechanism underlying the neuroprotective properties of tempol, and the associated reduction of
glutamate release, involves superoxide or a superoxide-derived
intermediate that is poorly scavenged by edaravone. The “usual
suspect,” H2O2, which has been previously shown to enhance
glutamate release in model experiments, ought to be ruled out
because of the insensitivity of glutamate release to edaravone.

180

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

Potential mechanisms for reduction in ischemic glutamate release
by SOD mimetics
To further understand the role of O2  in the stimulation of
glutamate release in vivo we performed model experiments in
primary astrocyte cultures exposed to xanthine oxidase and
hypoxanthine. Detailed analysis presented in Fig. 6 indicates that
O2  cannot directly trigger glutamate release, with or without
cellular swelling, but rather stimulates such release via secondary
formation of H2O2. These ﬁndings were not highly surprising
because we previously established that stimulation of endogenous
O2  production in microglia does not trigger glutamate release via
VRAC unless O2  is converted to H2O2 [34]. Thus, O2  is unlikely
to be directly responsible for the release of excitatory amino acids
during ischemia, and this process is activated or modulated by
other O2  -derived intermediate or intermediates. Treatments
with tempol are known to reduce production of arachidonic acid
metabolites, such as prostocyclins and thromboxanes, in various
preparations and in vivo (reviewed in [84]). Because two previous
studies demonstrated that the cyclooxygenase inhibitor aspirin
alleviates the intraischemic glutamate release and brain damage in
rat MCAo [85,86], the link to arachidonic acid metabolism deserves
further exploration. An additional mechanism that may contribute
to glutamate release and involve O2  is the formation of ONOO  ,
which has been found to stimulate glial VRAC in vitro [32].
Another ONOO  -related possibility that should be strongly
considered is that the effects of tempol are not restricted to
neuronal and/or glial cells, but also take place at the neurovascular
interface. Tempol is well known for its ability to improve local
blood ﬂow via scavenging of O2  in endothelial and smooth
muscle cells. Tempol preserves the bioavailability of the vasodilator molecule NO because in pathologies NO is consumed when
combined with O2  to form ONOO  (for comprehensive review
see [84]). Even small increases in blood ﬂow rates in the ischemic
penumbra may reduce pathological release of the excitatory amino
acids. In the present experiments we observed modest spontaneous recovery of blood ﬂow rates during MCAo (from the initial
values of  20% of the preischemic controls to 25–30%), which
coincided with partial restoration of the extracellular levels of
glutamate and aspartate (compare Figs. 1B to C and E). The idea of
protection via improved collateral blood ﬂow is particularly
attractive because it readily explains why edaravone, which unlike
tempol is incapable of scavenging O2  , is not effective. Unfortunately, we do not have direct support for the “blood ﬂow”
hypothesis. In our study, changes in blood ﬂow rates were
measured with a laser Doppler, and no statistical differences were
detected between tempol-, edaravone-, and vehicle-treated
groups. However, the laser Doppler signal is captured from the
surface pial vessels, whereas tempol is delivered via microdialysate probe inserted into cortical tissue. Therefore, potential effects
of tempol on blood ﬂow will have to be further explored using
more advanced techniques.
Is there a therapeutic potential for SOD mimetics?
Our present ﬁndings should be placed in the context of
previous work with tempol and edaravone in experimental stroke.
To directly compare the efﬁcacies of the two antioxidants, we
injected both agents into the lateral ventricle before ischemia or
delivered them via a microdialysis probe. Prior animal studies
utilized more clinically compatible routes of administration of the
same drugs. Systemic delivery of 10–100 mg/kg tempol produces
signiﬁcant reduction of brain infarction in both transient and
permanent MCAo with a therapeutic window of up to 2 h [87,88].
These effects have been reproduced with several structurally unrelated superoxide dismutase mimetics based on metalloporphyrins,

with one caveat: the latter compounds have low blood–brain barrier
permeativity and therefore are delivered directly inside the brain. In
one study, the metalloporphyrin SOD mimetic MnTE-2-PyP
decreased brain infarction volumes by >70% when administered up
to 6 h after initiation of ischemia [23]. Similar outcomes have been
reported for two other metalloporphyrins, with one of them, AEOL
1050, reducing the infarction volume by 43% when delivered with a
delay of 7.5 h after initiation of ischemia [89]. Compared to tempol,
edaravone was tested more extensively, and it showed strong
neuroprotective properties at dosages of 3–10 mg/kg and with a
therapeutic window of up to 6 h (see for example [90–92]). However,
in clinical settings and in the majority of animal studies edaravone
treatments involved multiple administrations, unlike what has been
done by us.
Based on the present ﬁndings we speculate that the superoxide
dismutase mimetics may have intrinsically higher neuroprotective
potency in brain tissue compared to edaravone and other clinically
tested antioxidants, including NXY-059. The SOD mimetics may
reduce, slow down, or stop propagation of the ischemic damage by
limiting the superoxide anion-dependent glutamate release in the
ischemic penumbra (see Fig. 8). Critically, the in vivo potency of
tempol and other compounds similar in action cannot be reliably
predicted based on traditional in vitro screening approaches.
Typically, pilot in vitro experiments seek the “ideal” antioxidant
that would scavenge the most reactive ROS and RNS, such as
peroxynitrite, hydroxyl radical, and lipid peroxides. As seen in the
present work, protective effects of antioxidants on glutamate
release, changes in blood ﬂow, etc., cannot be captured in simple
in vitro models. Further developments in our understanding of
sites and mechanisms of antioxidant actions in ischemic brain may
bring into clinical practice new effective stroke therapies.

Acknowledgments
We thank Vivek Bhatty, for assistance with in vivo experiments
and animal care, and Dr. Sarah E. McCallum for help with
establishing the microdialysis technique. This study was supported
in part by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (R01
NS61953 to A.A.M.), the American Heart Association Student
Scholarship in Cerebrovascular Disease and Stroke (A.V.), and an
AHA predoctoral fellowship (13PRE17220030 to N.H.B.).

Appendix A. Supporting information
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in
the online version at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.
2014.08.029.
References
[1] Brott, T.; Bogousslavsky, J. Treatment of acute ischemic stroke. N. Engl. J. Med.
343:710–722; 2000.
[2] Lozano, R.; Naghavi, M.; Foreman, K.; Lim, S.; Shibuya, K.; Aboyans, V.; Abraham, J.;
Adair, T.; Aggarwal, R.; Ahn, S. Y.; Alvarado, M.; Anderson, H. R.; Anderson, L. M.;
Andrews, K. G.; Atkinson, C.; Baddour, L. M.; Barker-Collo, S.; Bartels, D. H.; Bell, M. L.;
Benjamin, E. J.; et al. Global and regional mortality from 235 causes of death for 20
age groups in 1990 and 2010: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010. Lancet 380:2095–2128; 2012.
[3] Towﬁghi, A.; Saver, J. L. Stroke declines from third to fourth leading cause of
death in the United States: historical perspective and challenges ahead. Stroke
42:2351–2355; 2011.
[4] Fang, M. C.; Cutler, D. M.; Rosen, A. B. Trends in thrombolytic use for ischemic
stroke in the United States. J. Hosp. Med. 5:406–409; 2010.
[5] Ginsberg, M. D. Neuroprotection for ischemic stroke: past, present and future.
Neuropharmacology 55:363–389; 2008.
[6] Lipton, P. Ischemic cell death in brain neurons. Physiol. Rev. 79:1431–1568;
1999.

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

[7] Mongin, A. A. Disruption of ionic and cell volume homeostasis in cerebral
ischemia: the perfect storm. Pathophysiology 14:183–193; 2007.
[8] Choi, D. W. Glutamate neurotoxicity and diseases of the nervous system.
Neuron 1:623–634; 1988.
[9] Rothman, S. M.; Olney, J. W. Excitotoxicity and the NMDA receptor. Trends
Neurosci. 10:299–302; 1987.
[10] Dirnagl, U.; Iadecola, C.; Moskowitz, M. A. Pathobiology of ischaemic stroke:
an integrated view. Trends Neurosci. 22:391–397; 1999.
[11] Wang, Y.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M. Poly(ADP-ribose) signals to mitochondrial AIF: a key event in parthanatos. Exp. Neurol. 218:193–202; 2009.
[12] Chan, P. H. Reactive oxygen radicals in signaling and damage in the ischemic
brain. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 21:2–14; 2001.
[13] Margaill, I.; Plotkine, M.; Lerouet, D. Antioxidant strategies in the treatment of
stroke. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 39:429–443; 2005.
[14] Pacher, P.; Beckman, J. S.; Liaudet, L. Nitric oxide and peroxynitrite in health
and disease. Physiol. Rev. 87:315–424; 2007.
[15] Denicola, A.; Freeman, B. A.; Trujillo, M.; Radi, R. Peroxynitrite reaction with
carbon dioxide/bicarbonate: kinetics and inﬂuence on peroxynitrite-mediated
oxidations. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 333:49–58; 1996.
[16] Jourd’heuil, D.; Jourd’heuil, F. L.; Kutchukian, P. S.; Musah, R. A.; Wink, D. A.;
Grisham, M. B. Reaction of superoxide and nitric oxide with peroxynitrite:
implications for peroxynitrite-mediated oxidation reactions in vivo. J. Biol.
Chem. 276:28799–28805; 2001.
[17] Samdani, A. F.; Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L. Nitric oxide synthase in models of
focal ischemia. Stroke 28:1283–1288; 1997.
[18] Cao, X.; Phillis, J. W. alpha-Phenyl-tert-butyl-nitrone reduces cortical infarct
and edema in rats subjected to focal ischemia. Brain Res. 644:267–272; 1994.
[19] Huang, Z.; Huang, P. L.; Panahian, N.; Dalkara, T.; Fishman, M. C.; Moskowitz,
M. A. Effects of cerebral ischemia in mice deﬁcient in neuronal nitric oxide
synthase. Science 265:1883–1885; 1994.
[20] Yang, G.; Chan, P. H.; Chen, J.; Carlson, E.; Chen, S. F.; Weinstein, P.;
Epstein, C. J.; Kamii, H. Human copper-zinc superoxide dismutase transgenic
mice are highly resistant to reperfusion injury after focal cerebral ischemia.
Stroke 25:165–170; 1994.
[21] Murakami, K.; Kondo, T.; Kawase, M.; Li, Y.; Sato, S.; Chen, S. F.; Chan, P. H.
Mitochondrial susceptibility to oxidative stress exacerbates cerebral infarction
that follows permanent focal cerebral ischemia in mutant mice with manganese superoxide dismutase deﬁciency. J. Neurosci. 18:205–213; 1998.
[22] Kuroda, S.; Tsuchidate, R.; Smith, M. L.; Maples, K. R.; Siesjo, B. K. Neuroprotective effects of a novel nitrone, NXY-059, after transient focal cerebral
ischemia in the rat. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 19:778–787; 1999.
[23] Mackensen, G. B.; Patel, M.; Sheng, H.; Calvi, C. L.; Batinic-Haberle, I.; Day, B. J.;
Liang, L. P.; Fridovich, I.; Crapo, J. D.; Pearlstein, R. D.; Warner, D. S.
Neuroprotection from delayed postischemic administration of a metalloporphyrin catalytic antioxidant. J. Neurosci. 21:4582–4592; 2001.
[24] The Edaravone Study Group. Effect of a novel free radical scavenger, edaravone
(MCI-186), on acute brain infarction: randomized, placebo-controlled, doubleblind study at multicenters. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 15:222–229; 2003.
[25] Toyoda, K.; Fujii, K.; Kamouchi, M.; Nakane, H.; Arihiro, S.; Okada, Y.; Ibayashi,
S.; Iida, M. Free radical scavenger, edaravone, in stroke with internal carotid
artery occlusion. J. Neurol. Sci. 221:11–17; 2004.
[26] Cheng, Y. D.; Al Khoury, L.; Zivin, J. A. Neuroprotection for ischemic stroke:
two decades of success and failure. NeuroRx 1:36–45; 2004.
[27] Ginsberg, M. D. Life after Cerovive: a personal perspective on ischemic
neuroprotection in the post-NXY-059 era. Stroke 38:1967–1972; 2007.
[28] Diener, H. C.; Lees, K. R.; Lyden, P.; Grotta, J.; Davalos, A.; Davis, S. M.; Shuaib,
A.; Ashwood, T.; Wasiewski, W.; Alderfer, V.; Hardemark, H. G.; Rodichok, L.
NXY-059 for the treatment of acute stroke: pooled analysis of the SAINT I and
II trials. Stroke 39:1751–1758; 2008.
[29] Pearson, H. The bitterest pill. Nature 444:532–533; 2006.
[30] Hill, M. D. Stroke: the dashed hopes of neuroprotection. Lancet Neurol. 6:2–3;
2007.
[31] Savitz, S. I. A critical appraisal of the NXY-059 neuroprotection studies for
acute stroke: a need for more rigorous testing of neuroprotective agents in
animal models of stroke. Exp. Neurol. 205:20–25; 2007.
[32] Haskew, R. E.; Mongin, A. A.; Kimelberg, H. K. Peroxynitrite enhances
astrocytic volume-sensitive excitatory amino acid release via a src tyrosine
kinase-dependent mechanism. J. Neurochem. 82:903–912; 2002.
[33] Haskew-Layton, R. E.; Mongin, A. A.; Kimelberg, H. K. Hydrogen peroxide
potentiates volume-sensitive excitatory amino acid release via a mechanism
involving Ca2 þ /calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. J. Biol. Chem.
280:3548–3554; 2005.
[34] Harrigan, T. J.; Abdullaev, I. F.; Jourd’heuil, D.; Mongin, A. A. Activation of
microglia with zymosan promotes excitatory amino acid release via volumeregulated anion channels: the role of NADPH oxidases. J. Neurochem.
106:2449–2462; 2008.
[35] Haskew-Layton, R. E.; Rudkouskaya, A.; Jin, Y.; Feustel, P. J.; Kimelberg, H. K.;
Mongin, A. A. Two distinct modes of hypoosmotic medium-induced release of
excitatory amino acids and taurine in the rat brain in vivo. PLoS One 3:e3543;
2008.
[36] Longa, E. Z.; Weinstein, P. R.; Carlson, S.; Cummins, R. Reversible middle
cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20:84–91; 1989.
[37] Paxinos, G.; Watson, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates. San Diego:
Elsevier/Academic Press; 2009.
[38] Bederson, J. B.; Pitts, L. H.; Germano, S. M.; Nishimura, M. C.; Davis, R. L.;
Bartkowski, H. M. Evaluation of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride as a stain

[39]
[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]
[45]

[46]

[47]

[48]
[49]
[50]

[51]
[52]

[53]
[54]

[55]

[56]
[57]
[58]

[59]
[60]
[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]

[66]

[67]
[68]

181

for detection and quantiﬁcation of experimental cerebral infarction in rats.
Stroke 17:1304–1308; 1986.
Rasband, W. S. ImageJ. Bethesda: U.S. National Institutes of Health; 1997.
Swanson, R. A.; Morton, M. T.; Tsao-Wu, G.; Savalos, R. A.; Davidson, C.; Sharp,
F. R. A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 10:290–293; 1990.
Garcia, J. H.; Wagner, S.; Liu, K. F.; Hu, X. J. Neurological deﬁcit and extent of
neuronal necrosis attributable to middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats:
statistical validation. Stroke 26:627–634; 1995.
Schallert, T.; Upchurch, M.; Lobaugh, N.; Farrar, S. B.; Spirduso, W. W.; Gilliam,
P.; Vaughn, D.; Wilcox, R. E. Tactile extinction: distinguishing between
sensorimotor and motor asymmetries in rats with unilateral nigrostriatal
damage. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 16:455–462; 1982.
Balkaya, M.; Krober, J. M.; Rex, A.; Endres, M. Assessing post-stroke behavior
in mouse models of focal ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 33:330–338;
2013.
Ando, Y.; Steiner, M. Sulfhydryl and disulﬁde groups of platelet membranes.
I. Determination of sulfhydryl groups. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 311:26–37; 1973.
Hyzinski-Garcia, M. C.; Vincent, M. Y.; Haskew-Layton, R. E.; Dohare, P.; Keller Jr.
R. W.; Mongin, A. A. Hypoosmotic swelling modiﬁes glutamate–glutamine cycle
in the cerebral cortex and in astrocyte cultures. J. Neurochem. 118:140–152; 2011.
Bowens, N. H.; Dohare, P.; Kuo, Y. H.; Mongin, A. A. DCPIB, the proposed
selective blocker of volume-regulated anion channels, inhibits several glutamate transport pathways in glial cells. Mol. Pharmacol. 83:22–32; 2013.
Gegelashvili, G.; Danbolt, N. C.; Schousboe, A. Neuronal soluble factors
differentially regulate the expression of the GLT1 and GLAST glutamate
transporters in cultured astroglia. J. Neurochem. 69:2612–2615; 1997.
Nakajima, K.; Tohyama, Y.; Kohsaka, S.; Kurihara, T. Ability of rat microglia to
uptake extracellular glutamate. Neurosci. Lett. 307:171–174; 2001.
Blois, M. S. Antioxidant determinations by the use of a stable free radical.
Nature 181:1199–1200; 1958.
Storch, J.; Ferber, E. Detergent-ampliﬁed chemiluminescence of lucigenin for
determination of superoxide anion production by NADPH oxidase and
xanthine oxidase. Anal. Biochem. 169:262–267; 1988.
Hajos, F. An improved method for the preparation of synaptosomal fractions in
high purity. Brain Res. 93:485–489; 1975.
Rudkouskaya, A.; Sim, V.; Shah, A. A.; Feustel, P. J.; Jourd’heuil, D.; Mongin, A. A.
Long-lasting inhibition of presynaptic metabolism and neurotransmitter release
by protein S-nitrosylation. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 49:757–769; 2010.
Ohkawa, H.; Ohishi, N.; Yagi, K. Assay for lipid peroxides in animal tissues by
thiobarbituric acid reaction. Anal. Biochem. 95:351–358; 1979.
Crow, J. P. Dichlorodihydroﬂuorescein and dihydrorhodamine 123 are sensitive indicators of peroxynitrite in vitro: implications for intracellular measurement of reactive nitrogen and oxygen species. Nitric Oxide 1:145–157; 1997.
Kalyanaraman, B.; Darley-Usmar, V.; Davies, K. J.; Dennery, P. A.; Forman, H. J.;
Grisham, M. B.; Mann, G. E.; Moore, K.; Roberts, L. J.; Ischiropoulos, H. Measuring
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species with ﬂuorescent probes: challenges and
limitations. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 52:1–6; 2012.
Banderali, U.; Roy, G. Anion channels for amino-acids in Mdck cells. Am.
J. Physiol. 263:C1200–C1207; 1992.
Kirk, K.; Strange, K. Functional properties and physiological roles of organic
solute channels. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 60:719–739; 1998.
van der Worp, H. B.; Sena, E. S.; Donnan, G. A.; Howells, D. W.; Macleod, M. R.
Hypothermia in animal models of acute ischaemic stroke: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Brain 130:3063–3074; 2007.
Kimelberg, H. K.; Mongin, A. A. Swelling-activated release of excitatory amino acids
in the brain: relevance for pathophysiology. Contrib. Nephrol. 123:240–257; 1998.
Kimelberg, H. K. Astrocytic swelling in cerebral ischemia as a possible cause of
injury and target for therapy. Glia 50:389–397; 2005.
Seki, Y.; Feustel, P. J.; Keller Jr. R. W.; Tranmer, B. I.; Kimelberg, H. K. Inhibition
of ischemia-induced glutamate release in rat striatum by dihydrokinate and
an anion channel blocker. Stroke 30:433–440; 1999.
Kimelberg, H. K.; Goderie, S. K.; Higman, S.; Pang, S.; Waniewski, R. A.
Swelling-induced release of glutamate, aspartate, and taurine from astrocyte
cultures. J. Neurosci. 10:1583–1591; 1990.
Ye, Z. C.; Wyeth, M. S.; Baltan-Tekkok, S.; Ransom, B. R. Functional hemichannels in astrocytes: a novel mechanism of glutamate release. J. Neurosci.
23:3588–3596; 2003.
Fogal, B.; Li, J.; Lobner, D.; McCullough, L. D.; Hewett, S. J. System x(c)- activity
and astrocytes are necessary for interleukin-1 beta-mediated hypoxic neuronal injury. J. Neurosci. 27:10094–10105; 2007.
Feustel, P. J.; Jin, Y.; Kimelberg, H. K. Volume-regulated anion channels are the
predominant contributors to release of excitatory amino acids in the ischemic
cortical penumbra. Stroke 35:1164–1168; 2004.
Abdullaev, I. F.; Rudkouskaya, A.; Schools, G. P.; Kimelberg, H. K.; Mongin, A. A.
Pharmacological comparison of swelling-activated excitatory amino acid
release and Cl  currents in rat cultured astrocytes. J. Physiol. 572:677–689;
2006.
Bannai, S.; Sato, H.; Ishii, T.; Sugita, Y. Induction of cystine transport activity in
human ﬁbroblasts by oxygen. J. Biol. Chem. 264:18480–18484; 1989.
Patel, S. A.; Warren, B. A.; Rhoderick, J. F.; Bridges, R. J. Differentiation of
substrate and non-substrate inhibitors of transport system xc(-): an obligate
exchanger of L-glutamate and L-cystine. Neuropharmacology 46:273–284;
2004.

182

P. Dohare et al. / Free Radical Biology and Medicine 77 (2014) 168–182

[69] Krishna, M. C.; Russo, A.; Mitchell, J. B.; Goldstein, S.; Dafni, H.; Samuni, A. Do
nitroxide antioxidants act as scavengers of O2  or as SOD mimics? J. Biol.
Chem. 271:26026–26031; 1996.
[70] Mongin, A. A.; Kimelberg, H. K. Astrocytic swelling in neuropathology. In:
Kettenmann, H., Ransom, B. R., editors. Neuroglia. Oxford/New York: Oxford
Univ. Press; 2005. p. 550–562.
[71] Shivakumar, B. R.; Kolluri, S. V.; Ravindranath, V. Glutathione and protein thiol
homeostasis in brain during reperfusion after cerebral ischemia. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 274:1167–1173; 1995.
[72] Benveniste, H.; Drejer, J.; Schousboe, A.; Diemer, N. H. Elevation of the
extracellular concentrations of glutamate and aspartate in rat hippocampus
during transient cerebral ischemia monitored by intracerebral microdialysis.
J. Neurochem. 43:1369–1374; 1984.
[73] Hagberg, H.; Lehmann, A.; Sandberg, M.; Nystrom, B.; Jacobson, I.; Hamberger,
A. Ischemia-induced shift of inhibitory and excitatory amino acids from intrato extracellular compartments. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 5:413–419; 1985.
[74] Phillis, J. W.; Song, D.; O’Regan, M. H. Inhibition by anion channel blockers of
ischemia-evoked release of excitotoxic and other amino acids from rat
cerebral cortex. Brain Res. 758:9–16; 1997.
[75] Phillis, J. W.; Song, D.; O’Regan, M. H. Tamoxifen, a chloride channel blocker,
reduces glutamate and aspartate release from the ischemic cerebral cortex.
Brain Res. 780:352–355; 1998.
[76] Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Feustel, P. J.; Kimelberg, H. K. DCPIB, a speciﬁc inhibitor of
volume regulated anion channels (VRACs), reduces infarct size in MCAo and
the release of glutamate in the ischemic cortical penumbra. Exp. Neurol.
210:514–520; 2008.
[77] Kimelberg, H. K.; Feustel, P. J.; Jin, Y.; Paquette, J.; Boulos, A.; Keller Jr. R. W.;
Tranmer, B. I. Acute treatment with tamoxifen reduces ischemic damage
following middle cerebral artery occlusion. Neuroreport 11:2675–2679; 2000.
[78] Kimelberg, H. K.; Jin, Y.; Charniga, C.; Feustel, P. J. Neuroprotective activity of
tamoxifen in permanent focal ischemia. J. Neurosurg. 99:138–142; 2003.
[79] Danbolt, N. C. Glutamate uptake. Prog. Neurobiol. 65:1–105; 2001.
[80] Lo, E. H.; Dalkara, T.; Moskowitz, M. A. Mechanisms, challenges and opportunities in stroke. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4:399–415; 2003.
[81] Trotti, D.; Rossi, D.; Gjesdal, O.; Levy, L. M.; Racagni, G.; Danbolt, N. C.;
Volterra, A. Peroxynitrite inhibits glutamate transporter subtypes. J. Biol.
Chem. 271:5976–5979; 1996.

[82] Ahmad, A.; Khan, M. M.; Javed, H.; Raza, S. S.; Ishrat, T.; Khan, M. B.; Safhi, M. M.;
Islam, F. Edaravone ameliorates oxidative stress associated cholinergic dysfunction and limits apoptotic response following focal cerebral ischemia in rat. Mol.
Cell. Biochem. 367:215–225; 2012.
[83] Radi, R.; Beckman, J. S.; Bush, K. M.; Freeman, B. A. Peroxynitrite-induced
membrane lipid peroxidation: the cytotoxic potential of superoxide and nitric
oxide. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 288:481–487; 1991.
[84] Wilcox, C. S.; Pearlman, A. Chemistry and antihypertensive effects of tempol
and other nitroxides. Pharmacol. Rev. 60:418–469; 2008.
[85] De Cristobal, J.; Moro, M. A.; Davalos, A.; Castillo, J.; Leza, J. C.; Camarero, J.;
Colado, M. I.; Lorenzo, P.; Lizasoain, I. Neuroprotective effect of aspirin by
inhibition of glutamate release after permanent focal cerebral ischaemia in
rats. J. Neurochem. 79:456–459; 2001.
[86] Berger, C.; Stauder, A.; Xia, F.; Sommer, C.; Schwab, S. Neuroprotection and
glutamate attenuation by acetylsalicylic acid in temporary but not in permanent cerebral ischemia. Exp. Neurol. 210:543–548; 2008.
[87] Rak, R.; Chao, D. L.; Pluta, R. M.; Mitchell, J. B.; Oldﬁeld, E. H.; Watson, J. C.
Neuroprotection by the stable nitroxide Tempol during reperfusion in a rat
model of transient focal ischemia. J. Neurosurg. 92:646–651; 2000.
[88] Leker, R. R.; Teichner, A.; Lavie, G.; Shohami, E.; Lamensdorf, I.; Ovadia, H. The
nitroxide antioxidant tempol is cerebroprotective against focal cerebral
ischemia in spontaneously hypertensive rats. Exp. Neurol. 176:355–363; 2002.
[89] Sheng, H.; Enghild, J. J.; Bowler, R.; Patel, M.; Batinic-Haberle, I.; Calvi, C. L.;
Day, B. J.; Pearlstein, R. D.; Crapo, J. D.; Warner, D. S. Effects of metalloporphyrin catalytic antioxidants in experimental brain ischemia. Free Radic. Biol.
Med. 33:947–961; 2002.
[90] Shichinohe, H.; Kuroda, S.; Yasuda, H.; Ishikawa, T.; Iwai, M.; Horiuchi, M.;
Iwasaki, Y. Neuroprotective effects of the free radical scavenger Edaravone
(MCI-186) in mice permanent focal brain ischemia. Brain Res. 1029:200–206;
2004.
[91] Zhang, N.; Komine-Kobayashi, M.; Tanaka, R.; Liu, M.; Mizuno, Y.; Urabe, T.
Edaravone reduces early accumulation of oxidative products and sequential
inﬂammatory responses after transient focal ischemia in mice brain. Stroke
36:2220–2225; 2005.
[92] Xiao, B.; Bi, F. F.; Hu, Y. Q.; Tian, F. F.; Wu, Z. G.; Mujlli, H. M.; Ding, L.; Zhou, X. F.
Edaravone neuroprotection effected by suppressing the gene expression of the
Fas signal pathway following transient focal ischemia in rats. Neurotox. Res.
12:155–162; 2007.

