Brief Opinion

The transient intraluminal filament
middle cerebral artery occlusion
model as a model of endovascular
thrombectomy in stroke

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism
2016, Vol. 36(2) 363–369
! Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0271678X15606722
jcbfm.sagepub.com

Brad A Sutherland1, Ain A Neuhaus1, Yvonne Couch1,
Joyce S Balami2,3, Gabriele C DeLuca4, Gina Hadley1,
Scarlett L Harris1, Adam N Grey1 and Alastair M Buchan1

Abstract
The clinical relevance of the transient intraluminal filament model of middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) has been
questioned due to distinct cerebral blood flow profiles upon reperfusion between tMCAO (abrupt reperfusion) and
alteplase treatment (gradual reperfusion), resulting in differing pathophysiologies. Positive results from recent endovascular thrombectomy trials, where the occluding clot is mechanically removed, could revolutionize stroke treatment. The
rapid cerebral blood flow restoration in both tMCAO and endovascular thrombectomy provides clinical relevance for
this pre-clinical model. Any future clinical trials of neuroprotective agents as adjuncts to endovascular thrombectomy
should consider tMCAO as the model of choice to determine pre-clinical efficacy.

Keywords
Ischemic stroke, middle cerebral artery occlusion, endovascular thrombectomy, cerebral blood flow, animal models
Received 18 June 2015; Revised 13 August 2015; Accepted 19 August 2015

Introduction
Since 1995, recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
(rtPA) has been used as a thrombolytic agent to dissolve blood clots that occlude cerebral arteries, leading
to reperfusion of the ischemic brain.1 However, eligibility for thrombolysis currently stands at approximately
15%, largely due to a lack of eﬃcacy beyond 4.5 h poststroke, as well as the risk of haemorrhagic transformation.2 Other therapies, such as anti-platelet drugs, can
be used to prevent further coagulation, but there
remains a dearth of novel therapeutic agents. A
number of trials have attempted to show neuroprotection of the brain with single drug approaches, including
NXY-059 and magnesium sulphate, but no single neuroprotectant has shown any substantial eﬃcacy in a
phase III trial. Although intravenous (i.v.) rtPA has
the most robust evidence basis for the treatment of
acute ischemic stroke, its limitations – including low
rates of recanalization – have led to the exploration
of other treatments with higher recanalization

rates, including endovascular therapy. This approach
ranges from intra-arterial thrombolysis3 to mechanical
thrombectomy using specialized devices that can retract
clots and open occluded arteries.4,5 Five recently
published randomized controlled trials (RCTs) show
that endovascular thrombectomy with or without i.v.
thrombolysis produces a favourable outcome compared
to medical therapy alone.6–10 This beneﬁcial eﬀect is
correlated with an abrupt recanalization of the
1
Acute Stroke Programme, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK
2
Centre for Evidence Based Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3
Norfolk and Norwich University Teaching Hospital NHS Trust,
Norwich, UK
4
Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford,
Oxford, UK

Corresponding author:
Alastair M Buchan, Medical Sciences Division, University of Oxford, Level
3, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headley Way, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
Email: alastair.buchan@medsci.ox.ac.uk

364
occluded artery and subsequent reperfusion of the
ischemic brain, which parallels mechanical models of
stroke in animals such as the intraluminal ﬁlament
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model.
This perspective describes the similarities between the
endovascular thrombectomy and transient MCAO
(tMCAO) procedures from a cerebral blood ﬂow
(CBF) and pathophysiological point-of-view, and provides a rationale for use of ﬁlament tMCAO in animals
to model the potential outcomes of adjunct therapies to
endovascular thrombectomy in humans.

Endovascular thrombectomy
With the eﬃcacy of – and eligibility for – rtPA having
relatively low rates in clinic, especially for occlusions of
larger vessels, the focus over the past decade has been
on intra-arterial clot disruption, by either directly infusing rtPA into the artery or using endovascular retrieval
devices to mechanically remove the occluding clot from
the cerebral circulation. These have been reﬁned over
recent years and specialized stent-retriever devices catch
and remove the occluding clot (Figure 1(a)), resulting in
immediate recanalization of the artery (Figure 1(b))11
and reperfusion. Early endovascular thrombectomy
trials demonstrated the feasibility and safety of the procedure,4,5 but failed to show the beneﬁt of endovascular
therapy compared to i.v. thrombolysis alone.12–14
Recent overwhelming evidence from ﬁve RCTs using
stent-retriever devices showed that endovascular
thrombectomy for patients with large cerebral vessel
occlusion could lead to improved functional independence,6–10reduced mortality8 and no increase in the rate
of symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage compared to
best medical treatment (which could include i.v. rtPA
administration). These trials provide unequivocal evidence that the extent of recanalization associates with
better clinical outcomes (Figure 1(c)).
In addition to recanalization, MR and CT perfusion
imaging used in two trials showed that substantial
reperfusion was achieved with endovascular thrombectomy and was associated with improved outcome.8,10
Moreover, time to reperfusion is also an important
determinant of clinical outcome, with shorter times
from stroke onset to initiation of the endovascular procedure associated with a higher proportion of patients
with independent functional outcomes. This highlights
the importance of timely substantial reperfusion to
limit the expansion of the ischemic core following
acute ischemic stroke. Given the positive eﬀects of
endovascular thrombectomy on ischemic stroke outcome and blood ﬂow, this intervention is likely to
become the primary standard treatment alongside i.v.
rtPA in centres where it is available.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(2)

In vivo models of stroke
For more than 50 years, numerous animal models have
been used to mimic clinical ischemic stroke, to understand brain pathophysiology and to determine the eﬃcacy of new therapies. The most widely used models
produce focal lesions in the parietal cortex and striatum
via transient or permanent MCAO, accomplished
by mechanical, pharmacological, photothrombotic or
embolic means.15 MCAO is typically performed in
mice or rats, but there are notable examples of primate,
canine, ovine and porcine studies using the same methodologies which could have some applicability for
translational studies.16 In rodents, the intraluminal ﬁlament tMCAO model (Figure 2(a))17 is the most prevalent, largely because of its non-invasiveness compared
to direct surgical occlusion of cerebral vessels, and consistency in lesion size and location compared to embolic
models. Despite a vast number of compounds showing
therapeutic promise in pre-clinical models,18 there has
been a notable lack of success, with the exception of i.v.
thrombolysis using rtPA, in translating these ﬁndings
into clinically eﬀective therapies.19 There are many
putative reasons for these discrepant results, including
fundamental inter-species diﬀerences, incompatible
methods of evaluating the eﬀects of a therapy and,
with particular relevance to endovascular thrombectomy, CBF proﬁle diﬀerences between transient focal
ischemia and recanalization/reperfusion in patients.
The heterogeneity of focal ischemic stroke models is
perhaps most prominently reﬂected in their eﬀects on
CBF.20 Mechanical occlusion models – utilizing clips or
sutures directly placed onto the vessel, or the insertion
of an intraluminal ﬁlament – produce a characteristic
CBF proﬁle (Figure 2(b)), making them some of the
more popular models of pre-clinical stroke. At onset,
there is a rapid and profound decrease in CBF, maintained for the duration of the occlusion, with perhaps a
minimal rise due to collateral vessel dilation. When the
vessel is reopened, reperfusion (and in some cases
hyperperfusion) occurs almost immediately, followed
by a decline back to pre-stroke baseline or to a hypoperfused state. It has been shown that the extent of
reperfusion CBF is correlated with a positive outcome
following tMCAO,21 meaning that diﬀerences in reperfused CBF could confound experiments where abrupt
recanalization is important. Many studies state that as
part of their inclusion criteria, reperfusion CBF must be
greater than 70% at onset which provides a more
homogeneous group by excluding poorly reperfused
animals. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to measure CBF throughout MCAO and subsequent reperfusion so any outcome (behavioural or histological) can
be assessed based on the extent of reperfused CBF.

Sutherland et al.

365

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of endovascular thrombectomy after acute ischemic stroke. Stroke is caused by a clot occluding a major
vessel within the CNS. A thrombectomy device (usually helical and surrounded by a network of nitrol filaments) is introduced via a
guide cannula in the femoral vein, through the appropriate cerebral vessel (either a vertebral artery or the internal carotid artery) until
it reaches the region of the clot. Once the device is advanced so as to be distal to the occlusion, a number of loops are deployed in
order to surround the clot. Removal is via the guide cannula, leaving a recanalized vessel. (b) Angiography at 0, 5, and 10 min during
stent-retrieval of a thrombus with the Solitaire FR Revascularization Device. There is an immediate restoration of flow at T0 with a
progressive increase in recanalization up to T10 (arrow). The arrowhead indicates the distal stent marker distension. The asterisk
depicts the location of the proximal stent marker. Reproduced from Mordasini et al.11 with permission from American Journal of
Neuroradiology. (c) Six endovascular thrombectomy trials reported % Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction (TICI) 2b/3 scores indicative
of recanalization on angiography, % functional independence (modified Rankin Scale 0–2 at 90 days) and time to recanalization. These
results reveal that there is a correlation between the success of recanalization and the improvement in functional outcome. A greater
chance of recanalization occurred if thrombectomy occurred within 5 h of stroke onset.

366

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(2)

Figure 2. (a) Illustration of the transient middle cerebral artery occlusion model of ischemic stroke in rodents. In the intraluminal
filament model, the external carotid artery (ECA) is dissected and cauterized, and the common carotid artery (CCA) temporarily
ligated. The internal carotid artery (ICA) is dissected and an arteriotomy is performed in the ECA. The ECA is then reflected so as to
run into the ICA and a silicon-tipped nylon filament is introduced into the ICA via the ECA arteriotomy. The filament is advanced until
resistance is felt where it occludes the proximal middle cerebral artery (MCA). For transient experiments, the filament remains in
place for a set period of time before withdrawal and wound closure. Confirmation of occlusion is usually via concomitant laser
Doppler flowmetry. ACA: anterior cerebral artery, PCmA: posterior communicating artery, PCA: pterygopalatine artery. (b) Changes
to relative blood flow as a consequence of mechanical MCA occlusion using the transient intraluminal filament model with recanalization achieved by removal of the filament. (c) Changes to relative blood flow as a consequence of clot embolism with recanalization
achieved by administration of rtPA. (b) and (c) are reproduced from Hossmann20 with permission from Nature Publishing Group.

In contrast, embolic and thrombotic models, which
have traditionally relied on rtPA to achieve reperfusion,
show a very disparate CBF trace: while ischemia is
equally rapid, the reperfusion is much more gradual
and tends not to display the hyperperfusion seen in
mechanical tMCAO (Figure 2(c)). This diﬀerence has
particular pathomechanistic relevance to reperfusion
injury: the rapid inﬂux of oxygenated blood results in
the production of superoxide, hydrogen peroxide,
reactive nitrogen species and other free radicals,

which contribute to neuronal cell death as well as vascular damage in the aﬀected region.22 In turn, breakdown of the blood–brain barrier drives further
pathological processes, including inﬂammatory cell
recruitment and vasogenic oedema.23 Consequently,
short-duration mechanical occlusion models feature
delayed cell death due to this plethora of secondary
damage pathways. By contrast, in embolic models,
death occurs primarily during the ischemic period as
a direct consequence of anoxia and metabolic failure.20

Sutherland et al.
It has therefore been suggested that the root cause of
failure of therapeutic strategies in many clinical stroke
trials is the reliance of the pre-clinical evidence base on
models that fundamentally diﬀer in their mechanism of
ischemic damage compared to what is observed in acute
stroke patients treated with rtPA.

Endovascular thrombectomy versus
tMCAO
The advent of endovascular thrombectomy as a treatment strategy for acute ischemic stroke provides clinical
relevance for mechanical models of stroke. As has been
outlined above, CBF changes following endovascular
thrombectomy are similar to the CBF changes observed
in mechanical MCAO models, such as the intraluminal
ﬁlament tMCAO model,17 where this abrupt occlusion
and instant reperfusion are also seen (Figure 2(b)). In
comparison with rtPA treatment, where the gradual
reperfusion can lead to more severe pathophysiology
during ischemia, this rapid restoration in blood ﬂow
can lead to reperfusion injury through the rapid inﬂux
of systemic immune cells and local free-radical production. It is also thought that haemorrhagic transformation is likely to be the result of rapid reperfusion,24,25
however, the recent endovascular thrombectomy trials
showed no increase in symptomatic intracerebral haemorrhage compared to best medical treatment (which
could include the administration of i.v. rtPA).6–10 The
positive outcomes of the recent endovascular thrombectomy trials suggest that abrupt restoration of blood
ﬂow is more clinically eﬀective than gradual or no
reperfusion.26 Thus, it seems that the risks of reperfusion injury are outweighed by the beneﬁts of rapid restoration of oxygen and glucose to the ischemic tissue.
Mechanical MCAO models have previously been
criticized for not being clinically relevant given the
sharp increase in blood ﬂow when the ﬁlament or mechanical block has been removed.20 However, given the
similar CBF and pathophysiological changes between
endovascular thrombectomy for human stroke and the
rodent intraluminal ﬁlament tMCAO model, particularly upon reperfusion, the relevance of the ﬁlament
model, and in fact any mechanical MCAO model, to
clinical practice has become extremely clear. Scepticism
regarding the lack of neuroprotection and translational
problems with animal models should be reduced with
the advent of mechanical thrombectomy as a stroke
therapy. The substantial literature describing the ischemic brain and the eﬃcacy of neuroprotective agents
following mechanical MCAO and reperfusion, dating
back to the 1980s, will now become relevant to clinical
practice. The ﬁlament tMCAO model is ideal as it is
widely validated, shares CBF and pathophysiological
proﬁles with thrombectomy or embolectomy models,

367
and is easy to perform. Moving forward, the intraluminal ﬁlament tMCAO model should be considered the
gold standard for pre-clinical studies of ischemic stroke
treated by endovascular thrombectomy.

Limitations of pre-clinical models
The limitations of pre-clinical models of stroke, more speciﬁcally their lack of translation into eﬀective therapies,
have been extensively reviewed elsewhere.15 The particular drawbacks of the ﬁlament tMCAO model tend to be
limited to reproducibility compared to direct occlusion of
cerebral vessels. Generally, reproducible lesions, such as
those obtained from the permanent proximal electrocoagulation model, produce consistent functional outcomes.27 In comparison the tMCAO model outcome is
aﬀected by a variety of factors including weight, strain,
age and sex of the animal, and ﬁlament size. Surgical
expertise and ﬁnesse also inﬂuence the functional outcome as the degree of endothelial damage and precise
ﬁlament location both aﬀect the severity of injury.28
This inconsistency in functional outcome is reﬂected in
the signiﬁcant variability in lesion size and location28
found using the tMCAO model. The variability within
the model is further compounded by the vast heterogeneity in technical details between labs. For example, durations of occlusion vary between 30 and 120 min, with
longer occlusion times resulting in >20% mortality
while brief MCAO produces only selective neuronal
death rather than outright pan-necrosis.29
In addition, there are certain inescapable diﬀerences
between patients and rodent models: while the MCA territory is the most commonly aﬀected in ischemic stroke,30
the degree of infarction in humans is, on average, 10% of
hemispheric volume,31 whereas in rodent models it ranges
from 10% to 50%.32 Similarly, the relative abundance of
white matter in humans means that even with proportionally similar lesion volumes, the cytological composition of
the aﬀected region is very likely to diﬀer from rodent
models. Such diﬀerences are problematic; however, our
ability to directly assess cerebral pathophysiological
changes in patients is largely restricted to post-mortem
histological and biochemical analyses, making the use
of animal models inevitable.
Fortunately, despite inconsistencies in a given
model, some pathological phenomena remain consistent between animal models and the human stroke
population. For example, the existence of the ischemic
penumbra was originally discovered in rodents33 and
occurs in both the ﬁlament tMCAO model20,34 and in
human stroke.35 There is also a rapid increase in the
levels of CNS and systemic cytokines in both stroke
patients36 and in animal models of stroke,37 as well as
associated pathological features such as microglial and
astroglial activation. These and other similarities

368
underlie the clinical relevance of pre-clinical models and
as such the potential power of these tools within stroke
research should not be underestimated.
It is important to re-iterate here that the design of
pre-clinical stroke experiments will depend entirely on
the particular outcome measure desired. If the aim is
simply to study the cellular mechanisms of a particular
intervention, then single-lab studies or small interlaboratory collaborations should work. Pre-clinical
trials of drugs or interventional studies that aim to continue to phase III must demonstrate global reproducibility across multiple laboratories. The innumerable
failures of translation in stroke neuroprotection have
led to eﬀorts such as the Stroke Therapy Academic
Industry Roundtable (STAIR) criteria,38 a list of recommendations for study design and conduct to enhance the
reproducibility and quality of individual studies so that
ﬁndings can be applied to human stroke. However, there
is a parallel drive to test compounds in much larger-scale
pre-clinical experiments, referred to as ‘phase III preclinical trials’. Pre-clinical trials require international collaboration and sharing of tissue and data to minimize
the eﬀects of surgical inexperience and variability, and
should be placed on the developmental pipeline of an
intervention between single-centre pre-clinical studies
and multi-centre clinical trials.19 The feasibility of international cooperation to conduct multi-centre pre-clinical
trials was recently displayed by a European consortium
who reported that anti-CD49d therapy was protective in
a murine permanent coagulation MCAO model.39

Conclusions
Acute stroke treatment is experiencing a revolution, largely due to the positive results of the ﬁve endovascular
thrombectomy trials published in early 2015. The therapeutic landscape for stroke patients is changing, and so
should the outlook for pre-clinical stroke research.
Given the increasing likelihood that endovascular
thrombectomy will become a front-line therapy for
stroke, alongside i.v. rtPA, further neuroprotection studies and developments in stroke research will still need to
use experimental MCAO models. The intraluminal ﬁlament tMCAO model is easy to perform and has similar
CBF and pathophysiological changes upon recanalization as endovascular thrombectomy in humans.
Therefore, any future clinical trials studying neuroprotection as an adjunct therapy to endovascular thrombectomy should consider the ﬁlament tMCAO model as
the model of choice to determine pre-clinical eﬃcacy.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: the Medical Research Council (AMB, BAS, GCD),

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism 36(2)
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre (AMB, GCD), Centre
for Evidence Based Medicine (JSB), Norfolk and Norwich
University Hospitals NHS Trust (JSB), Oxford University
Clinical Academic Graduate School (GH), and a Radcliﬀe
Department of Medicine Scholarship (AAN).

Declaration of conflicting interests
AMB is a senior medical science advisor and co-founder of
Brainomix, a company that develops electronic ASPECTS (eASPECTS), an automated method to evaluate ASPECTS in
stroke patients. All other authors declare no conﬂict of
interest.

References
1. NINDS. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic
stroke. The National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke rt-PA Stroke Study Group. N Engl J Med
1995; 333: 1581–1587.
2. Lees KR, Bluhmki E, von Kummer R, et al. Time to
treatment with intravenous alteplase and outcome in
stroke: an updated pooled analysis of ECASS,
ATLANTIS, NINDS, and EPITHET trials. Lancet
2010; 375: 1695–1703.
3. del Zoppo GJ, Higashida RT, Furlan AJ, et al.
PROACT: a phase II randomized trial of recombinant
pro-urokinase by direct arterial delivery in acute middle
cerebral artery stroke. PROACT Investigators. Prolyse in
acute cerebral thromboembolism. Stroke 1998; 29: 4–11.
4. Bose A, Henkes H, Alfke K, et al. The Penumbra System:
a mechanical device for the treatment of acute stroke due
to thromboembolism. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29:
1409–1413.
5. Smith WS, Sung G, Starkman S, et al. Safety and efficacy
of mechanical embolectomy in acute ischemic stroke:
results of the MERCI trial. Stroke 2005; 36: 1432–1438.
6. Berkhemer OA, Fransen PS, Beumer D, et al. A randomized trial of intraarterial treatment for acute ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 11–20.
7. Campbell BC, Mitchell PJ, Kleinig TJ, et al.
Endovascular therapy for ischemic stroke with perfusion-imaging selection. N Engl J Med 2015; 372:
1009–1018.
8. Goyal M, Demchuk AM, Menon BK, et al. Randomized
assessment of rapid endovascular treatment of ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 1019–1030.
9. Jovin TG, Chamorro A, Cobo E, et al. Thrombectomy
within 8 hours after symptom onset in ischemic stroke.
N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 2296–2306.
10. Saver JL, Goyal M, Bonafe A, et al. Stent-retriever
thrombectomy after intravenous t-PA vs. t-PA alone in
stroke. N Engl J Med 2015; 372: 2285–2295.
11. Mordasini P, Frabetti N, Gralla J, et al. In vivo evaluation of the first dedicated combined flow-restoration
and mechanical thrombectomy device in a swine model
of acute vessel occlusion. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011;
32: 294–300.
12. Broderick JP, Palesch YY, Demchuk AM, et al.
Endovascular therapy after intravenous t-PA versus
t-PA alone for stroke. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 893–903.

Sutherland et al.
13. Ciccone A, Valvassori L, Nichelatti M, et al.
Endovascular treatment for acute ischemic stroke.
N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 904–913.
14. Kidwell CS, Jahan R, Gornbein J, et al. A trial of imaging selection and endovascular treatment for ischemic
stroke. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 914–923.
15. Neuhaus AA, Rabie T, Sutherland BA, et al. Importance
of preclinical research in the development of neuroprotective strategies for ischemic stroke. JAMA Neurol 2014;
71: 634–639.
16. Mehra M, Henninger N, Hirsch JA, et al. Preclinical
acute ischemic stroke modeling. J Neurointerv Surg
2012; 4: 307–313.
17. Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, et al. Reversible
middle cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in
rats. Stroke 1989; 20: 84–91.
18. O’Collins VE, Macleod MR, Donnan GA, et al. 1,026
experimental treatments in acute stroke. Ann Neurol
2006; 59: 467–477.
19. Dirnagl U, Hakim A, Macleod M, et al. A concerted
appeal for international cooperation in preclinical
stroke research. Stroke 2013; 44: 1754–1760.
20. Hossmann KA. The two pathophysiologies of focal brain
ischemia: implications for translational stroke research.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012; 32: 1310–1316.
21. Sutherland BA and Buchan AM. Alteplase treatment
does not increase brain injury after mechanical middle
cerebral artery occlusion in the rat. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 2013; 33: e1–e7.
22. Li C and Jackson RM. Reactive species mechanisms of
cellular hypoxia-reoxygenation injury. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol 2002; 282: C227–C241.
23. Sutherland BA, Minnerup J, Balami JS, et al.
Neuroprotection for ischaemic stroke: translation from
the bench to the bedside. Int J Stroke 2012; 7: 407–418.
24. Molina CA, Alvarez-Sabin J, Montaner J, et al.
Thrombolysis-related hemorrhagic infarction: a marker
of early reperfusion, reduced infarct size, and improved
outcome in patients with proximal middle cerebral artery
occlusion. Stroke 2002; 33: 1551–1556.
25. Henning EC, Latour LL, Hallenbeck JM, et al.
Reperfusion-associated hemorrhagic transformation in
SHR rats: evidence of symptomatic parenchymal hematoma. Stroke 2008; 39: 3405–3410.
26. Prabhakaran S, Ruff I and Bernstein RA. Acute stroke
intervention: a systematic review. JAMA 2015; 313:
1451–1462.
27. Clausen BH, Degn M, Martin NA, et al. Systemically
administered anti-TNF therapy ameliorates functional

369

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.

39.

outcomes after focal cerebral ischemia. J Neuroinflamm
2014; 11: 203.
Schmid-Elsaesser R, Zausinger S, Hungerhuber E, et al.
A critical reevaluation of the intraluminal thread model
of focal cerebral ischemia: evidence of inadvertent premature reperfusion and subarachnoid hemorrhage in rats by
laser-Doppler flowmetry. Stroke 1998; 29: 2162–2170.
Engel O, Kolodziej S, Dirnagl U, et al. Modeling stroke
in mice – middle cerebral artery occlusion with the filament model. J Vis Exp 2011; 47: 2423.
Rordorf G, Koroshetz WJ, Copen WA, et al. Regional
ischemia and ischemic injury in patients with acute
middle cerebral artery stroke as defined by early diffusion-weighted and perfusion-weighted MRI. Stroke 1998;
29: 939–943.
Brott T, Marler JR, Olinger CP, et al. Measurements of
acute cerebral infarction: lesion size by computed tomography. Stroke 1989; 20: 871–875.
Kazemi M, Silva MD, Li F, et al. Investigation of techniques to quantify in vivo lesion volume based on comparison of water apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)
maps with histology in focal cerebral ischemia of rats.
Magn Reson Imaging 2004; 22: 653–659.
Astrup J, Symon L, Branston NM, et al. Cortical evoked
potential and extracellular Kþ and Hþ at critical levels
of brain ischemia. Stroke 1977; 8: 51–57.
Hata R, Maeda K, Hermann D, et al. Evolution of brain
infarction after transient focal cerebral ischemia in mice.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2000; 20: 937–946.
Schwamm LH, Koroshetz WJ, Sorensen AG, et al. Time
course of lesion development in patients with acute
stroke: serial diffusion- and hemodynamic-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Stroke 1998; 29: 2268–2276.
Sairanen T, Carpen O, Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML, et al.
Evolution of cerebral tumor necrosis factor-alpha production during human ischemic stroke. Stroke 2001; 32:
1750–1758.
Berti R, Williams AJ, Moffett JR, et al. Quantitative realtime RT-PCR analysis of inflammatory gene expression
associated with ischemia-reperfusion brain injury.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2002; 22: 1068–1079.
Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, et al. Update of
the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical recommendations. Stroke 2009; 40: 2244–2250.
Llovera G, Hofmann K, Roth S, et al. Results of a preclinical randomized controlled multicenter trial (pRCT):
anti-CD49d treatment for acute brain ischemia. Sci
Transl Med 2015; 7: 299ra121.

