[Link]
http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/64/3/653.full.pdf+html
[Link]
http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/64/3/590.full.pdf+html
[Link]
http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/64/3/523.full.pdf+html
445
(Hypertension. 2014;64:445.)
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Hypertension is available at http://hyper.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.04247
Subjective Cognition in Patients With 
Hypertension (page 653)
Subjective cognitive failures (SCF) are personal
experiences of cognitive problems in 
everyday life and are a common feature in 
elderly people with cardiovascular disease. 
SCF can include perceptions of forgetfulness
, slowness in performing simple tasks, 
or problems in planning or reasoning. It is 
not completely clear what these cognitive 
complaints represent. Strong associations 
between SCF and mood have been found. 
However, studies on the relationship with 
objective cognitive performance have shown 
inconsistent results. In addition, research 
on the association between SCF and imaging
markers of cerebral small vessel disease 
is limited. In this issue of Hypertension, 
Uiterwijk et al show that SCF were related 
to objectively measured overall cognition, 
memory, and information processing speed. 
In addition, SCF were associated with the 
presence of cerebral microbleeds after adjustment
for patient characteristics and vascular 
risk factors. These results provide important 
evidence that it is necessary to ask about 
the presence of cognitive complaints during 
consultation of patients with hypertension 
because SCF may point to lower objective 
cognitive function or cerebral microbleeds. 
Accordingly, this study emphasizes the 
importance of considering neuropsychological
assessment and brain imaging when 
patients with hypertension report cognitive 
problems. Longitudinal studies in patients 
with hypertension are needed to examine 
whether SCF are predictive of cognitive 
decline over time.
Autonomic Dysfunction in S-P467L 
Mice (page 590)
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ
(PPARγ) is a ligand-activated transcription 
factor regulating adipogenesis and metabolism
, and genetic data implicate PPARγ in 
human hypertension. S-P467L mice that specifically
express a dominant-negative mutation
(P467L) of PPARγ in vascular smooth 
muscle phenocopy the hypertension inpatients 
carrying the same mutation. In addition to 
hypertension, S-P467L mice exhibit impaired 
vasodilation, augmented vasoconstriction, and 
cerebral vascular remodeling. Interestingly, 
S-P467L mice also exhibit tachycardia suggesting
baroreflex and autonomic dysfunction
, a common feature in diabetes mellitus 
and predictor of cardiovascular events. In this 
issue of Hypertension, Borges et al used the 
S-P467L model to assess the role of vascular 
smooth muscle PPARγ in regulating baroreflex
activity because activation of PPARγ
increases baroreflex sensitivity in animals and 
human subjects, and diabetes mellitus is often 
associated with PPARγ impairment. S-P467L 
mice displayed increased sympathetic traffic
to the heart and decreased baroreflex 
effectiveness. Aortic depressor nerve activity
in response to increased arterial pressure 
was blunted in the transgenic mice (Figure), 
whereas the arterial pressure and heart rate 
responses to direct aortic depressor nerve 
stimulation were unaltered. Carotid arteries
exhibited inward remodeling without a 
change in distensibility. These data suggest 
a defect in the afferent, with preservation of 
the central and efferent limbs of the baroreflex
arc, caused by impaired vascular function, 
altered vascular structure, or compromised 
neurovascular coupling. These findings implicate
vascular smooth muscle PPARγ as a critical
determinant of neurovascular signaling. 
Because diabetes mellitus is often associated 
with PPARγ impairment, the study raises the 
possibility that diabetes mellitus–associated 
baroreflex alteration is as a result of defective 
vascular PPARγ and that S-P467L mice may 
be a useful model to understand the decreased 
baroreflex sensitivity in diabetes mellitus.
Kir6.1 in Vascular Smooth Muscle 
(page 523)
ATP-sensitive K+ channels (KATP) are sensitive
to cellular metabolism and open in 
response to falling ATP and rising ADP levels.
They are present in a diverse array of 
tissues and underlie several physiological 
processes including insulin release, cellular 
protection, and smooth muscle relaxation. 
They have a rich pharmacology with wellknown
inhibitors such as the antidiabetic 
sulphonylureas and a chemically diverse 
array of openers. Over the past 15 years, the 
molecular composition has been elucidated, 
and KATP channels are a hetero-octameric 
complex of a sulphonylurea receptor (SUR1, 
SUR2A, and SUR2B) and a Kir6.0 subunit, a 
member of the inwardly rectifying family of 
K+ channel. A series of murine models have 
been generated involving the global genetic 
deletion of these subunits to understand their 
physiological role. These mice have complex 
phenotypes that involve several different 
organ systems, and disentangling the influence
of KATP in various tissues has proved 
difficult. For example, the global genetic 
deletion of Kir6.1 (kcnj8) leads to hypertension
and cardiac arrhythmia potentially 
because of coronary artery spasm. In this 
issue of Hypertension, Aziz et al develop a 
model in which conditional genetic deletion 
of Kir6.1 is possible. Deletion specifically in 
vascular smooth muscle leads to hypertension
but no sudden death, suggesting that 
Kir6.1-containing KATP in the endothelium
or other tissues have an important role 
in cardiovascular (patho)physiology. The 
increased appreciation of the molecular and 
functional complexity of KATP may allow 
the development of therapeutic agents that 
are tissue specific and context dependent.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS
Hypertension ■ Vol. 64 ■ No. 3 ■ September 2014
SNP                  PE
Δ ADN Activity (%, v*sec/min)
-100
0
100
200
300
*
NT
S-P467L
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1438948615)