[Link]
mailto:Celeste.Riley@asu.edu
[Link]
mailto:Celeste.Riley@asu.edu
[Link]
http://www.worldneurosurgery.org
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com
In Vivo Experimental Aneurysm Embolization in a Swine Model with a Liquid-to-Solid
Gelling Polymer System: Initial Biocompatibility and Delivery Strategy Analysis
Celeste R. Brennecka1, Mark C. Preul2, William D. Bichard2, Brent L. Vernon1
INTRODUCTION
Treatment of cerebral aneurysms was revolutionized
in the early 1990s when improvements
in embolic devices, namely endovascular
coils, allowed endovascular embolization
to become mainstream. Less invasive than
surgical intervention, endovascular treatment
is routine and preferred for many types of cerebral
aneurysms (7, 9, 10, 17, 22). Many types
of embolic materials are now on the market,
including a variety of endovascular coils (5,
14, 25, 31, 47). There is only one liquid delivery
system approved for aneurysms, Onyx (eV3,
Irvine, California, USA), which is a precipitation-based
system using ethylene vinyl alcohol
copolymer (EVOH) and dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) (33, 51, 53).
However, these materials are not ideal. Coil
embolization is considered the most effective
endovascular aneurysm treatment, yet coils
tend to compact over time and have a significant
rate of recanalization, especially after
treating giant aneurysms (35%–70% recanalization
rate) and wide-necked aneurysms
(25%–50% recanalization rate) (15, 21, 23, 30,
44, 50, 55). This phenomenon is likely related
to the low packing density achievable during
coil placement (26, 36, 43, 46). Advancements
to traditional coil technology have included a hydrogel
filling or coating, designed to swell and
therefore occlude more of the aneurysm space
than bare coils. However, coated coils have not
actually translated into consistent improvements
over bare coils (12, 34, 54).
In principle, greater aneurysm volume
filling can be achieved with liquid systems.
Initial clinical experience with Onyx has
shown an improvement in recanalization
rates over coils for large and giant aneurysms
(29, 37). However, Onyx has significant
drawbacks that make it less appealing.
Onyx involves co-delivery of DMSO, which
is used to dissolve the EVOH copolymer.
When delivered too quickly, DMSO has
been shown to induce vessel necrosis and
cause vasospasm (11, 33, 35). As a result of
co-formulation with DMSO, EVOH liquid
must be delivered very slowly and in stages,
making for a challenging delivery technique
(29, 48).
An ideal embolic material for endovascular
delivery would be able to achieve complete
or near-complete aneurysm volume
 OBJECTIVE: Current treatments for cerebral aneurysms are far from ideal.
Platinum coils are prone to compaction, and currently used liquid embolics are
delivered with angiotoxic agents. This work presents initial in vivo studies of a
novel liquid-to-solid gelling polymer system (PPODA-QT), focusing on biocompatibility
and effective delivery strategies.
 METHODS: PPODA-QT was used to embolize surgically created lateral wall
carotid artery aneurysms in swine using three delivery strategies. Group 1 aneurysms
were completely filled with PPODA-QT (n 5), group 2 aneurysms were subcompletely
(80%–90%) filled (n 3), and group 3 aneurysms underwent three-dimensional
coil placement followed by polymer embolization (n  3). The study was
designed such that three animals per treatment group survived to 1 month.
 RESULTS: The group 1 delivery strategy (100% filling) resulted in survival of 3/5
animals. This strategy led to aneurysm stretching, which resulted model failure
in 2/5 animals. Group 2 aneurysms, although initially <100% filled with the
polymer, displayed robust neointimal tissue coverage and complete obliteration
after 1 month. Group 3 aneurysms showed less prominent neointimal tissue
coverage as well as two instances where excess polymer was found in the
parent vessel. The PPODA-QT material showed good biocompatibility with
vascular tissue in all animals at 1 month.
 CONCLUSIONS: This small-scale pilot study highlighted first-time in vivo use
of PPODA-QT as an embolic agent for aneurysm treatment. Filling aneurysms to
80% to 90% capacity proved to be a safe and effective delivery strategy, and
PPODA-QT showed excellent biocompatibility. This study indicates that future
investigation of PPODA-QT for aneurysm embolization is warranted, as it may
prove to be a viable alternative to current embolic materials.
Key words
 Biocompatibility testing
 Cerebral aneurysm
 Cross-linking polymer
 Endovascular techniques
 Therapeutic embolization
Abbreviations and Acronyms
DMSO: Dimethyl sulfoxide
EJV: External jugular vein
EVOH: Ethylene vinyl alcohol
H&E: Hematoxylin and eosin
IAP: Intra-aneurysmal pressure
NI: Neointimal
PPODA: Poly(propylene glycol) diacrylate
QT: Pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate)
From the 1Center for Interventional
Biomaterials, School of Biological and Health
Systems Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe; and
2Division of Neurological Surgery, Barrow Neurological
Institute, St. Joseph’s Hospital and Medical Center,
Phoenix, Arizona, USA
To whom correspondence should be addressed:
Celeste Riley Brennecka, Ph.D. [E-mail: Celeste.Riley@asu.
edu]
Citation: World Neurosurg. (2012) 78, 5:469-480.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
Journal homepage: www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org
Available online: www.sciencedirect.com
1878-8750/$ - see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
WORLD NEUROSURGERY 78 [5]: 469-480, NOVEMBER 2012 www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org 469
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-224424912)
filling initially, which cannot be done with
coils. Furthermore, an ideal embolic agent
would not necessitate formulation with organic
solvents, given their potential angiotoxicity.
Another critical aspect of an ideal
embolic agent is that it can be administered
in a straightforward manner, requiring only
a short, one-time delivery technique. At
present there are no such materials on the
market for cerebral aneurysm embolization.
PPODA-QT Gelling System
In the quest for a better embolic material, we
have developed a water-based, in situ gelling
polymer system based on the monomers
poly(propylene glycol) diacrylate (PPODA)
and pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate
) (QT). This system comprises of
PPODA and QT monomers, which are liquid
at room temperature. When combined in appropriate
amounts, and in the presence of a
high pH aqueous solution, QT and PPODA
chemically react and “add” onto each other.
As the reaction propagates, the system eventually
forms a solid in a controllable and predictable
manner, through chemical crosslinking
(40). Because of its liquid-to-solid
gelling nature, PPODA-QT allows for a similarly
high degree of aneurysm volume filling
as is achievable with EVOH, but without using
a partner system involving organic solvents.
As a result, the delivery technique associated
with PPODA-QT is more straightforward,
without requiring the material to be delivered
over prolonged stages.
Study Goals
This work reports the first in vivo investigation
of PPODA-QT in experimental aneurysm
models. The aims of this study were to 1) determine
the initial biocompatibility behavior
of PPODA-QT in a large (i.e., human gauge)
animal aneurysm model, and 2) identify a delivery
strategy suitable for PPODA-QT to maximize
the potential benefits of the material.
Delivery strategies examined were complete
(100%) aneurysm filling with PPODA-QT,
subcomplete (80%–90%) aneurysm filling
with PPODA-QT, and a combination treatment
involving placement of a framing coil
followed by PPODA-QT embolization.
The terms delivery technique and delivery
strategy have very specific definitions in the
context of this work. Delivery technique refers
to the manner in which a liquid embolic
is delivered through a catheter to the aneurysm
, relating to its inherent material properties
or characteristics. Delivery strategy
refers to a method of aneurysm embolization
, regardless of embolic agent used.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
PPODA-QT Formulation
Formulation of PPODA-QT involves two
multifunctional hydrophobic monomers
poly(propylene glycol) diacrylate (PPODA)
and pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate
) (QT) (Figure 1). These monomers
are mixed in equimolar ratios of reactive
groups. A basic initiating solution is
introduced to begin Michael-type addition
between PPODA and QT (Figure 1C). As
described by Riley et al. (40), radio-opacity
can be incorporated into the polymer system
through the use of a liquid contrast
agent, which can replace the basic initiating
solution by simply increasing the pH of the
contrast agent. The optimized formulation
of this polymer system was used in the experiments
reported here.
Poly(propylene glycol) diacrylate, molecular
weight900 (PPODA), and pentaerythritol
tetrakis(3-mercaptopropionate) (QT) were
purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, Missouri,
USA). The liquid contrast agent used in this
work was iothalamate meglumine (Conray,
Mallinckrodt, St. Louis, Missouri, USA), a
high osmolar, ionic contrast agent. Conray
was adjusted to pH11.0 with 5 N sodium
hydroxide, based on parameters investigated
in previous work (40). The addition of sodium
hydroxide did not negatively affect radioopacity
of the solution or the resulting gels.
To begin the reaction, each component
was weighed and aliquoted in a sterile environment
after filtration through 0.2-m syringe
filters. Components were measured
and aliquoted into 1-mL syringes such that
final concentrations were 75% (wt) organic
components and 25% (wt) aqueous contrast
agent. For these experiments, 0.293 g
of QT was syringe-mixed with 1.08 g of
PPODA using a Luer lock syringe coupler to
attach component syringes. After 30 seconds
of mixing, 0.458 g of Conray at pH 11
was introduced. Conray was mixed in with
the organic components for 2 minutes.
The gel time of PPODA-QT was determined
using parallel plate rheology on a
Physica MCR 101 rheometer (Anton Paar,
Graz, Austria). A total of three samples (n
3) were mixed and then placed on the rheometer.
An oscillation time sweep was performed
at 25°C with a constant stress of 10
Pa and constant frequency of 1 Hz. The gel
time was taken to be the time at which the
phase angle	 reached 45 degrees. A phase
angle of 90 degrees represents a purely viscous
liquid, whereas 0 degrees is considered
an elastic solid. Therefore, a phase angle
of 45 degrees represents the point at
which the polymer material has an equal
proportion of solid-like and liquid-like
properties, and is commonly used to define
the gel point. The average and standard deviation
of gel time for the three samples
was calculated.
CH2
O
O
CH2
O CH 3
O
n
O
O
O
O
SH
SH
SH SH
O
O
O O
A PPODA B QT
S
H
OH
-
S
-
CH2
O
R
O
S O 
R
O
-
S O 
R
O
C) Michael-type Addition
R R
R
R
Figure 1. Components and reaction scheme. (A) Poly(propylene glycol)
diacrylate, also called PPODA; (B) pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-
mercaptopropionate), also called QT; (C) Michael-type addition
reaction. Deprotonated thiol group of QT nucleophilically attacks
acrylate group of PPODA. Figure reproduced from Riley et al. (2011)
(40). Copyright (2010) Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
470 www.SCIENCEDIRECT.com WORLD NEUROSURGERY, DOI:10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Surgical and Endovascular Procedures
The animal studies reported in this work
were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee at Barrow Neurological
Institute and are in line with guidelines
as set forth by the U. S. Department of
Agriculture, National Institutes of Health,
and the Association for Assessment and Accreditation
of Laboratory Animal Care
(AAALAC). Aneurysms were surgically created
in the right common carotid artery of
adult Yorkshire swine (130 lb) as previously
described (3). A lateral wall carotid
artery aneurysm was created by making a
10-cm incision on the right side of the animal
’s neck to access the right common carotid
artery and external jugular vein (EJV).
A 2-cm section of the EJV was removed and
sewn over a 5-mm opening made in the
common carotid artery to form the aneurysm
sac. Resulting aneurysms were oval
shaped with neck diameters of 5 to 6 mm,
heights of 5 to 8 mm, and largest width
dimensions of 7 to 12 mm. Animals were
intubated and anesthetized with and maintained
on 2% isoflurane plus oxygen during
the procedure. Animals were given 3000 IU
intravenous bolus of heparin immediately
after conclusion of aneurysm construction
and before embolization, with heparin
maintenance of 500 IU intravenously every
30 minutes during the embolization-angiographic
procedure. Postoperative aspirin
was given orally at a dose of 81.25 mg/d.
Experimental aneurysms were embolized
immediately after creation by a standard endovascular
access procedure through the
right femoral artery. Catheters were housed in
an 8-F guide catheter for introduction into the
vasculature. Embolization procedures were
performed by first directing the filling catheter
(Renegade Hi-Flo, Boston Scientific,
Natick, Massachusetts, USA) to the aneurysm
and placing the tip inside the aneurysm sac.
Next, the 30-mm balloon catheter (Hyper-
Glide; eV3) was inflated across the aneurysm
neck. Upon delivery of PPODA-QT, the inflated
balloon prevented the polymer from
flowing into the parent vessel until solidification
occurred. Procedures involving a threedimensional
coil (CASHMERE 14; Codman &
Shurtleff, Inc., Raynham, Massachusetts,
USA) were done by depositing the coil before
inflating the endovascular balloon,
followed by balloon inflation during delivery
of PPODA-QT to fill the remaining
aneurysm volume.
Control procedures, either coil embolization
alone or no-treatment controls, were
not performed due to published reports on
outcomes of such treatments and our own
experience (3). Given the exploratory and
small nature of this study, it was decided
that these controls would not provide
enough significant new information to justify
the animal sacrifice. Furthermore, our
study goals were not aimed at comparing
effectiveness results to other treatments.
Study Outline
Three different PPODA-QT delivery strategies
were investigated in this study, designed to
have three surviving animals per treatment
group with a 1-month end point; group 1,
complete aneurysm filling with PPODA-QT;
group 2, subcomplete (80%–90%) aneurysm
filling with PPODA-QT; and group 3, placement
of a three-dimensional platinum coil
followed by filling the remaining aneurysm
volume with PPODA-QT. In all groups, aneurysm
filling was achieved through visualization
of PPODA-QT under digital subtraction
angiography. For group 2 aneurysms, the
road-mapped aneurysm image was physically
traced on the viewing screen. Filling was performed
such that 80% to 90% of the outlined
angiogram (two-dimensional image) was
filled with the polymer.
In all treatment groups, material leftover in
the syringe (noninjected material) was monitored
to gauge its degree of solidification. Although
PPODA-QT has been found to react
more quickly at body temperature (27), monitoring
was done at room temperature to ensure
the polymer was suitably solidified upon deflation
of the endovascular balloon. For each procedure
, the balloon was inflated for15 minutes
, during which time the polymer was mixed,
delivered, and underwent solidification.
In this study, PPODA-QT was purposefully
formulated to have a longer gel time
than would be desired for clinical use. The
long gel time (10 –15 minutes) allowed for
successful delivery in accordance with the
study goals, and offered enough flexibility
in the delivery window during this firsttime
use investigation. The gel time of
PPODA-QT is tailorable, meaning that it
can be further optimized to achieve
shorter gel times for a clinical setting.
Analysis
Outcomes from this study include each
group’s survival rate, the degree of aneurysm
occlusion immediately after the procedure
and at 1 month after embolization, as well as
the thickness of neointimal (NI) tissue
growth at the polymer–vessel interface. In
each treatment group, experiments were performed
such that three animals survived to the
1-month time point. Survival rate was calculated
as the number of animals surviving divided
by the total number of animals that underwent
treatment.
Table 1. Results from 1 Month In Vivo Aneurysm Embolization Study with Different PPODA-QT Delivery Strategies
Treatment
Group Description
Total
Number of
Animals
Number of
Animals
Surviving to 1
Month
1-Month Survival
Rate
Raymond-Roy
Classification
Cell Layer Present
(Full/Partial)
Material in Parent
Vessel (Y/N)
30
Minutes
1
Month
Group 1 Complete Fill 5 3* 60% 1,1,1 1,1,1 F, F, F N, N, N
Group 2 Subcomplete Fill 3† 3 100% 2,3,3 1,1,1 P, F, F N, N, N
Group 3 Coil polymer 3 3 100% 1,1,1 1,2,1 P, P, P N, Y, Y
*Two animals died in the 100% fill group due to aneurysm model failure 5 to 7 days after the embolization procedure.
†Another animal was initially included in this group, but died due to excessive clotting complications the day of embolization. This response was anomalous and the animal was removed from
the study group.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
WORLD NEUROSURGERY 78 [5]: 469-480, NOVEMBER 2012 www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org 471
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-476306053)
The degree of aneurysm occlusion was
determined using the Raymond-Roy classification
system (41). Class 1 indicates total
obliteration, including the aneurysm neck.
Class 2 means a residual neck is present,
but there is no opacification of the aneurysm
sac. Class 3 indicates that a residual
aneurysm is present due to opacification of
the aneurysm sac. The Raymond-Roy scale
was used to classify angiograms at 30 minutes
after embolization and at the end of the
1-month survival time. In group 2, the degree
of occlusion was further quantified to
determine the percentage of two-dimensional
aneurysm space filled by the polymer.
A spline area calculation program was
developed in MATLAB (MathWorks,
Natick, Massachusetts, USA) to calculate
percent aneurysm filling.
Explanted aneurysms were macroscopically
observed for the presence of new tissue
growth in the ostium of PPODA-QT filled
aneurysms, followed by histologic verification.
Before histology, group 1 and 2 samples
were fixed in 10% formaldehyde and
sent to the Medical College of Georgia (Augusta
, Georgia, USA) for paraffin embedding
, sectioning, and staining. Samples
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) and Masson’s trichrome. Group 3
samples were fixed in 70% ethanol and sent
to TAACH Pathology (Phoenix, Arizona,
USA) for plastic embedding, sectioning,
Figure 2. Angiographic images of experimentally created aneurysms before
embolization (first column), immediately after embolization (second
column), and 1 month after embolization (third column), for each treatment
group.
A B C 
Figure 3. Representative explanted aneurysms from each treatment group. The luminal side of the
aneurysm neck/vessel interface has been exposed by cutting axially along the opposite side of the
vessel wall. Neointimal tissue growth over the aneurysm neck orifice can be seen in each image.
Group 1 (A) and group 2 (B) samples showed more complete tissue overgrowth than observed in
group 3 aneurysms (C) by macroscopic observation.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
472 www.SCIENCEDIRECT.com WORLD NEUROSURGERY, DOI:10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
( 8.0.0.2542.1778386693 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
and proprietary staining. Explanted group 3
samples were processed differently from
groups 1 and 2 because of the presence of
the platinum coils, which required a different
sectioning protocol. The thickness of NI
tissue over the aneurysm neck was measured
from histology images at10 magnification.
Two slides per animal underwent
NI tissue thickness measurements. Due to
the difficulty in sectioning coil-containing
aneurysms, only two slides per aneurysm
were obtained for group 3 animals. To
maintain consistency, only two slides per
animal were analyzed group 1 and 2 animals
as well. In all aneurysm samples, one slide
was taken from the distally occluded region
, and one slide from the proximally occluded
region. With n 5 measurements
per slide, this analysis reflects the degree of
tissue thickness present in each treatment
group. Statistical analysis (one-way analysis
of variance) was performed between
treatment groups.
RESULTS
PPODA-QT Formulation
Previous studies with PPODA-QT have
shown that the gel time kinetics are reproducible
and have low sample-to-sample
variability (40). In the current study, rheologic
analysis for gels formulated with Conray
at pH 11.0 and mixed for 2 minutes resulted
in gel times of 10.2 0.5 minutes.
Overall Study Results
Results from the 1-month studies are summarized
in Table 1. The important outcomes of
this study include the animal survival rate, degree
of occlusion at 30 minutes and at 1
month after embolization, as well as the presence
of NI tissue in the ostium. FromTable 1,
the most obvious concerns arise from the
group 1 survival rate of 60%. This was directly
related to the delivery strategy, where the target
of 100% aneurysm filling resulted in 2/5
aneurysm model failures. Further explanation
of this outcome is presented in the Discussion
section.
Groups 2 and 3 resulted in 100% animal
survival and complete angiographic occlusion
at 1 month. Representative angiographic
images from each treatment group
are shown in Figure 2. These images show
angiograms before embolization, immediately
after the procedure, and at 1 month
after embolization. Images of aneurysm
neck regions from explanted samples are
shown for representative groups in Figure
3, confirming the presence of NI tissue
growth in all groups. However, more pronounced
tissue coverage is visible in groups
1 and 2 than in group 3. Material in the
parent vessel was seen only in group 3.
Initial filling percentages for aneurysms
in group 2 are displayed inTable 2.
Given the subcomplete (100%) occlusion
in group 2 aneurysms, yet their complete
angiographic occlusion at 1 month,
PPODA-QT showed positive progressive
occlusion behavior without resulting in
parent artery occlusion in any group 2
sample.
A B
Figure 4. Histology images from a representative group 2 aneurysm. Tissue was stained with Masson’s trichrome and viewed at
8( A) and50 (B) magnification. (A) A cross-sectional slice of the aneurysm, reconstructed from a series of images at8
magnification. The tissue “flaps” at the top of A make up the original parent vessel, bisected for macroscopic observation.
(B) The neointimal tissue growth region at50 magnification. At the polymer interface (bottom inset), a thin layer of blood
(arrow) transitions into a dense collagen layer (blue). Tissue closer to the parent vessel interface (top inset) has much less
collagen, but contains fibrous neointimal tissue (arrowheads).
Table 2. Initial Percent of Aneurysm
Occlusion With PPODA-QT, Using
Two-Dimensional Angiographic Images
of Group 2 Aneurysms
Group 2 Filling % (area)
1 87.1%
2 80.1%
3 82.0%
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
WORLD NEUROSURGERY 78 [5]: 469-480, NOVEMBER 2012 www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org 473
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
NI Tissue Growth Analysis
Figures 4 and 5 show histologic images
from a representative group 2 sample
stained with Masson’s trichrome and H&E,
respectively. These images highlight NI tissue
growth in the aneurysm neck region.
Figures 4 and 5 show the aneurysm lumen
occluded with the PPODA-QT material,
rather than an intraluminal clot, as would
be seen with coiling. Upon processing, the
polymer was removed, but vascular tissue,
as well as NI tissue over the aneurysm orifice
, remains stained. From these images, it
is apparent that the polymer itself is responsible
for aneurysm occlusion, rather than
thrombosis within the lumen.
Figure 4, in which samples were stained
with Masson’s trichrome to visualize collagen
, shows an initial clotting response to the
material, but the clot transitions into a dense
collagen layer (blue) and eventual fibrous tissue
(red strands) when moving across NI tissue
from the polymer toward the parent vessel
lumen. The sample displayed in Figure 5,
stained with H&E, clearly shows the neoendothelial
cell layer over the newly formed tissue,
an indicator of successful aneurysm healing
and biocompatibility.
NI tissue thickness measurements for
each treatment group are shown inFigure 6.
This graph shows similar thicknesses
across all treatment groups, with group 1
displaying the most variability in thickness,
as a result of one replicate that showed significantly
more tissue growth than others.
Group average measurements are as follows
: group 1, 1.55 0.88 mm; group 2,
1.43 0.51 mm; group 3, 0.44 0.39 mm.
Only two of the three explanted aneurysm
replicate samples in group 3 showed NI tissue
growth over the ostium that could be
measured. One sample was still patent and
showed little, if any, NI tissue over the ostium
, which is shown in Figure 7. In fact,
during tissue processing the coil ejected itself
through the still patent aneurysmal ostium.
This sample was recorded as not
showing NI tissue overgrowth. Statistical
testing found that groups 1 and 2 were not
significantly different from each other (P
0.53), but both groups showed significantly
more NI tissue growth than group 3 (P
0.001). A marked difference was noted in
group 3 in that there remained spaces and
channels within the aneurysm with tenuous
adhesions attached to the coil strands.
DISCUSSION
PPODA-QT System for Aneurysm
Embolization
PPODA-QT is a novel liquid-to-solid gelling
material with ideal properties for cerebral
aneurysm embolization. PPODA-QT transitions
from a liquid into a solid by crosslinking
of PPODA and QT monomers, catalyzed
in the presence of freeOH groups. In
]*
Figure 5. Representative group 2 aneurysm stained with hematoxylin and eosin at20 and200
magnification. The neoendothelial cell layer is present at the luminal interface (arrowhead). The
internal elastic lamina of the parent vessel is also visible (arrow), as well as the region of initial
neointimal tissue growth from the parent vessel over the neck region (*).
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3
NI Tissue Thickness (mm)
Figure 6. Neointimal tissue thickness measurements, with n 10
measurements per sample and 3 samples per treatment group (except
for group 3). One aneurysm sample in group 3 did not show any
measureable neointimal tissue thickness. Average group measurements
are group 1, 1.55 0.88 mm; group 2, 1.43 0.51 mm; and group 3,
0.44 0.39 mm. Statistical testing found that neointimal tissue thickness
measurement in groups 1 and 2 were not significantly different (P
0.53), but showed significantly thicker neointimal tissue growth than
group 3 (P 0.001).
Figure 7. Explanted aneurysm sample from
the group 3 replicate showing no neointimal
tissue growth in the ostium. This sample also
displays a considerable amount of PPODAQT
in the parent vessel, likely hindering
tissue growth in the ostial region.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
474 www.SCIENCEDIRECT.com WORLD NEUROSURGERY, DOI:10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
formulating the gel, sufficient OH levels
can be incorporated by increasing the pH of
an aqueous buffer. After mixing all components
together, PPODA and QT begin to react
, developing first into growing polymer
chains and then into a solid network over
time. The speed of reaction can be increased
or decreased by changing the pH of the
aqueous solution, with higher pH leading
to faster gel times. The aqueous solution
used for PPODA-QT formulation was the
contrast agent Conray. Once the pH of Conray
was increased to an appropriate level, it
was mixed in with PPODA and QT to form
the gel. This Conray-formulated system
provided fluoroscopic visibility of the gel in
vivo.
PPODA-QT can be delivered through a
single catheter once all components are
mixed together. In-depth characterization
of PPODA-QT has shown that there is a delivery
window available in which PPODA-QT
can be administered as a liquid. The duration
of the delivery window is dependent on
the material gel time, and is therefore also
tailorable (40). As the chemical reaction
progresses, the PPODA-QT gel becomes an
elastic solid, showing substantial crosslinking
and high viscoelastic strength (27,
52), capable of withstanding the forces of
blood flow. Recent studies have also shown
low in vitro cytotoxicity and minimal longterm
degradation behavior (data not yet
published).
PPODA-QT Delivery Technique versus
Other Liquid Embolics
The PPODA-QT system is different from
any other liquid embolic that has been used
clinically. This study was not designed to
take particular aim at Onyx, but because
EVOH is the only liquid embolic system currently
available in the United States, it naturally
assumes a role for comparative relevance.
We also compare the delivery
technique of PPODA-QT to delivery of the
calcium alginate gelling system, which has
been investigated previously for aneurysm
embolization and used in a small number of
patients (1, 3, 38, 47).
EVOH-DMSO Versus PPODA-QT: Material and
Handling Characteristics. In contrast to the
EVOH-DMSO system, PPODA-QT is a selfcontained
gelling system. The solidification
reaction used in PPODA-QT is “self-reactive”
in that the catalyst (freeOH groups) is formulated
into the gelling system. With Onyx,
EVOH solidifies only when DMSO is allowed
to diffuse away. In this respect, Onyx uses
polymer deposition to achieve formation of a
solid material, whereas PPODA-QT chemically
cross-links into a solid over time, once
components are mixed.
Delivery of EVOH is performed very
slowly in staged fashions, so that DMSO
can diffuse away and Onyx can cure. EVOHDMSO
is injected for a period of time while
the endovascular balloon is inflated, followed
by periods of balloon deflation and
reperfusion. This process is repeated until a
sufficient amount of EVOH is delivered to
occlude the aneurysm. Although this technique
does promote safe delivery of the copolymer
, it results in a technically challenging
procedure and prolonged procedure
times, with an average of about 95 minutes,
as reported in the Cerebral Aneurysm Multicenter
European Onyx (CAMEO) trial (29,
48).
Calcium Alginate Gel Versus PPODA-QT: Material
and Handling Characteristics. Similar to
the EVOH-DMSO system, calcium alginate
is a precipitation-based system, composed
of a naturally occurring copolymer (alginate
) that cross-links to form a gel matrix
in the presence of divalent ions, such as
calcium. This gelling system was first investigated
for endovascular delivery by Becker
and Kipke (1). For the material to gel in situ,
the liquid alginate precursor must be codelivered
with an ionic solution. Aqueous
calcium chloride (CaCl
2
) was used for this
purpose. Co-delivery of alginate and CaCl
2
was accomplished by using a double-lumen
catheter so that components did not react
before leaving the delivery catheter. Once
mixed, however, Ca2 integrated into the
alginate, resulting in rapid cross-linking
(1–3). Although the advantages of this system
include low material toxicity and formation
of a “tissue-like” gel, it has inherent
delivery challenges as well.
From our experience with calcium alginate
, although biocompatibility aspects
were favorable, the rapid cross-linking of
this material is problematic for delivery purposes.
Because cross-linking happens so
rapidly, filling the aneurysm was the result
of a “one shot” injection. Although in most
instances the experimental aneurysms were
filled well, problems with incremental alginate delivery occurred upon the delivery
of additional gel to an existing gel mass.
The new alginate gel mass did not adhere
to the already-delivered and cured gel.
This result proved troublesome because
blood was able to perfuse the spaces between
alginate pieces, resulting in dislodgement
of the additional alginate
pieces (unpublished data).
The PPODA-QT system, as already discussed
, does not require or even permit incremental
delivery. Because the gelling process
of PPODA-QT is self-contained, the
aneurysm can be filled while the material is
still in liquid form, which is impossible
with calcium alginate and EVOH. As long as
it is within the delivery window, PPODA-QT
can be continuously injected through a
small catheter while the parent vessel is
kept under balloon protection.
In this study, PPODA-QT delivery was
completed in 1 to 2 minutes in all animals.
Because PPODA-QT has proven to have reproducible
gelling kinetics (40), it solidifies
in a predictable time frame. Furthermore,
this time frame can be tailored to the needs
of the procedure by adjusting the pH of the
aqueous component. Although interuser
variability related to gelling kinetics was not
addressed in this study, future work must
evaluate such effects. However, our experience
with this material suggests that when
mixing instructions are properly followed,
interuser variability in gel time is expected
to be low, given the macroscopic processes
that dominate cross-linking in PPODA-QT
gels formulated with Conray (40). The uncomplicated
delivery technique associated
with PPODA-QT, as well as the absence of
organic solvent delivery, may enhance clinical
acceptance of this liquid embolic material.
Study Goals and Controls
With these properties indicating an improvement
in delivery technique over currently
available liquid embolics, we aimed
to evaluate initial biocompatibility as well as
direct the future delivery strategy of
PPODA-QT with this small-scale study.
This study was designed to assess two specific
outcomes. The first study question
was: Does PPODA-QT show good initial
biocompatibility in an in vivo aneurysm
model? The second study question was:
Given its straightforward delivery technique
, are there specific strategies for
PPODA-QT delivery that stand out as poten-
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
WORLD NEUROSURGERY 78 [5]: 469-480, NOVEMBER 2012 www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org 475
(8.0.0.2542.887312904 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
tially better or worse for future clinical
use?
One important note regarding study
goals is that this first-time in vivo study was
not meant to evaluate efficacy of the
PPODA-QT compared with other treatment
methods. There are not enough study subjects
to make statistically valid comparisons
with other studies, and we believe the swine
animal model itself is not preferable for
testing long-term efficacy, although it is acceptable
for short-term survival studies in
which material handling characteristics are
evaluated at human gauge. We do report
outcomes, such as occlusion scores and NI
tissue thickness measurements between
treatment groups, but these are tools for
comparing between delivery strategies
within this particular study.
Along these same lines, control groups
were not deemed necessary. Previous studies
, including our experience, have shown
outcomes from untreated experimental lateral
wall aneurysms, as well as coiled experimental
aneurysms in swine, providing the
necessary control information without having
to use additional animals. These previously
published reports and our experience
indicate that experimental lateral wall aneurysms
in swine are unstable when left untreated
, being prone to either spontaneous
thrombosis or rupture (3, 8, 20). Conversely
, coiled aneurysms in the swine
model have previously shown variable-tomoderate
NI tissue coverage over time
frames similar to our 1-month study (8, 31).
PPODA-QT Containment within Model
Aneurysms
One of the main concerns neurointerventionalists
have with using any liquid embolic
material is the possibility of material
escaping out of the aneurysm and blocking
arteries downstream, without the ability to
retrieve the material once it escapes. This is
a valid concern due to the serious and potentially
fatal consequences of such an
event. However, the Onyx Liquid Embolic
System has been used clinically since the
early 2000s. Reported rates from largescale
clinical studies indicate that Onyx has
comparable complication rates to endovascular
coiling when comparing similar aneurysm
populations (29).
In our study, we report no instances of
PPODA-QT escaping past balloon protection
before material solidification. The lateral
wall aneurysm model used in this study
is not representative of the tortuous vessel
geometry that can be associated with pathologic
aneurysms, but successful containment
of PPODA-QT shown in this study
may at least satisfy initial safety concerns.
Initial In Vivo Biocompatibility
Biocompatibility of PPODA-QT gels could
have been analyzed using any in vivo model,
but due to the parallel interest in assessing
different delivery strategies with near human
gauge, the lateral wall carotid artery
aneurysm model in swine was used. Previous
studies with PPODA-QT in a swine arteriovenous
malformation model have shown
good biocompatibility (27), therefore the
present study served to reconfirm positive
biocompatibility outcomes in a swine aneurysm
model.
One month after embolization, macroscopic
observation and histology analysis
showed that PPODA-QT had no untoward
effects on local tissue in the aneurysm region
(Figures 4 and 5). The swine model
also allowed for assessment of biocompatibility
in terms of NI tissue response. Because
swine are known for their aggressive
clotting cascade and adept aneurysm healing
after almost any embolic treatment, we
were able to estimate potential toxicity of
the PPODA-QT system by its affect on NI
tissue growth. Groups 1 and 2, in which
PPODA-QT alone was delivered to aneurysms
, showed a similar level of NI tissue
thickness (Figure 6) as achieved with other
embolic agents in the swine aneurysm
model (1000m) (6). These results indicate
that PPODA-QT does not hinder NI tissue
growth in the neck region and therefore
displays good biocompatibility at 1 month
after embolization.
Delivery Strategy Analysis
Group 1: Complete Fill. Complete obliteration
of an aneurysm is the overarching goal
in embolization treatment. One of the
benchmarks used to assess an embolic material
is its ability to completely prevent
blood flow into the aneurysm immediately
after delivery. This benchmark is monitored
for all embolic agents, especially emerging
therapies (4, 13, 18, 19, 37). Therefore, one
of the delivery strategies used for
PPODA-QT in this study was 100% aneurysm
volume filling by the polymer.
Group 1 (n 5) consisted of experimental
aneurysms that were completely (100%)
filled with PPODA-QT. The delivery technique
involved continuous injection (1–2
minutes) with an endovascular balloon inflated
across the aneurysm neck until the
aneurysm was completely filled. Once
PPODA-QT was considered gelled, the balloon
was deflated. Initial angiography in all
group 1 aneurysms showed total occlusion.
Although histology results of surviving animals
showed excellent biocompatibility
and considerable NI tissue growth, the
main concern with this group was the low
survival rate.
To compare outcomes and histology results
between all treatment groups in this
study, three animals in each group were required
to survive to the 1-month time point.
However, during the study, two animals in
group 1 died prematurely, within 5 to 7 days of
the embolization procedure. Two additional
animals were placed in this group, which survived
to 1 month, making the total number of
animals in this group 5 instead of 3.
Autopsy of the two nonsurviving animals
showed that the aneurysm model had
failed, but PPODA-QT was still in place
within the aneurysm. This means that the
material did not dislodge from the aneurysm
and flow upstream and therefore permit
blood flow to rupture the unfilled aneurysm.
Instead, there is evidence that these
two aneurysms failed as a result of overfilling
aneurysms with PPODA-QT, rather
than blood reperfusion. If blood reperfusion
caused experimental aneurysms to
rupture, the initially subcompletely filled
aneurysms of group 2 would have also
showed rupture problems, but this was not
the case.
Overfilling experimental aneurysms is a
likely cause of the observed aneurysm
model failure in 2/5 of the group 1 animals.
Simply overstretching the surgically created
aneurysm during PPODA-QT filling could
have caused failure. During delivery, the endovascular
balloon is inflated across the aneurysm
neck to prevent PPODA-QT from
escaping before it solidifies. Blood inside
the aneurysm can escape around the balloon
, but the more viscous polymer cannot.
When attempting to fill the aneurysm to
100% capacity, there is a likelihood of
stretching the surgically created aneurysm
sac, which is a portion of the compliant EJV,
such that the stretched aneurysm volume is
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
476 www.SCIENCEDIRECT.com WORLD NEUROSURGERY, DOI:10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1650749899)
greater than the volume originally meant to
be occluded. Because the endovascular balloon
is physically keeping PPODA-QT
within the aneurysm, the material is allowed
to solidify even though the aneurysm
walls are in an overstretched state. The perpetually
stretched state of the surgically created
aneurysm walls may result in tearing of
the tissue. This would result in what looks
like a ruptured aneurysm, because the “aneurysm”
walls did in fact tear.
If this sequence of events caused animal
death in these two cases, the overstretching
problem may be limited to experimentally
created aneurysms. The EJV is more compliant
than normal carotid arteries, and would
likely be much more compliant than a
pathologic aneurysm. A pathologic aneurysm
is less likely to stretch, due to disruption
of its internal elastic lamina (28), therefore
complete angiographic occlusion may
be seen before any stretching is allowed to
occur.
However, one concern with pathologic
aneurysms is that they may be very weak. It
has been suggested that the intra-aneurysmal
pressure (IAP) during endovascular delivery
may be high enough to actually rupture
the aneurysm. This is a concern when
delivering any embolic device under balloon
occlusion. Murayama et al. (32) analyzed
IAP during Onyx delivery in a swine
model with balloon occlusion over the aneurysm
neck and found a spike in IAP when
100% filling was attempted. However, they
did indicate that subtotal occlusion of the
aneurysm volume (80%–90% filling) resulted
in alleviation of high IAP during filling
, even with the balloon in place.
Another potential concern is the swelling
behavior associated with PPODA-QT gels.
In previous studies, we have found that
PPODA-QT shows moderate in vitro swelling
behavior at 37°C. During the first 7 days
in a physiologically simulated environment
(150 mM phosphate-buffered saline),
PPODA-QT gels tend to swell by15% in
volume (data not yet published). For a theoretical
7-mm aneurysm that is perfectly
spherical, this 15% volume increase actually
results in a spherical diameter increase of
0.33 mm (increasing from 7.0 to 7.33 mm).
It is unlikely that a 15% increase in
PPODA-QT volume alone is enough to rupture
an experimental aneurysm, especially
one made of the compliant EJV. Furthermore
, this volume increase occurring during
7 days was measured under benchtop
conditions, which likely overestimate the
degree of swelling that would occur in vivo.
However, if the aneurysm is initially completely
filled such that the aneurysm is
stretched, subsequent gel swelling of 15%
could cause rupture. Results from this experimental
group highlight the potential
safety concerns of filling aneurysms to
100% capacity with any material that may
swell or expand.
Group 2: Subcomplete Fill. Previous studies
with Onyx have shown that initially occluding
100% of the aneurysm volume
may not be necessary to achieve complete
aneurysm healing. A number of clinical
reports have indicated that progressive
volume occlusion of an aneurysm can be
achieved with Onyx over time (29, 37). In
our experience with calcium alginate in
swine and canine experimental aneurysms
, sub-100% filling of the aneurysms
resulted in excellent aneurysmal ostium
healing. Taking this into consideration,
the current study also assessed the effect
of subcomplete aneurysm volume filling
with PPODA-QT to determine whether
progressive aneurysm occlusion was possible.
Of course, the swine model is
known for its aggressive clotting cascade
and robust healing after experimental aneurysm
embolization (16, 24, 39), but this
model afforded proof-of-concept information
regarding whether progressive
occlusion was possible or not.
Group 2 aneurysms were filled with
PPODA-QT such that 80% to 90% of the
aneurysm volume was filled when visualized
by digital subtraction angiography. All
aneurysms in this group were completely
obliterated by 1 month, and showed complete
NI tissue growth over the aneurysm
ostial regions. Results from this group indicate
that progressive occlusion of an aneurysm
is achievable with PPODA-QT, even
when some residual contrast filling of the
aneurysm was seen immediately after embolization.
The improvement in survival rate compared
with group 1 animals indicates that
subcomplete aneurysm filling with PPODA-QT
may be a safer delivery strategy, resulting in
no cases of aneurysm overfilling or stretching.
We hypothesize that subcomplete filling
(80%–90%) allows continuous blood
escape along the filling catheter channel as
the viscous liquid polymer fills the aneurysm.
In support of Murayama et al. (32),
this blood escape route likely prevents a
spike in IAP during delivery when using the
subcomplete filling strategy. Subcomplete
filling allows for the gel to expand and reside
in the aneurysm below the level of the
critical threshold at which the tissue tears or
ruptures. In addition, just as coils are successfully
used in ruptured aneurysms, the
use of such gel systems might be better at
sealing the rupture site and allowing for an
improved healing substrate. Such considerations
will be critical when working with
liquid-to-solid materials and will be a crucial
aspect of formulation.
Histology indicated that initially blood
does clot in response to contact with
PPODA-QT (also seen in surviving group 1
aneurysms), but this clot is mild and replaced
by a fibrous capsule at the polymer
interface by 1 month. Closer to the parent
vessel, NI tissue becomes more organized
and presents a neoendothelial cell layer at
the parent vessel interface. Although a
mild clotting is observed in response to
the polymer, the clot was not problematic
, did not propagate in the vessel, and
tissue reorganization apparently worked
to seal off the aneurysm from the vascular
system, resulting in a favorable healing
surface at 1 month.
Overall, the positive results seen in group
2 aneurysms indicate that subcomplete occlusion
with PPODA-QT may be a safe and
suitable delivery strategy for cerebral aneurysms.
Given the size and nature of this
study, no definite conclusions can be
drawn, but results reported here suggest
that initial subcomplete occlusion is worth
exploring for future delivery of PPODA-QT.
Group 3: Coil and Polymer Fill. The final treatment
group studied was a combination
treatment including a single three-dimensional
platinum coil, followed by filling the
remaining aneurysm volume with PPODAQT.
Initial studies with Onyx and coil combination
treatments have indicated generally
positive occlusion results, but not
necessarily reduction in the occurrence of
Onyx migration (10, 32). Other investigational
liquid embolics have used this delivery
scheme because the material itself is not
adhesive or lacks flow resistance (viscoelastic
strength). These agents may perform
better with a coil scaffold to anchor the material
so that it does not wash out of the
aneurysm (3, 49). Although PPODA-QT
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
WORLD NEUROSURGERY 78 [5]: 469-480, NOVEMBER 2012 www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org 477
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.805346892)
gels do show suitable viscoelastic strength
to be used in aneurysm embolization alone,
the framing coil plus PPODA-QT combination
treatment was investigated to determine
whether this delivery has any additional
advantages.
Group 3 consisted of first placing a
three-dimensional framing coil into an
experimental aneurysm, followed by attempting
to completely fill the remaining
space with PPODA-QT. Estimation of volume
of PPODA-QT added to the aneurysm
was difficult because of the radio-opacity
differences between the coil and gel. Platinum
coils are more radiographically
dense than the polymer, which made
PPODA-QT visibility difficult during delivery
, a phenomena common when using
a combination of coils and liquid embolics
(32, 49). Furthermore, addition of
PPODA-QT after coil placement may have
resulted in adherence to the coil and less
PPODA-QT penetration into the remaining
aneurysm space. Because the remaining
aneurysm interstitial space was likely
not 100% filled with polymer before delivery
was stopped, there were no instances
of aneurysm stretching or overfilling in
group 3 animals.
Although this delivery strategy resulted
in 100% animal survival, two of three aneurysms
in group 3 showed PPODA-QT present
in the parent vessel upon sample explantation.
This occurrence may be
attributed to the coil acting as a “scaffold”
for the polymer upon delivery. Takao et al.
(49) described the scaffolding action of
coils when delivering a thermogelling liquid
polymer to an aneurysm, in which the
thermogelling polymer adhered to coils
first, allowing a faster and easier delivery.
Upon contacting the coil, PPODA-QT may
have adhered onto the metal, as alluded to
previously. In the ostium, polymer adherence
to coils could lead to PPODA-QT displacement
into the parent vessel.
In this study, although PPODA-QT migration
was observed when used in conjunction
with a coil, there were no instances
of material migration when
PPODA-QT was used alone. Migration
into the parent vessel is one of the most
common problems with Onyx embolization
, occurring both alone and when used
with a framing coil (32, 37, 42, 48). Although
the small number of animal used
prevent firm conclusions, the absence of
PPODA-QT migration when used alone
has positive implications for using this
material clinically in the future.
CONCLUSIONS
The experiments performed in this study
were aimed at determining initial biocompatibility
of PPODA-QT in an appropriate
large animal aneurysm model, as well as
experimenting with different delivery strategies
in hopes of providing insight for future
use of the polymer. These 1-month
studies indicate that PPODA-QT has favorable
biocompatibility, given its ability to facilitate
NI tissue overgrowth in a swine aneurysm
model.
Analysis of different delivery strategies
provided valuable insight regarding potential
concerns with using PPODA-QT,
yet also unveiled a delivery strategy suitable
for the polymer system. Filling experimental
aneurysms to 100% capacity
proved detrimental, given the propensity
for aneurysm model stretching. This resulted
in failure of the experimental aneurysm
in two of five cases, likely due to
overstressed aneurysm walls. Placement
of a framing coil followed by embolization
with PPODA-QT may counter the
overstretching problem, but resulted in
the presence of excess PPODA-QT in the
parent vessel in two of three samples.
Subcomplete filling, to 80% to 90% of the
aneurysm volume, resulted in the best filling
strategy. Subcompletely filled aneurysms
showed progressive occlusion, resulting
in complete obliteration 1 month
after embolization. It is possible that subcomplete
filling of an aneurysm after
three-dimensional coil placement would
minimize excess PPODA-QT in the parent
vessel, yet still allow for progressive occlusion
, but requires discriminatory visibility
of the materials during the procedure.
This study successfully examined biocompatibility
and delivery strategy when using
PPODA-QT to embolize experimental
aneurysms. However, this study did not assess
long-term efficacy. To evaluate the initial
effectiveness of PPODA-QT, a more
clinically appropriate animal model must
be used such as a canine aneurysm model
(6, 38). Furthermore, survival duration
should be longer to capture data on healing
and recanalization (45). These initial studies
indicate that PPODA-QT holds potential
material advantages in a clinical realm
where few similar materials have been successfully
investigated, let alone used for patient
benefit.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank undergraduate researcher Kristen
Soodak at Arizona State University for
assistance with histology measurements.
REFERENCES
1. Becker TA, Kipke DR: Flow properties of liquid calcium
alginate polymer injected through medical microcatheters
for endovascular embolization. J
Biomed Materials Res 61:533-540, 2001.
2. Becker TA, Preul MC, Bichard WD, Kipke DR,
McDougall CG: Material for endovascular arteriovenous
malformation embolization: six-month results
in an animal model. Neurosurgery 56:793-801,
2005.
3. Becker TA, Preul MC, Bichard WD, Kipke DR,
McDougall CG: Preliminary investigation of calcium
alginate gel as a biocompatible material for
endovascular aneurysm embolization in vivo. Neurosurgery
60:1119-1128, 2007.
4. Bendszus M, Bartsch AJ, Solymosi L: Endovascular
occlusion of aneurysms using a new bioactive coil: a
matched pair analysis with bare platinum coils.
Stroke 38:2855-2857, 2007.
5. Bendszus M, Solymosi L: Cerecyte coils in the treatment
of intracranial aneurysms: a preliminary clinical
study. Am J Neuroradiol 27:2053-2057, 2006.
6. Bouzeghrane F, Naggara O, Kallmes DF, Berenstein
A, Raymond J: In vivo experimental intracranial aneurysm
models: a systematic review. Am J Neuroradiol
31:418-423, 2010.
7. Brilstra EH, Rinkel GJ, van der Graff Y, van Rooij WJ:
Treatment of intracranial aneurysms by embolization
with coils: a systematic review. Stroke 30:470-
476, 1999.
8. Byrne JV, Hope JKA, Hubbard N, Morris J: The nature
of thrombosis induced by platinum and tungsten
coils in saccular aneurysms. Am J Neuroradiol
18:29-33, 1997.
9. Byrne JV, Molyneux AJ, Brennan PR: Embolisation
of recently ruptured intracranial aneurysms. J Neurol
, Neurosurg Psychiat 59:616-620, 1995.
10. Cekirge S, Saatci I, Geyik S, Yavuz K, Ozturk H,
Pamuk G: Intrasaccular combination of metallic
coils and Onyx liquid embolic agent for the endovascular
treatment of cerebral aneurysms. J Neurosurg
105:706-712, 2006.
11. Chaloupka JC, Huddle DC, Alderman J, Fink S, Hammond
R, Vinters HV: A reexamination of the angio-
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
478 www.SCIENCEDIRECT.com WORLD NEUROSURGERY, DOI:10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1404683750)
toxicity of superselective injection of DMSO in the
swine rete embolization model. Am J Neuroradiol
20:401-410, 1999.
12. Cloft HJ: HydroCoil for endovascular aneurysm
occlusion (HEAL) study: 3– 6-month angiographic
follow-up results. Am J Neuroradiol 28:
152-154, 2007.
13. Cloft HJ: HydroCoil for endovascular aneurysm occlusion
(HEAL) study: perprocedural results. Am J
Neuroradiol 27:289-292, 2006.
14. Cloft HJ, Kallmes DF: Aneurysm packing with HydroCoil
embolic system versus platinum coils: initial
clinical experience. Am J Neuroradiol 25:60-62,
2004.
15. Cognard C, Weill A, Spelle L, Piotin M, Castaings
L, Rey A, Moret J: Long-term angiographic follow-up
of 169 intracranial berry aneurysms occluded
with detachable coils. Radiology 212:348-
356, 1999.
16. Dai D, Ding YH, Danielson MA, Kadirvel R, Lewis
DA, Cloft HJ, Kallmes DF: Histopathologic and immunohistochemical
comparison of human, rabbit,
and swine aneurysms embolized with platinum
coils. Am J Neuroradiol 26:2560-2568, 2005.
17. Friedman JA, Nichols DA, Meyer FB, Pichelmann
MA, McIver JI, Toussaint LGI, Axley PL, Brown RDJ:
Guglielmi detachable coil treatment of ruptured
saccular cerebral aneurysms: retrospective review of
a 10-year single-center experience. Am J Neuroradiol
24:526-533, 2003.
18. Gallas S, Pasco A, Cottier J-P, Gabrillargues J, Drouineau
J, Cognard C, Herbreteau D: A multicenter
study of 705 ruptured intracranial aneurysms
treated with Guglielmi detachable coils. Am J Neuroradiol
26:1723-1731, 2005.
19. Geyik S, Yavuz K, Cekirge S, Saatci I: Endovasular
treatment of basilar and ICA termination aneurysms
: effects of the use of HydroCoils on treatment
stability in a subgroup of patients prone to a higher
recurrence rate. Neuroradiology 49:1015-1021,
2007.
20. Guglielmi G, Ji C, Massoud TF, Kurata A, Lownie
SP, Vinuela F, Robert J: Experimental saccular aneurysms.
Neuroradiology 36:547-550, 1994.
21. Hayakawa M, Murayama Y, Duckwiler GR, Gobin
YP, Guglielmi G, Vinuela F: Natural history of the
neck remnant of a cerebral aneurysm treated with
the Guglielmi detachable coil system. J Neurosurg
93:561-568, 2000.
22. Henkes H, Fischer S, Weber W, Miloslavski E,
Felber S, Brew S, Kuehne D: Endovascular coil occlusion
of 1811 intracranial aneurysms: early angiographic
and clinical results. Neurosurgery 54:268-
285, 2004.
23. Hope JKA, Byrne JV, Molyneux AJ: Factors influencing
successful angiographic occlusion of aneurysms
treated by coil embolization. Am J Neuroradiol
20:391-399, 1999.
24. Kadirvel R, Dai D, Ding YH, Danielson MA, Lewis
DA, Cloft HJ, Kallmes DF: Endovascular treatment
of aneurysms: healing mechanisms in a swine
model are associated with increased expression of
matrix metalloproteinases, vascular cell adhesion
molecule-1, and vascular endothelial growth factor,
and decreased expression of tissue inhibitors of
matrix metalloproteinases. Am J Neuroradiol
28:849-856, 2007.
25. Kang HS, Han MH, Lee TH, Shin YS, Roh HG, Kwon
BJ, Kim SY, Byun HS: Embolization of intracranial
aneurysms with hydrogel-coated coils: result of a
Korean multicenter trial. Neurosurgery 61:51-59,
2007.
26. Kawanabe Y, Sadato A, Taki W, Hashimoto N:
Endovascular occlusion of intracranial aneurysms
with Guglielmi detachable coils: correlation
between coil packing density and coil compaction.
Acta Neurochirurgica 143:451-455,
2001.
27. McLemore R, Preul MC, Vernon B: Controlling delivery
properties of a waterborne, in-situ-forming
biomaterial. J Biomed Materials Res Part B: Applied
Biomaterials 79B:398-410, 2006.
28. Meng H, Wang Z, Hoi Y, Gao L, Metaxa E, Swartz
DD, Kolega J: Complex hemodynamics at the apex
of an arterial bifurcation induces vascular remodeling
resembling cerebral aneurysm initiation. Stroke
38:1924-1931, 2007.
29. Molyneux AJ, Cekirge S, Saatci I, Gal G: Cerebral
aneurysm multicenter European Onyx (CAMEO) trial
: results of a prospective observational study in 20
European centers. Am J Neuroradiol 25:39-51,
2004.
30. Murayama Y, Nien YL, Duckwiler GR, Gobin YP,
Jahan R, Frazee J, Martin N, Vinuela F: Guglielmi
detachable coil embolization of cerebral aneurysms
: 11 years’ experience. J Neurosurg 98:959-
966, 2003.
31. Murayama Y, Tateshima S, Gonzalez N, Vinuela F:
Matrix and bioabsorbable polymeric coils accelerate
healing of intracranial aneurysms: long-term
experimental study. Stroke 34:2031-2037, 2003.
32. Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Tateshima S, Vinuela FJ,
Akiba Y: Endovascular treatment of experimental
aneurysms by use of a combination of liquid embolic
agents and protective devices. Am J Neuroradiol
21:1726-1735, 2000.
33. Murayama Y, Vinuela F, Ulhoa A, Akiba Y, Duckwiler
GR, Gobin YP, Vinters HV, Greff RJ: Nonadhesive
liquid embolic agent for cerebral arteriovenous
malformations: preliminary histopathological
studies in swine rete mirabile. Neurosurgery 43:
1164-1172, 1998.
34. Niimi Y, Song J, Madrid M, Berenstein A: Endosaccular
treatment of intracranial aneurysms using Matrix
coils: early experience and midterm follow-up.
Stroke 37:1028-1032, 2006.
35. Pamuk AG, Saatci I, Cekirge S, Aypar U: A contribution
to the controversy over dimethyl sulfoxide
toxicity: anesthesia monitoring results in patients
treated with Onyx embolization for intracranial
aneurysms. Neuroradiology 47:380-386,
2005.
36. Piotin M, Mandai S, Murphy KJ, Sugiu K, Gailloud
P, Martin JB, Rufenacht DA: Dense packing of
cerebral aneurysms: an in vitro study with detachable
platinum coils. Am J Neuroradiol
21:757-760, 2000.
37. Piske RL, Kanashiro LH, Paschoal E, Agner C,
Lima SS, Aguiar PH: Evaluation of Onyx HD-500
Embolic System in the treatment of 84 wide-neck
intracranial aneurysms. Neurosurgery 64:E865-
E875, 2009.
38. Raymond J, Metcalfe A, Desfaits A-C, Ribourtout E,
Salazkin I, Gilmartin K, Embry G, Boock RJ: Alginate
for endovascular treatment of aneurysms and
local growth factor delivery. Am J Neuroradiol 24:
1214-1221, 2003.
39. Raymond J, Salazkin I, Gevry G, Nguyen TN: Interventional
neuroradiology: the role of experimental
models in scientific progress. Am J Neuroradiol 28:
401-405, 2007.
40. Riley CM, McLemore R, Preul MC, Vernon B: Gelling
process differences in reverse emulsion, in situ
gelling polymeric materials for intracranial aneurysm
embolization, formulated with injectable contrast
agents. J Biomed Materials Res Part B: Applied
Biomaterials 96B:47-56, 2011.
41. Roy D, Milot G, Raymond J: Endovascular treatment
of unruptured aneurysms. Stroke 32:1998-2004,
2001.
42. Simon SD, Eskioglu E, Reig AS, Mericle RA: Endovascular
treatment of side wall aneurysms using a
liquid embolic agent: a US single-center prospective
trial. Neurosurgery 67:855-860, 2010.
43. Slob M, Sluzewski M, van Rooij WJ: The relation
between packing and reopening in coiled intracranial
aneurysms: a prospective study. Neuroradiology
47:942-945, 2005.
44. Sluzewski M, Menovsky T, van Rooij WJ, Wijnalda
D: Coiling of very large or giant cerebral aneurysms:
long-term clinical and serial angiographic results.
Am J Neuroradiol 24:257-262, 2003.
45. Sluzewski M, van Rooij WJ, Rinkel GJ, Wijnalda D:
Endovascular treatment of ruptured intracranial aneurysms
with detachable coils: long-term clinical and
serial angiographic results. Radiology 227:720-724,
2003.
46. Sluzewski M, van Rooij WJ, Slob M, Bescos JO,
Slump CH, Wijnalda D: Relation between aneurysm
volume, packing, and compaction in 145
cerebral aneurysms treated with coils. Radiology
231:653-658, 2004.
47. Soga Y, Preul MC, Furuse M, Becker TA, McDougall
CG: Calcium alginate provides a high degree
of embolization in aneurysm models: a specific
comparison to coil packing. Neurosurgery 55:
1401-1409, 2004.
48. Struffert T, Roth C, Romeike B, Grunwald IO,
Reith W: Onyx in an experimental aneurysm model
: histological and angiographic results. J Neurosurg
109:77-82, 2008.
49. Takao H, Murayama Y, Yuki I, Ishibashi T,
Ebara M, Irie K, Yoshioka H, Mori Y, Vinuela F,
Abe T: Endovascular treatment of experimental
aneurysms using a combination of thermoreversible
gelation polymer protection devices:
feasibility study. Neurosurgery 65:601-609, 2009.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
WORLD NEUROSURGERY 78 [5]: 469-480, NOVEMBER 2012 www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org 479
(8.0.0.2542.259612314 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
[Link]
http://www.worldneurosurgery.org
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com
[Link]
mailto:jankowitzbt@upmc.edu
[Link]
http://www.worldneurosurgery.org
[Link]
http://www.sciencedirect.com
50. van Rooij WJ, Sluzewski M: Coiling of very large
and giant basilar tip aneurysms: midterm clinical
and angiographic results. Am J Neuroradiol 28:
1405-1408, 2007.
51. Velat GJ, Reavey-Cantwell JF, Sistrom C, Smullen
D, Fautheree GL, Whiting J, Lewis SB, Mericle RA,
Firment CS, Hoh BL: Comparison of n-butyl cyanoacrylate
and ONYX for the embolization of intracranial
arteriovenous malformations: analysis
of fluoroscopy and procedure times. Neurosurgery
63:ONS75-ONS82, 2008.
52. Vernon B, Tirelli N, Bachi T, Haldimann D, Hubbell
JA: Water-borne, in situ crosslinked biomaterials
from phase-segregated precursors. J Biomed Materials
Res 64A:447-456, 2003.
53. Weber W, Kis B, Siekmann R, Jans P, Laumer R,
Kuhne D: Preoperative embolization of intracranial
arteriovenous malformations with Onyx. Neurosurgery
61:244-254, 2007.
54. White PM, Raymond J: Endovascular coiling of cerebral
aneurysms using “bioactive” or coated-coil
technologies: a systematic review of the literature.
Am J Neuroradiol 30:219-226, 2008.
55. Youn SO, Lee JI, Ko JK, Lee TH, Choi CH: Endovascular
treatment of wide-necked intracranial
aneurysms using balloon-assisted technique with
HyperForm balloon. J Korean Neurosurg Soc 48:
207-212, 2010.
Conflict of interest statement: Funding provided by the
American Heart Association, 10PRE3450043, and support
received from the Science Foundation of Arizona.
Received June 30, 2011; accepted October 20, 2011;
published online 01 November 2011
Citation: World Neurosurg. (2012) 78, 5:469-480.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2011.10.029
Journal homepage: www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org
Available online: www.sciencedirect.com
1878-8750/$ - see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
Decompressive Hemicraniectomy, Strokectomy, or Both in the Treatment of Malignant
Middle Cerebral Artery Syndrome
Dean B. Kostov, Richard H. Singleton, David Panczykowski, Hilal A. Kanaan, Michael B. Horowitz, Tudor Jovin,
Brian T. Jankowitz
INTRODUCTION
Supratentorial ischemia can result in malignant
middle cerebral artery (MCA) infarction,
a life-threatening condition in which brain
edema generates overwhelming hemispheric
swelling that reduces cerebral perfusion to
the ischemic region and penumbra because of
increasing intracranial pressure (ICP) (11, 13).
This phenomenon, also known as malignant
MCA syndrome, creates a vicious cycle of progressive
expansion of the infarction with a
concomitant rise in intracranial pressure, further
reducing perfusion of the remaining viable
tissue. As a result, affected individuals develop
a progressive herniation syndrome that
culminates in death in approximately 80%
with medical management alone (11, 31). An
infarction of sufficient size in the MCA distribution
is both necessary and sufficient to precipitate
malignant MCA syndrome, but the
anterior cerebral artery and/or posterior cerebral
artery territories may also be involved
(13, 14).
Numerous studies have reported a significant
decrease in mortality and improved
functional outcomes in survivors after decompressive
hemicraniectomy (DHC) for
 OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate the impact of a craniotomy for strokectomy
(CS) with bone replacement, decompressive hemicraniectomy (DHC), or DHC
with a strokectomy (DHCS) on outcome after malignant supratentorial infarction.
 METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study of cases of malignant
supratentorial infarction treated by CS (n 18), DHC (n 17), or DHCS( n 33)
at our institution from 2002 to 2008. End points included functional outcome
measured by the modified Rankin Scale and incidence of mortality at 1 year.
 RESULTS: Mean age, gender, side, vessel, and time from ictus to surgery were
not statistically different between treatment groups. Stroke volume was significantly
higher in the CS group. Operative time and blood loss were significantly
higher in the DHCS group. At 1 year, the median modified Rankin Scale score
was 4 and overall survival was 71%. Functional outcomes and mortality for both
the CS and DHCS groups were not significantly different from the DHC group
(P 0.24). After adjusting for patient age, stroke volume, and time to surgery,
there was no significant difference in outcome.
 CONCLUSION: In patients with malignant supratentorial infarction, a strokectomy
alone may be equivalent to a decompressive hemicraniectomy with or
without brain resection.
Key words
 Decompressive hemicraniectomy
 Malignant MCA syndrome
 Stroke
 Strokectomy
Abbreviations and Acronyms
CS: Craniotomy for strokectomy
DHC: Decompressive hemicraniectomy
DHCS: Decompressive hemicraniectomy with a
strokectomy
ICP: Intracranial pressure
MCA: Middle cerebral artery
mRS: Modified Rankin Scale
PCA: Posterior cerebral artery
Department of Neurological Surgery, University
of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA
To whom correspondence should be addressed:
Brian Jankowitz, M.D. [E-mail: jankowitzbt@upmc.edu]
Citation: World Neurosurg. (2012) 78, 5:480-486.
DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2011.12.080
Journal homepage: www.WORLDNEUROSURGERY.org
Available online: www.sciencedirect.com
1878-8750/$ - see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.
PEER-REVIEW REPORTS
CELESTE R. BRENNECKA ET AL. BIOCOMPATIBILITY AND DELIVERY STRATEGY FOR ANEURYSM EMBOLIZATION
480 www.SCIENCEDIRECT.com WORLD NEUROSURGERY, DOI:10.1016/j.wneu.2011.12.080
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1847179517)
