Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338
DOI 10.1007/s12975-015-0400-3

PROTOCOLS

Correcting for Brain Swelling’s Effects on Infarct Volume
Calculation After Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion in Rats
Devin W. McBride 1 & Damon Klebe 1 & Jiping Tang 1 & John H. Zhang 1,2,3

Received: 15 March 2015 / Revised: 12 April 2015 / Accepted: 15 April 2015 / Published online: 3 May 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015

Abstract Evaluating infarct volume is the primary outcome
for experimental ischemic stroke studies and is a major factor
in determining translation of a drug into clinical trials. Numerous algorithms are available for evaluating this critical value,
but a major limitation of current algorithms is that brain swelling is not appropriately considered. The model by Lin et al. is
widely used, but overestimates swelling within the infarction,
yielding infarct volumes which do not reflect the true infarct
size. Herein, a new infarct volume algorithm is developed to
minimize the effects of both peri-infarct and infarct core swelling on infarct volume measurement. 2,3,5-Triphenyl-2H-tetrazolium chloride-stained brain tissue of adult rats subjected to
middle cerebral artery occlusion was used for infarct volume
analysis. When both peri-infarct swelling and infarction core
swelling are removed from infarct volume calculations, such
as accomplished by our algorithm, larger infarct volumes are
estimated than those of Lin et al.’s algorithm. Furthermore, the
infarct volume difference between the two algorithms is the
greatest for small infarcts (<10 % of brain volume) when periinfarct swelling is the greatest. Finally, using data from four
published studies, our algorithm is compared to Lin et al.’s
algorithm. Our algorithm offers a more reliable estimation of

* John H. Zhang
johnzhang3910@yahoo.com
1

Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, Loma Linda University
School of Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA

2

Department of Neurosurgery, Loma Linda University School of
Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA

3

Department of Anesthesiology, Loma Linda University School of
Medicine, Loma Linda, CA 92350, USA

the infarct volume after ischemic brain injury, and thus may
provide the foundation for comparing infarct volumes between experimental studies and standardizing infarct volume
quantification to aid in the selection of the best candidates for
clinical trials.
Keywords Brain swelling . Infarct volume . Infarction .
Middle cerebral artery occlusion . MCAO

Introduction
Preclinical studies investigating potential therapeutics for
stroke critically rely on infarct volume quantification to justify
advancing to clinical trials [1, 2]. To date, a variety of methods
have been developed for evaluating the sizes of infarctions in
experimental stroke models [3–11]; the most popular method
is histological analysis, such as staining with 2,3,5-triphenyl2H-tetrazolium chloride (TTC). TTC is one of the most commonly used stains for infarction visualization and relies on an
algorithm to calculate infarct volume.
While a number of algorithms exist for measuring the infarct size of TTC-stained brains, the gold standard is the algorithm by Lin et al. [12]. Their algorithm utilizes the difference
between the areas of the non-infarcted ipsilesional hemisphere
and the contralesional hemisphere to correct for brain swelling
[12]. However, Lin et al. base their swelling correction on the
assumption that swelling occurs only in the infarcted tissue
[12]. Thus, it follows that if only the infarct swells, then the
non-ischemic ipsilesional tissue is the true size, so the difference between the contralesional tissue and non-ischemic
ipsilesional tissue yields the size of the infarct devoid of swelling. Yet, this assumption makes Lin et al.’s algorithm

324

vulnerable to artifacts, the most salient of which is changes in
ipsilesional hemisphere swelling.
Brain swelling accompanies infarction, beginning within
hours of infarct appearance [13–15], and is known to affect
the apparent volume of infarction, accounting for up to 30 %
of the observed infarct volume [16]. Additionally, drugs
which are purported to reduce infarction size may actually
decrease swelling via edema reduction, thus seemingly producing smaller infarcts. Therefore, is it critical for an infarct
volume algorithm to adequately remove the effects of cerebral
swelling on infarct estimation. While current algorithms remove the effects of infarct core swelling, peri-infarct swelling
is not adequately considered.
Herein, we develop a novel algorithm for calculating infarct volume which (1) relaxes the assumptions of previous
algorithms and (2) reduces the effects of brain swelling on
infarct volume measurement. Our algorithm relies on the
ratio of infarction to the ipsilesional hemisphere, then adjusted using the area of the contralesional hemisphere, to minimize the effects of peri-infarct and infarct core swelling on
infarction calculation. Our algorithm is compared to the algorithm by Lin et al. [12] using brain tissue samples from
rats subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion. The use of
our algorithm is also investigated using four previously published studies to identify differences in the reported effects
of the therapeutics examined. Additionally, the advantages,
applications, and limitations of our algorithm are discussed.
Finally, the potential of our algorithm to change basic science translational studies, as well as selection of drug candidates for clinical trials, is considered.

Materials and Methods
All experiments were approved by Loma Linda University
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. One hundred
one adult male Sprague-Dawley rats (270–310 g) were subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO, n=101).
Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion Model
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were subjected to 2 h of
middle cerebral artery occlusion as previously described
[17]. Animals were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection mixture of ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine (20 mg/kg).
After reaching an adequate plane of anesthesia, determined by
loss of paw pinch reflex, surgery began.
Briefly, animals were placed supine, then the right common, internal, and external carotid arteries were surgically
exposed and isolated. The external carotid artery was ligated
leaving a 3–4-mm stump. The pterygopalatine artery was ligated close to its origin with the internal carotid artery, then a
vascular clip was placed on the internal carotid artery and

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

another was placed on the common carotid artery. The stump
of the external carotid artery was reopened and a 4.0 monofilament nylon suture with a rounded tip was inserted up through
the internal carotid artery and stopped when resistance was
felt. The suture remained in place for 2 h, after which the
suture was removed, beginning reperfusion. The stump of
the external carotid artery was then ligated, and the skin was
sutured.
Twenty-four hours after reperfusion, deeply anesthetized
animals were sacrificed and the brains were removed, sectioned into 2-mm-thick slices, and placed into 2 % TTC for
15 min at room temperature. TTC-stained slices were
photographed.
Quantifying Ipsilesional Swelling
Twenty-four hours after MCAO, ipsilesional hemisphere
swelling can be found by analyzing the difference between
the ipsilesional and contralesional hemisphere volumes
[18–20], or
1
X
C
B
B
ðI i −C i Þ C
C
B
C
B i
Ipsilateral Hemispheric Volume ð%Þ ¼ B
C100;
B
!C
C
B X
A
@
Ci
0

ð1Þ

i

where Ii is the ipsilesional area of slice i and Ci is the
contralesional area of slice i (Fig. 1a).
Evaluating Peri-infarct Swelling via the Difference
in the Non-ischemic Hemisphere Volumes
In order to determine if peri-infarct swelling occurs within the
non-ischemic tissue of the ipsilesional hemisphere, we compared the observed non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere tissue to a region reflected onto the contralesional hemisphere
which represents the non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere
area.
First, following Lin et al.’s algorithm development [12], we
assumed that if no peri-infarct swelling occurs within the
ipsilesional hemisphere tissue, then all of the ipsilesional
swelling is associated with the infarction only. Second, we
assumed that the contralesional tissue is its true size. In other
words, the contralesional tissue is unaffected by either the
infarction or swelling. Thus, the contralesional hemisphere
offers ground truths for the true hemisphere areas/volume.
Therefore, following the above two assumptions, there exists
two areas on the contralesional hemisphere which correspond
to areas on the ipsilesional hemisphere. The first contralesional
region corresponds to the non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere
tissue. The second contralesional region corresponds to the

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

325

Fig. 1 Representative brains showing the areas used in infarct volume
and ipsilesional swelling calculations. a The areas of the contralesional
hemisphere (C), ipsilesional hemisphere (I), non-infarcted ipsilesional
hemisphere (N), and the infarcted ipsilesional hemisphere (F) which are
used in infarct volume calculation are shown. b The areas of the
contralesional hemisphere (C), ipsilesional hemisphere (I), non-

infarcted ipsilesional hemisphere (NI), and the infarcted ipsilesional hemisphere (FI) which are used in peri-infarct swelling calculation are shown.
Also shown is the area of the contralesional hemisphere which corresponds to the non-ischemic ipsilesional tissue (NC) and the corresponding
infarct (devoid of swelling) (FC). When there is no peri-infarct swelling,
then NC =NI and FC <FI. When peri-infarct swelling occurs, then NC ≠NI

infarct area which is devoid of all swelling. This logic follows
that of Lin et al.’s infarct algorithm [12].
Since swelling is assumed to be only within the infarction,
and no peri-infarct swelling exists, then the area/volume of the
non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere (NI) should equal the
corresponding area/volume of the contralesional hemisphere
(NC), or NC =NI also follows the same logic as outlined by Lin
et al. If the non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere contains
peri-infarct swelling, then NC ≠NI. Therefore, comparing the
area/volume of the non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere to
the corresponding contralesional hemisphere area/volume,
the presence or absence of peri-infarct swelling can be
determined.
The contralesional tissue corresponding to the nonischemic ipsilesional tissue is

To determine if peri-infarct swelling is present, the percent
difference between the volumes of the non-ischemic
ipsilesional hemisphere and that of the corresponding
contralesional hemisphere is assessed, or

NC ¼

X
i

Ci−

X

F Ci

ð2Þ

i

where NCis the volume of the contralesional tissue which corresponds to the non-ischemic ipsilesional area of slice i, Ci is the
contralesional area of slice i, and FCi is the area of the corresponding infarct, without swelling, of slice i (Fig. 1b). While the
contralesional areas are known, the area of the contralesional
hemisphere which corresponds to the infarct without swelling is
unknown, but can be determined assuming the ratio of the infarct to the ipsilesional hemisphere is unaffected by swelling, or

F Ci ¼


I i −N i
Ci:
Ii

Therefore, Eq. 2 becomes
X
X  I i −N i  
NC ¼
Ci−
Ci :
Ii
i
i

ð3Þ


Non‐ischemic Volume ð% Difference Þ ¼

ð5Þ

where NI is the volume of the non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere and NC is the volume of the contralesional hemisphere
which correlates to that of the non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere and adjusted for volume differences. NI is the sum of
the non-ischemic ipsilesional areas within the ipsilesional
hemisphere. If peri-infarct swelling is not present, then Eq. 5
will be zero.
Next, ipsilesional hemisphere swelling was separated into
the amount of peri-infarct swelling and the amount of infarct
core swelling. To determine the amount of swelling which is
associated with the peri-infarct region and that which is associated with the infarction, the volumes of the non-ischemic
ipsilesional tissue and the infarction were corrected and then
used within the ipsilesional swelling model (Eq. 1).
To identify the amount of peri-infarct swelling, the
ipsilesional hemisphere area (Ii in Eq. 1) is equal to the sum
of the observed non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere area (in
which swelling is present) and the corrected infarct area. For
infarct core swelling, the ipsilesional hemisphere area is equal
to the sum of the corrected non-ischemic ipsilesional hemisphere area (in which swelling is removed) and the observed
infarct area. Peri-infarct swelling and infarct core swelling,
respectively, are computed using
0 X 

ð4Þ


N I −N C
100
NC

B
Peri‐infarct Swelling ð%Þ ¼ B
@

i


1
0
N i þ F i −C i
C
C100
X
A
Ci
i

ð6Þ

326

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

0 X 
B
Infarct Core Swelling ð%Þ ¼ B
@

i


1
0
N i þ F i −C i
C
C100 ð7Þ
X
A
Ci
i

where Ci is the contralesional area of slice i, Ni is the observed
non-ischemic ipsilesional area of slice i, N′i is the corrected nonischemic ipsilesional area of slice i, Fi is the observed infarct
area of slice i, and F′i is the corrected infarct area of slice i. The
ipsilesional area corrected for peri-infarct swelling, so that only
infarct core swelling remains, is (N′i +Fi). The ipsilesional area
corrected for infarct core swelling, so that only peri-infarct edema remains, is (Ni +F′i). The corrected areas for the nonischemic ipsilesional and infarct areas, respectively, are
 
Ni
0
Ni ¼
ð8Þ
Ci
Ii
and
0

Fi ¼




Fi
Ci
Ii

ð9Þ

where Fi can be computed by taking the difference between the
ipsilesional hemisphere and the non-ischemic area of the
ipsilesional hemisphere, or (Fi =Ii −Ni).
Ipsilesional Swelling Statistical Analysis
The differences between the non-ischemic volume of the
ipsilesional hemisphere and the corresponding adjusted
non-ischemic volume of the contralesional hemisphere were
presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) and
grouped based on infarct volume range. The infarct volume
ranges, based on the infarct volumes computed using Lin
et al.’s algorithm, were 0–10 % (n=25), 10–15 % (n=22),
15–20 % (n=20), 20–25 % (n=14), 25–30 % (n=13), and
30-40 % (n=7). The data was analyzed using one-way
ANOVA with a Tukey post hoc test (GraphPad Prism 6,
La Jolla, CA, USA).
The peri-infarct and infarct core swelling are presented as
mean±SD and grouped based on infarct volume range [0–
10 % (n=25), 10–15 % (n=22), 15–20 % (n=20), 20–25 %
(n=14), 25–30 % (n=13), and 30-40 % (n=7)]. The data was
analyzed using two-way ANOVA with a Sidak post hoc test
[factor 1, infarct size; factor 2, swelling (peri-infarct vs. infarct
core)] (GraphPad Prism 6, La Jolla, CA, USA).

tissue of the ipsilesional hemisphere, Ni, and the thickness of each brain slice, d. The infarct volume,
expressed as a percent of the contralesional hemisphere volume, is [12]
1
0 X
d
ðC i −N i Þ
C
B i
C100;
Infarct Volume ð%Þ ¼ B
ð10Þ
X
A
@
Ci
d
i

where (Ci − Ni) is the swelling-corrected infarct area for


slice i, d∑ ðC i −N i Þ is the swelling-corrected infarct
i

volume for the whole ipsilesional hemisphere, and


d∑ C i is the volume of the contralesional hemii

sphere. Since the contralesional hemisphere is assumed
to be the same size as the ipsilesional hemisphere before injury, the contralesional hemisphere is used to
determine the percent of the hemisphere volume that
is occupied by the infarction.
Typically, the thickness of each slice is equivalent for a
given method, thus Eq. 10 can be reduced to
1
0
X
ðC i −N i Þ C
B
C
B i
C
ð11Þ
Infarct Volume ð%Þ ¼ B
B X ! C100:
A
@
Ci
i

A slight modification of Lin et al.’s algorithm was made to


compare the infarct volume to the whole brain, 2∑ C i ,
i

rather than a single hemisphere. This correction results in the
version of Lin et al.’s algorithm which is utilized hereafter:
0X
1
ðC i −N i Þ
B i
C
C100:
ð12Þ
Infarct Volume ð%Þ ¼ B
@ X
A
2
Ci
i

Using the photographs of TTC-stained brain slices, the
areas of the contralesional, Ci, ipsilesional, Ii, and nonischemic ipsilesional hemispheres, Ni, were traced (ImageJ
1.48, NIH) and the infarct volume from Lin et al.’s algorithm
was computed (Eq. 12).

Quantifying Infarct Volume
Lin et al.’s Algorithm for Calculating Infarct Volume

Development of Our Infarct Volume Algorithm

The indirect method for infarct volume of Lin et al.’s
algorithm utilizes the area of the contralesional hemisphere, C i , the area of the non-ischemic (healthy)

To better correct for the effects of brain hemisphere volume
changes on infarct volume estimation, a new algorithm is developed. This algorithm relies on the ratio of the infarction to

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

327

the whole ipsilesional hemisphere as an estimation of the infarct area.
First, the infarct area is calculated by taking the difference in the area of the ipsilesional hemisphere and
the non-infarcted ipsilesional hemisphere tissue, Ni, for
slice i, or (Ii −Ni). Taking this difference removes bias
of the analyzer towards the infarct area. This difference
(infarct area) is then normalized to the area of the
ipsilesional hemisphere for slice i, yielding the fractional amount of the ipsilesional hemisphere which is infarcted per slice, or
Fractional Amount of Infarcted Tissue per Slice ¼

I i −N i
;
Ii

ð13Þ
where Ii is the ipsilesional hemisphere for slice i, Ni is the
non-infarcted ipsilesional hemisphere tissue for slice i, and (Ii
−Ni) is the infarct area for slice i.
To obtain the corrected area of the infarct, the fractional amount of infarcted tissue (Eq. 13) is multiplied
by the area of the contralesional hemisphere for slice i
(Ci), or


I i −N i
Corrected Infarct Area per Slice ¼
C i : ð14Þ
Ii
The corrected infarct area is then summed over all slices
and multiplied by the thickness of each slice, d. This yields the
infarct volume, or
Infarct Volume ¼ d

X  I i −N i  
Ci :
Ii
i

ð15Þ

To determine the percentage of the whole brain
which is infarcted, the infarct volume (Eq. 15) is divided by two times the volume of the contralesional hemisphere. Following the same logic as Lin et al.’s algorithm, since the thickness of each slice is typically the
same, the thickness term in the numerator and denominator cancel out. After these modifications, the novel
algorithm for computing infarct volume is
0 X 
B
B
Infarct Volume ð%Þ ¼ B
@

i

 1
I i −N i
Ci C
Ii
C
C100: ð16Þ
X
A
2
C
i

i

Using the photographs of TTC-stained brain slices, the
areas of the contralesional, Ci, ipsilesional, Ii, and nonischemic ipsilesional hemispheres, Ni, were traced (ImageJ
1.48, NIH) and the infarct volume from our algorithm was
computed (Eq. 16).

Infarct Volume Statistical Analysis
Data is presented as mean±SD. To analyze the infarct
volumes computed for Lin et al.’s and our algorithms,
the infarct volumes were grouped into infarct volume
ranges [0–10 % (n = 25), 10–15 % (n = 22), 15–20 %
(n= 20), 20–25 % (n = 14), 25–30 % (n= 13), and 3040 % (n=7)]. For each subject within these infarct volume ranges, our algorithm was used to estimate the
infarcts. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA with
Sidak post hoc test (factor 1, infarct size; factor 2, algorithm) was used to identify significance between the
infarct volume ranges (intra-algorithm difference for the
infarct volume ranges) and between the two algorithms
used for computing infarct volume (inter-algorithm
difference for each infarct volume range) (GraphPad
Prism 6, La Jolla, CA, USA).
Bland-Altman plots were used to qualitatively examine the differences between the two algorithms for the
infarct volume difference and the infarct volume ratio.
The first Bland-Altman plot was created for the infarct
volume difference between our algorithm and Lin
et al.’s algorithm,
Infarct Volume Difference ð%Þ


Our Algorithm0 s Infarct Volume−
¼
;
Lin et al:0 s Algorithm0 s Infarct Volume

ð17Þ

and plotted against the average infarct volume between the
two algorithms, or
Average Infarct Volume ð%Þ


Our Algorithm0 s Infarct Volumeþ
Lin et al:0 s Algorithm0 s Infarct Volume
¼
:
2

ð18Þ

A second Bland-Altman plot was created to examine the
infarct volume ratio,
Infarct Volume Ratio


Our Algorithm0 s Infarct Volume
¼
:
Lin et al:0 s Algorithm0 s Infarct Volume

ð19Þ

The mean values of the infarct volume difference and
the mean values of the infarct ratio were both determined for each infarct volume range. These were used
to determine the mean value curve for the entire infarct
volume spectrum using non-linear regression of the
mean values (of infarct volume difference and of infarct
ratio) for each infarct volume range (TableCurve 2D;
Systat Software, San Jose, CA, USA). In a similar manner, the mean 95 % agreements (of infarct volume difference and of infarct ratio) were determined for each

328

infarct volume range. These mean 95 % agreement
values were used to determine the 95 % agreement
curve for the entire infarct volume spectrum using
non-linear regression of the mean values (of 95 %
agreement for infarct volume difference and of 95 %
agreement for infarct ratio) for each infarct volume
range (TableCurve 2D; Systat Software, San Jose, CA,
USA). One way-ANOVAs with Tukey post hoc tests
were used to analyze the infarct volume difference and
infarct volume ratio for the infarct volume ranges.
Published Data Used to Compare Our Algorithm and Lin
et al.’s Algorithm
A PubMed search was performed to identify publications for
which the data could be used as a comparison between Lin
et al.’s algorithm and our algorithm. The search terms were
Bmiddle cerebral artery occlusion^ AND Brats^ with a publication date B2014^ to B2015^. The search, performed on January 21, 2015, yielded 544 hits, of which 13 satisfied the
inclusion criteria: adult Sprague-Dawley rats given food and
water ad libitum, 2 h of MCAO using the intraluminal suture
model, animals sacrificed 24 h post-ictus, TTC-stained brain
slices, and infarct quantification using the indirect method of
Lin et al. [12]. Of the 13 publications, four were chosen and
used to compare our algorithm with that of Lin et al. [21–24].
All four publications reported the infarct volumes as
a percent of the contralesional hemisphere, so each
mean and SD or standard error of the mean (SEM) were
adjusted to reflect the infarct volume as a percentage of
the whole brain (i.e., the infarct volume and SD or
SEM were divided by 2). For the publications in which
SEM was reported, the SD was calculated. The mean,
SD, and animal number (n) for each group were used in
a random number generator to produce representative
datasets of each group which had the same mean, SD,
and n as those in the original publications. The generated datasets, which represent the infarct volumes computed by Lin et al.’s algorithm, were verified for published statistical significance following the statistical
analysis methods reported within each study.
To estimate the value that the infarct volumes would have
been if our algorithm was used in the publications, the infarct
volume difference (Eq. 17, Fig. 3b, Table 2) was added to each
infarct volume of the generated data depending on the range
which the infarct volume belonged to (i.e., for the generated
infarct volumes which were between 0 and 10 %, the mean
infarct volume difference observed between the two algorithms for the infarct volume range of 0–10 % was added to
those generated infarct volumes). Data is presented as mean±
SD. Two-way ANOVAs with Sidak post hoc tests were performed (factor 1, injury; factor 2, algorithm) for the data of
each study.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

Results
Peri-infarct Brain Swelling
Significant ipsilesional brain swelling occurs 24 h after
MCAO in rats and is a combination of peri-infarct swelling
and infarct core swelling (Fig. 2). The differences between the
non-ischemic ipsilesional volume and the corresponding volume of the contralesional hemisphere are non-zero for all size
infarctions due to the presence of significant peri-infarct swelling within the non-ischemic ipsilesional tissue (Fig. 2d). This
difference remains the same for all size infarctions (p>0.05 for
all group comparisons).
When the swelling associated with the peri-infarct region is
separated from that of the infarction, the peri-infarct swelling
decreases as the volume of infarction increases, while the infarct core swelling increases as infarct volume increases
(Fig. 2e). For infarctions with a volume less than 15 %, the
amount of peri-infarct swelling is significantly greater than
that of the infarct (p<0.05 between peri-infarct and infarct
swelling for 0–10 %, p<0.05 between peri-infarct and infarct
swelling for 10–15 %). For infarction volumes between 15
and 25 %, the amount of peri-infarct swelling and infarct
swelling is indistinguishable (p>0.05 between peri-infarct
and infarct swelling for 15–20 %, p>0.05 between periinfarct and infarct swelling for 20–25 %). For infarct volumes
greater than 25 %, the amount of peri-infarct swelling is significantly lower than that of the infarct (p<0.05 between periinfarct and infarct swelling for 0–10 %, p<0.05 between periinfarct and infarct swelling for 10–15 %).
Effects of Peri-infarct Swelling on the Infarct Volume
Computed by Lin et al.’s Algorithm
The presence of peri-infarct swelling can cause the infarct
volumes by Lin et al.’ algorithm to be estimated as smaller
than the true infarction. When significant peri-infarct swelling
is present within a TTC-stained brain slice, the infarct area of
that particular slice can yield a negative value (Table 1). For
animals with large infarctions, for which peri-infarct swelling
is less prominent than infarct swelling, the amount of computed negative infarct areas is minimized (Table 1 Animal 1).
Table 1 contains a representative animal with a large infarction
(Table 1 Animal 1) which has a total infarct volume of
128.3 mm3 when Lin et al.’s algorithm is used, for which
one of the seven slices yields a negative infarct area of
−2.7 mm2.
For animals with small infarctions, peri-infarct swelling
can cause the calculated infarct volume to be vastly different
from its true value due to computed negative infarcts for some
slices (Table 1 Animal 2). This causes the infarcts to be significantly smaller than the true infarct size. The representative
animal for a small infarct (Table 1 Animal 2) contains a total

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

329

Fig. 2 Ipsilesional swelling is a combination of infarct core and periinfarct swelling 24 h after MCAO. a A representative image of TTCstained brain slices which have a large infarction and ipsilesional swelling. The contralesional hemisphere areas are outlined (solid yellow
curves) for each slice and reflected on the ipsilesional hemisphere areas.
The reflected outlines display the difference in the areas between the two
hemispheres caused by swelling (dashed yellow curves). Table 1 contains
the values of the areas and infarction calculations. b A representative
image of TTC-stained brain slices have a small infarction. The
contralesional hemisphere areas are outlined (solid yellow curves) for
each slice and reflected on the ipsilesional hemisphere areas. The
reflected outlines display the difference in the areas between the two
hemispheres caused by swelling (dashed yellow curves). Table 1 contains
the values of the areas and infarction calculations. c Ipsilesional hemisphere swelling (%, Eq. 1) for each infarct volume range (based on the

infarct volumes computed using Lin et al.’s algorithm). n=7-25/group. d
The change in the volumes of the ipsilesional non-ischemic tissue are
plotted for each infarct volume range. The non-ischemic tissue of the
ipsilesional hemisphere was determined from image analysis. This area
was reflected into the contralesional hemisphere and corrected for periinfarct swelling. The percent difference between the reflected and
ipsilesional non-ischemic tissues are plotted. n=7-25/group. e Ipsilesional
swelling is separated into that which occurs in the peri-infarct region and
infarction. Peri-infarct swelling (%) and infarct core swelling (%) are
plotted for each infarct volume range. n=7-25/group. *p<0.05 for 010 % between peri-infarct swelling and infarct swelling, #p<0.05 for
10–15 % between peri-infarct swelling and infarct swelling, &p<0.05
for 25–30 % between peri-infarct swelling and infarct swelling,
@
p<0.05 for 30–40 % between peri-infarct swelling and infarct swelling.
N.S. denotes lack of statistical significance

infarct volume of 8.3 mm3 when Lin et al.’s algorithm is used
compared to our algorithm’s infarct volume of 41.8 mm3. The
infarct volume estimation by Lin et al.’s algorithm is five
times less than that of our algorithm because Lin et al.’s algorithm contains two slices which have positive infarct areas and
four slices which have negative infarct areas.

30–40 %; p<0.05 for 25–30 vs. 30–40 %). Similarly, for our
algorithm, the infarct volumes in each infarct volume range
are significantly different from one another (our algorithm—
p<0.05 for 0–10 vs. 10–15, 15–20, 20–25, 25–30, and 30–
40 %; p<0.05 for 10–15 vs. 15–20, 20–25, 25–30, and 30–
40 %; p<0.05 for 15–20 vs. 20–25, 25–30, and 30–40 %;
p<0.05 for 20–25 vs. 25–30 and 30–40 %; p<0.05 for 25–
30 vs. 30–40 %) (Fig. 3).
For our algorithm, the infarct volumes for each infarct volume range are significantly higher than their corresponding
infarct volumes calculated by Lin et al.’s algorithm (p<0.05
for the 0–10 % infarct volume range between the two algorithms, p<0.05 for the 10–15 % infarct volume range between
the two algorithms, p<0.05 for the 15–20 % infarct volume
range between the two algorithms, p<0.05 for the 20–25 %
infarct volume range between the two algorithms, p<0.05 for

Infarct Volume After Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
in Rats
The infarct volumes, computed by Lin et al.’s algorithm, for
each infarct volume range are significantly different from each
other (for Lin et al.’s algorithm—p<0.05 for 0–10 vs. 10–15,
15–20, 20–25, 25–30, and 30–40 %; p<0.05 for 10–15 vs.
15–20, 20–25, 25–30, and 30–40 %; p<0.05 for 15–20 vs.
20–25, 25–30, and 30–40 %; p<0.05 for 20–25 vs. 25–30 and

330
Table 1

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338
Negative infarct areas caused by peri-infarct swelling
Contralesional area (mm2)

Non-injured ipsilesional area (mm2)

Infarct area (mm2)
Lin et al.’s algorithm

Animal 1

Animal 2

Our algorithm

Slice 1
Slice 2
Slice 3
Slice 4

23.4
45.9
57.8
62.4

18.9
25.0
18.0
26.5

4.5
20.9
39.8
35.9

9.4
24.8
41.6
39.1

Slice 5
Slice 6
Slice 7
Total

65.5
64.3
53.9
373.2

40.5
67.0
49.0
244.9

25.0
−2.7
4.9
128.3

28.6
0.0
3.0
164.5

Slice 1
Slice 2
Slice 3
Slice 4
Slice 5
Slice 6

24.6
53.1
59.0
57.1
63.9
64.6

26.2
33.0
52.7
63.3
64.2
74.6

−1.6
20.1
6.3
−6.2
−0.3
−10.0

0.0
20.2
14.4
6.9
0.1
0.2

8.3

41.8

Total

322.3

314

Infarct area analysis per slice of two TTC-stained brains from animals subjected to 2 h of MCAO and sacrificed 24 h after reperfusion (Fig. 2a, b). The
infarct area for each slice calculated via Lin et al.’salgorithm

 uses
 the numerator in Eq. 12, (Ci −Ni). The infarct area for each slice calculated via the
developed algorithm uses the numerator in Eq. 16,

I i −N i
Ii

C i . For Animal 1 (Fig. 2a), the infarct volume is 17.2 % using Lin et al.’s algorithm and

22.0 % using our algorithm. The amount of peri-infarct swelling is 4.9 %, while the infarct swelling is 5.6 %. For Animal 2 (Fig. 2b), the infarct volume is
1.3 % using Lin et al.’s algorithm and 6.5 % using our algorithm. The amount of peri-infarct swelling is 10.3 %, while that of infarct swelling is 1.4 %

the 25–30 % infarct volume range between the two algorithms, p<0.05 for the 30–40 % infarct volume range between
the two algorithms) (Fig. 3).
Infarct Volume Differences Between the Two Algorithms
For each brain sample, the infarct volume differences between
our algorithm and Lin et al.’s algorithm were determined. A
Bland-Altman plot of the infarct volume difference (our algorithm’s infarct minus Lin et al.’s algorithm’s infarct) displays a
greater difference between the two algorithms for the smaller
infarctions than large infarctions; as infarct size increases, the
difference between the two algorithms decreases. In a similar
manner, the infarct difference values for which the two algorithms have a 95 % agreement that approaches each other as
the infarct volume increases (Fig. 4a). The mean difference in
infarct volume between the two algorithms is quantified and
grouped into the infarct volume ranges. As infarct volume
increases, the difference between the algorithms decrease
(p < 0.05 for 10–15 vs. 20–25, 25–30, and 30-40 %)
(Fig. 4b, Table 2).
The ratio of our algorithm’s infarct volume to that of Lin
et al.’s algorithm were determined for each brain sample. A
Bland-Altman plot of the infarct volume ratio shows the ratio
between the two algorithms is the greatest for small infarctions
and approaches 1 as infarct volume increases. The 95 %

agreement for the infarct volume ratio between our algorithm
and Lin et al.’s algorithm also converges on 1 as the infarct
increases (Fig. 4c). Grouping the infarct volume ratios into the
infarct volume ranges demonstrates that the significant reduction in the infarct volume ratio as the infarct volume increases
(p<0.05 for 0–10 vs. 15–20, 20–25, 25-30, and 30–40 %;
p<0.05 for 10–15 vs. 15–20, 20–25, 25–30, and 30–40 %)
(Fig. 4d, Table 2).
Effect of Our Algorithm on the Infarct Volumes
for Published Studies
A PubMed search of middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats
from the years 2014–2015 was performed. Five hundred
forty-four hits were found, but only 13 of them satisfied the
inclusion criteria, of which four were chosen to compare the
two algorithms.
Study 1 examines two different doses of a treatment for
reducing infarction [22]. When Lin et al.’s algorithm is used
for calculating the infarct volumes, the MCAO+Treatment
Dose 2 group has a significantly smaller infarct volume than
both the MCAO and MCAO+Vehicle groups (p<0.05 for
MCAO+Treatment Dose 2 vs. MCAO and MCAO+Vehicle).
However, when our algorithm is used to estimate the infarct
volumes, there is no statistically significant difference between the MCAO+Treatment Dose 2 group and either the

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

Fig. 3 Comparison of our algorithm to Lin et al.’s algorithm. The infarct
volumes (%) 24 h post-MCAO in rats were grouped based on the infarct
volume range (based on the infarct volumes computed using Lin et al.’s
algorithm) to determine the difference between our algorithm and Lin
et al.’s algorithm for infarct volume calculation. For all infarct volume
ranges, our algorithm computes a larger infarct volume than that of Lin
et al.’s algorithm. All infarct volume ranges are significantly different
from each other for both Lin et al.’s algorithm and our algorithm (i.e.,
intra-algorithm significance for all infarct volume range comparisons).
*p<0.05 for 0-10 % between the two algorithms, #p<0.05 for 10–15 %
between the two algorithms, †p<0.05 for 15–20 % between the two
algorithms, p<0.05 for 20–25 % between the two algorithms, &p<0.05
for 25–30 % between the two algorithms, @p<0.05 for 30–40 % between
the two algorithms. n=7-25/group

MCAO or the MCAO+Vehicle groups (p>0.05 for all group
pairings) (Fig. 5a).
Study 2 examines a single treatment on reducing infarction
[21]. The infarct volume, computed by Lin et al.’s algorithm,
is significantly reduced in the MCAO+Treatment group compared to that of the MCAO group (p<0.05 for MCAO vs.
MCAO+Treatment). However, the significant difference between these two groups is lost when our algorithm’s infarct
volumes are analyzed (p>0.05 for MCAO vs. MCAO+Treatment) (Fig. 5b).
Study 3 examines the infarct reduction for two treatments
and a combined treatment [23]. For Lin et al.’s algorithm, the
infarct volume of the MCAO+Vehicle group is significantly
reduced by treatments 1 and 2 and the combined treatment
(p < 0.05 for MCAO + Vehicle vs. MCAO + Treatment 1,
MCAO+Treatment 2, and MCAO+Treatments 1+2). However, for our algorithm, the infarct volumes of the MCAO+
Treatment 1 and MCAO+Treatment 2 groups are statistically
indistinguishable from that of the MCAO+Vehicle group
(p>0.05 for MCAO+Vehicle vs. MCAO+Treatment 1 and
MCAO+Treatment 2). Yet, identical to Lin et al.’s algorithm,
when our algorithm is used, the infarct volume of the
MCAO+Treatments 1+2 group is significantly lower than
that of the MCAO+Vehicle group (p<0.05) (Fig. 5c).
Study 4 examines the effects of two treatments and an
inhibitor on infarction reduction [24]. Using the infarct

331

volumes calculated by Lin et al.’s algorithm, the infarct volume is statistically lower in the MCAO + Treatment 1,
MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and MCAO+Treatment 2
groups compared to that of the MCAO, MCAO+Treatment
1+Inhibitor, and MCAO+Vehicle groups (p<0.05 for MCAO
vs. MCAO+Treatment 1, MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and
MCAO+Treatment 2; p<0.05 for MCAO+Treatment 1+Inhibitor vs. MCAO+Treatment 1, MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and MCAO+Treatment 2; p<0.05 for MCAO+Vehicle
vs. MCAO+Treatment 1, MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and
MCAO+Treatment 2). The infarct volumes, calculated by our
algorithm, had identical statistical significance as that observed when Lin et al.’s algorithm is used (p<0.05 for MCAO
vs. MCAO+Treatment 1, MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and
MCAO+Treatment 2; p<0.05 for MCAO+Treatment 1+Inhibitor vs. MCAO+Treatment 1, MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and MCAO+Treatment 2; p<0.05 for MCAO+Vehicle
vs. MCAO+Treatment 1, MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle, and
MCAO+Treatment 2) (Fig. 5d).

Discussion
Herein, peri-infarct swelling was found to be a significant
contributor to the overall ipsilesional hemisphere swelling in
rats after MCAO. An algorithm was developed to minimize
the effects of both types of brain swelling on infarct volume
calculation. Our algorithm was used to evaluate infarct volume after experimental ischemic stroke, and we validated its
difference in infarct volume calculation using MCAO data as
well as previously published studies. Our algorithm relaxes
the assumptions and removes several limitations of Lin
et al.’s algorithm, thereby providing an estimation of infarct
size which is independent of brain swelling’s effects. Herein,
data from rats subjected to MCAO was analyzed using Lin
et al.’s algorithm and our algorithm and, for all samples, our
algorithm estimated larger infarct volumes than those of Lin
et al.’s algorithm. Furthermore, the infarct volume difference
between our algorithm and Lin et al.’s algorithm is the greatest
for small infarcts and converges at large infarcts. Finally, our
algorithm was used to analyze several published studies; in
three of the studies, our algorithm displayed different statistical significance than when Lin et al.’s algorithm was used.
A Brief History of Infarct Volume Algorithms
Despite the vast amount of research on experimental models
of ischemic stroke [25–28], it was not until 1984 that an algorithm was developed for infarct quantification [9]. Jones and
Coyle developed the first algorithm which measured infarction on whole brains, utilizing curvature correction factors to
compute the infarct surface area [9], but this method only
lasted a few years [29, 30].

332

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

Fig. 4 Infarct volume difference between our algorithm and Lin et al.’s
algorithm decreases as the infarct volume range increases. Differences
between the two algorithms for infarct volume estimation are examined
using rat brains 24 h post-MCAO. a Bland-Altman plot of infarct volume
difference. The infarct volume difference (%, Eq. 17) between the two
algorithms decreases as the average infarct volume (%, Eq. 18) increases.
n=101. b Infarct volume difference for each infarct volume range. The
infarct volume difference (%) between our algorithm and Lin et al.’s
algorithm decreases as the infarct volume range (%) increases. n=7–25/

group. c Bland-Altman plot of infarct volume ratio. The infarct volume
ratio (Eq. 19) decreases as the average infarct volume (%) increases. n=
101. d Infarct volume ratio for each infarct volume range. The infarct
volume ratio of the two algorithms decreases as the infarct volume range
(%) increases. n=7–25/group. Bland-Altman plots (a, c): the mean values
(dashed lines) and the values for which 95 % agreement (dotted lines) is
observed between the two algorithms are plotted. Bar graphs (b, d):
*p<0.05 vs. 0-10 %, #p<0.05 vs. 10–15 %. Infarct volume ranges are
based on the infarct volumes computed using Lin et al.’s algorithm

Simultaneous to the development of the Jones and Coyle
model, Bederson et al. created an alternative algorithm which
directly calculated infarct area by outlining the infarct in

several brain slices and normalizing them to the area of the
coronal section [3, 4]. This direct method of infarct size estimation was more widely accepted, leading to the direct

Table 2 Bland-Altman comparison of the differences between our algorithm and Lin et al.’s algorithm for infarct volume difference (Eq. 17) and
infarct volume ratio (Eq. 19)
Infarct volume range (%)a

0–10
10–15
15–20
20–25
25–30
30–40

Differences in infarct volume (%)

Infarct volume ratio

Mean±SD

95 % Agreement (lower, upper)

Mean±STD

95 % Agreement (lower, upper)

3.0±2.12
3.6±1.95
2.6±1.33
2.1±1.45†
1.9±1.16†
1.2±0.63†

−1.16, 7.16
−0.22, 7.42
−0.01, 5.15
−0.74, 4.84
−0.37, 4.10
−0.03, 2.36

1.39±0.293
1.30±0.170
1.15±0.079# †
1.09±0.063# †
1.07±0.044# †
1.04±0.018# †

0.816, 1.964
0.967, 1.633
0.995, 1.305
0.967, 1.213
0.984, 1.156
1.005, 1.075

The means and standard deviations are computed using the individual data points within each infarct volume range. The 95 % agreements are computed
based on the method of Bland and Altman [49]. n=7-25/group. # p<0.05 vs. 0–10 % infarct volume range, † p<0.05 vs. 10–15 % infarct volume range
a

The infarct volume range is based on infarct volumes computed using Lin et al.’s algorithm

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

Fig. 5 Effect of our algorithm on infarct volume analysis for published
data. Algorithm differences are examined using four published studies
which utilized Lin et al.’s algorithm for estimating infarct volume in
TTC-stained brain tissue of adult Sprague-Dawley rats subjected to 2 h
MCAO and sacrificed 24 h after MCAO. a Study 1. Lin et al.’s
algorithm’s infarct volumes display statistical significance between the
MCAO+Treatment Dose 2 and the MCAO groups and the MCAO+
Treatment Dose 2 and the MCAO+Vehicle groups. The infarct volumes
computed using our algorithm are increased more for the smaller infarct
volumes (MCAO+Treatment Dose 1 and MCAO+Treatment Dose 2).
Our algorithm’s infarct volumes are not statistically different from one
another. n=6/group [22]. b Study 2. When Lin et al.’s algorithm is used,
the MCAO+Treatment group is significantly lower than the MCAO
group. When our algorithm is used, no significance is observed
between the two groups. n = 8/group [21]. c Study 3. The infarct
volumes computed using Lin et al.’s algorithm displays statistical
significance for all three treatment groups versus the Vehicle group. Our
algorithm’s infarct volumes for the MCAO + Treatment 1 and the

333

MCAO+Treatment 2 groups are not significantly different from the
MCAO + Vehicle group. However, the combined treatment group
(MCAO+Treatments 1+2) is statistically different from the MCAO+
Vehicle group. n=6/group [23]. d Study 4. All inter-group statistical
significance for Lin et al.’s algorithm’s infarct volumes are identical to
that of our algorithm’s. n=6/group [24]. All graphs: *p<0.05 vs. MCAO
for Lin et al.’s algorithm, #p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Vehicle for Lin et al.’s
algorithm, †p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Vehicle for our algorithm, p<0.05 vs.
MCAO for our algorithm, &p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Treatment 1 for Lin
et al.’s algorithm, @p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Treatment 1 for our algorithm,
¥
p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Treatment 1+Inhibitor for Lin et al.’s algorithm,
§
p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Treatment 1+Inhibitor for our algorithm, €p<0.05
vs. MCAO+Treatment 1+Vehicle for Lin et al.’s algorithm, £p<0.05 vs.
MCAO+Treatment 2 for Lin et al.’s algorithm, ¤p<0.05 vs. MCAO+
Treatment 1+Vehicle for our algorithm, p<0.05 vs. MCAO+Treatment
2 for our algorithm. N.S. denotes lost statistical significance when our
algorithm is used rather than Lin et al.’s algorithm

334

method of infarct volume by Osborne et al. [20]. Although the
direct infarct volume algorithm was used for several years, it
did not yield a true measurement of infarct volume due to
swelling of the ipsilesional hemisphere.
In 1990, Swanson et al. recognized that the direct
method for infarct volume could be severely affected
by brain swelling [3, 4, 20], thus the indirect infarct
volume algorithm was developed [31]. The method by
Swanson et al. utilized pixel density analysis of eight to
nine slices of stained brain tissue. The authors examined
four stains and found that the ischemic tissue had a
similar staining to that of white matter. The conclusion
was that any stain for which differences in staining intensity was observed between the ischemic and nonischemic tissue was ideal. Since the stains used by
Swanson et al. did not stain ischemic tissue nor did it
stain white matter, their algorithm relied on the pixel
intensities of healthy gray matter tissue for infarct volume estimation [31]. Although the algorithm by
Swanson et al. yielded a much better estimate of the
infarct volume, reducing the effect of brain edema on
infarct volume by up to 22 % [31], it was modified
shortly after.
In 1993, Lin et al. modified the model by Swanson et al. to
use the non-ischemic tissue volume in the ipsilesional hemisphere and total volume of the ipsilesional hemisphere, and
although Lin et al. reported direct infarct volumes [12], it led
to an indirect version.
Since Lin et al.’s indirect algorithm was published,
several additional algorithms have been developed [32,
33]. Yet despite these recent algorithms, the indirect Lin
et al. algorithm remains the gold standard for infarct
volume.

Assumptions of Lin et al.’s Algorithm
As with any algorithm, the development of Lin et al.’s algorithm makes several assumptions. The first assumption is that
the contralesional hemisphere is unaffected by infarction and
brain swelling. This implies that the measured volume of the
contralesional hemisphere is the true volume. This assumption
is typically valid and therefore is assumed by most infarct
volume algorithms.
The second assumption is that swelling occurs only
in the infarcted tissue. Thus, it follows that if swelling
only occurs in the infarct, the area/volume of the nonischemic ipsilesional tissue is unaffected (i.e., the
healthy ipsilesional tissue is its true size). This assumption makes Lin et al.’s algorithm vulnerable to artifacts
due to volume changes in the ipsilesional hemisphere
since significant peri-infarct edema may occur.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

Our Algorithm and its Assumptions
The new algorithm developed to estimate the infarct volume utilizes the ratio of the infarcted tissue area to the
entire ipsilesional area to correct for brain swelling. Normalizing the infarct area to that of the ipsilesional hemisphere allows for the amount of infarcted tissue to be
determined as a percent of the hemisphere. This ratio is
then multiplied by the area of the contralesional hemisphere; the effects of swelling are minimized since swelling does not occur in the contralesional hemisphere,
yielding an estimate of the true infarct size (Eq. 16).
First, identical to the assumption made for Lin et al.’s algorithm, the contralesional hemisphere is assumed to be unaffected by brain swelling, or the area of the contralesional hemisphere is the true value. While the first assumption is shared
between the two algorithms, the second assumption makes our
algorithm unique. Our algorithm assumes that swelling is not
confined to the infarction, but rather peri-infarct edema may be
present in the ipsilesional hemisphere. This assumption relaxes the constraint of swelling being restricted to only the
infarct, made for Lin et al.’s algorithm, which caused a majority of Lin et al.’s algorithm’s artifacts to exist.
Advantages of Our Algorithm
Our infarct volume algorithm offers several advantages to Lin
et al.’s algorithm. First, our algorithm removes the effects of
cerebral swelling on infarct volume which allows for an estimation of the true infarct size. This is achieved by utilizing the
ratio of the infarct to the ipsilesional hemisphere. Second, our
algorithm allows experimental studies to examine the effects of
a drug on solely infarction, rather than its effects on the swollen
infarction. Lin et al.’s algorithm is unable to uncouple the effect
of peri-infarct swelling from that of infarct core, so drugs which
display a decreased infarct volume may decrease the infarction,
decrease swelling within the infarction, or both. The third advantage of our algorithm is that the infarct volume can be standardized. Evaluation of the true infarct permits comparison of
the effects on infarction of the same drug from different laboratories, adhering to the recommendations of the STAIR meetings [34]. Finally, standardization of infarct volume calculation
will aid future clinical trials in candidate selection. With respect
to infarct volume, each promising drug can be directly compared to all others. This will not only help translation but may
also improve the success rate of clinical trials.
Application of Our Algorithm to Other Methods of Infarct
Visualization
This study investigated our algorithm for the swelling correction of infarction estimation using TTC-stained brains. TTC

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

335

staining of brain tissue is the gold standard for infarct visualization and can be used up to 3 days post-MCAO. However,
for animals sacrificed more than 3 days post-ictus, Nissl or
hematoxylin and eosin stains are commonly used. Infarctions
visualized using TTC are reported to be identical to those
shown by Nissl [35] as well as hematoxylin and eosin stains
[3]. Additionally, Lin et al.’s algorithm has been used to evaluate infarct size for all three stains [12, 31]. Thus, our algorithm may also be used for infarct volume estimation for Nissl
and hematoxylin and eosin stains, in addition to TTC.

[44]. Since our algorithm was found to be more robust than
Lin et al.’s algorithm, it is likely also superior to the direct
infarct measurement.
Another model developed for brain swelling correction is
that of Belayev et al. [32]. To date, no studies have been
conducted to determine the advantage of their model over
Lin et al.’s method. However, the model of Belayev et al.
has not been widely adopted. Future studies can compare the
model of Belayev et al. to our algorithm as well as Lin et al.’s
algorithm.

Comparison of Our Algorithm to Other Infarct Volume
Algorithms

Limitations of Our Algorithm

Although measurement of infarction volume is essential for
understanding a treatment’s benefits following stroke, no single algorithm has been adopted by all experimental studies
[12, 31, 32, 36–39]. Each algorithm developed relies on a
different set of assumptions, resulting in infarct values which
are algorithm dependent [12, 31, 32, 36–39]. Infarct volume
can be evaluated as a direct [30, 36, 37, 39] or an indirect
measurement [12, 31, 32, 38], and may be normalized to
hemisphere or whole brain volumes. Direct infarct measurements yield values with physical units (i.e., square millimeters
for area and cubic millimeters for volume), while indirect
infarct measurements yield dimensionless values (typically
percent). Each of these infarct estimation methods produces
a different interpretation regarding the effectiveness of novel
drugs on infarction, ultimately making the comparison of infarct volumes between studies nearly impossible.
The discrepancy in infarct volume calculations leads to
standalone basic science studies that cannot be compared to
one another for drug efficacy not only affecting basic science
research but also clinical trials. Since the most promising
drugs in experimental studies become clinical trial candidates,
for which infarct volume is one of the primary selection factors [40–42], it is of the highest importance to standardize
infarct volume calculations. Yet, the various infarct volume
algorithms available confound the results of experimental
studies, which may be partially responsible for the failure of
many drugs translated to clinical trials.
The algorithm developed within may provide the foundation
for standardization of infarct volume measurement. Herein, our
algorithm was shown to provide a more realistic calculation of
infarction size than Lin et al.’s algorithm, but our algorithm is
also likely to be more robust than other algorithms.
Lin et al., confirmed by Jin et al. [43], found that the algorithm by Lin et al. is superior to the direct measurement of
infarct volume for a variety of reasons, including reduced
swelling effects and constant infarction size estimation over
3 days post-MCAO [12]. Yet despite the disadvantages of the
direct method for infarct estimation, it is still being utilized

Our algorithm assumes that cerebral swelling is not confined to the infarction, but rather extends beyond the infarct core into the peri-infarct zone in the ipsilesional
hemisphere [45]. This assumption relaxes the constraint
of only infarct swelling, made in Lin et al.’s algorithm,
which caused infarct volume to be estimated as smaller
than the true infarct size. A limitation, unique to our algorithm, arises from this assumption. While our algorithm
can yield information about the amount of peri-infarct
swelling and infarct core swelling, the swelling gradient
that likely exists is not defined. Although this limitation
does not affect the calculation of infarct volume (i.e., our
algorithm estimates the true infarct volume), studying the
roles of peri-infarct swelling and swelling within the infarct core, as well as the swelling gradient, will improve
our understanding of stroke pathophysiology. The most
likely scenario is that a gradient in swelling exists for
which swelling is at a maximum in the ischemic core
and/or penumbra and decreases as the distance from the
infarction increases. Incorporating this phenomenon into
an infarct volume algorithm would result in a unique infarct volume algorithm for each animal. Until an automatic method which evaluates and corrects for the effects of a
brain swelling gradient on infarct volume exists, the assumption that swelling exists within the infarct as well as
in the peri-infarct region provides the best platform for
development of an infarct volume algorithm.
Impact of Our Algorithm on Clinical Trial Drug
Candidates
The recommendations from the STAIR meetings highlight the importance of preclinical studies being mindful
in designing experiments, including carefully defining
primary and secondary endpoints [1, 34, 46, 47]. However, choosing methods for data analysis should be given the same amount of care since clinical trials for
ischemic stroke depend on infarct reduction as a major
factor in identifying potential therapeutic candidates.

336

The numerous algorithms for quantifying infarct volume, leading to disparate experimental studies, implies
that we have not been as meticulous as we should be
about choosing the method used for infarct size measurement. Therefore, standardizing infarct volume computation is of the utmost importance.
Despite the differences in assumptions and limitations for
infarct volume algorithms, a decrease in the infarct size by 20–
40 % has been suggested as a threshold for clinical translation
[2, 48]. A major concern of this threshold for infarct volume
reduction is that each algorithm can yield vastly different measurements of infarction. The study by Lin et al. identified such
differences between the direct and indirect methods [12], and
although swelling was purported to be the cause, there may
also be differences between distinct indirect algorithms, such
as observed in the current study.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338

A standardized model which removes the effects of cerebral swelling, as well as removing analyzer bias towards the
infarcted tissue, will provide experimental studies with an infarct volume which can be compared between studies to identify the most promising drugs for clinical trials. Furthermore,
the value of basic science studies will be improved as a standardized infarct volume algorithm allows for direct comparison with other drugs to their molecular pathways. This may
lead to identification of the most salient molecular pathways
of stroke pathophysiology. Finally, a standardized infarct
equation will bridge the gap between clinical and basic research since miscalculation of infarction volume may be one
of the potential weaknesses that mislead clinicians to begin
trials.

Conclusions
Comparison of the Infarct Volume Reduction Between Our
Algorithm and Lin et al.’s Algorithm for the Four Published
Studies
When Lin et al.’s algorithm is used in the four published studies examined herein [21–24], statistical significance is achieved for the treatment groups when
the infarct volumes are reduced by a minimum of 20
%. However, when our algorithm is used, for statistical
significance to be observed between the treated and untreated groups, the infarctions must be reduced by a
minimum of 32 %. Based on this finding, the infarct
volume reduction threshold for a drug to be considered
for clinical trials should be no less than 30 %. At first
glance, the difference between a 20 and 30 % infarct
reduction might not seem like a lot; however, if the
effects of peri-infarct swelling are removed (accomplished with our algorithm), then the 10 % difference
represents solely preserved tissue rather than a combination of swollen healthy tissue and swollen injured
tissue.
Towards a Standardized Algorithm for Infarct Volume
One of the major concerns when computing infarction size is
the effect of brain swelling. While Lin et al.’s algorithm was
developed to correct for swelling [12], it overestimates the
effect of cerebral swelling on infarct size. Peri-infarct swelling
causes the estimated infarct to be aggrandized since the swollen healthy tissue will be larger than its true size. By incorporating the ratio of the infarction to the ipsilesional hemisphere,
the effect of both peri-infarct swelling and swelling associated
with the infarct core can be minimized in the calculation of
infarct volume. Our algorithm relies on this swelling correction to provide a more robust estimation of infarct volume.

Herein, we developed a new algorithm for quantifying infarct
volume which better corrects for brain swelling than gold
standard algorithm by Lin et al. The major limitation of our
model is it does not provide any information as to the localization of peri-infarct swelling, but this can be experimentally
verified in future studies. Ultimately, standardizing infarct volume quantification will allow for comparison between experimental studies and may lead to more stringent criteria for
advancing therapeutics to clinical trials.

Acknowledgments This work was supported by NIH R01 NS043338
grant (J.H.Z.). The authors would like to thank Xiping Liang, Nathanael
Matei, and Justin Câmara.
Conflict of Interest The authors have no conflicts of interest.
Author’s Contributions Author contributions to the study and manuscript preparation include the following. Conception and design: McBride
and Zhang. Acquisition of data: McBride. Analysis and interpretation: all
authors. Drafting and critically revising the manuscript: all authors.

References
1.

Dirnagl U, Fisher M. International, multicenter randomized preclinical trials in translational stroke research: it’s time to act. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab. 2012;32(6):933–5.
2. Schabitz WR, Fisher M. Perspectives on neuroprotective stroke
therapy. Biochem Soc Trans. 2006;34(6):1271–6.
3. Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Germano SM, Nishimura MC, Davis RL,
Bartkowski HM. Evaluation of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
as a stain for detection and quantification of experimental cerebral
infarction in rats. Stroke. 1986;17(6):1304–8.
4. Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL,
Bartkowski H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of
the model and development of a neurologic examination. Stroke.
1986;17(3):472–6.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338
5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

Carano RA, Li F, Irie K, Helmer KG, Silva MD, Fisher M, et al.
Multispectral analysis of the temporal evolution of cerebral ischemia in the rat brain. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2000;12(6):842–58.
Duverger D, MacKenzie ET. The quantification of cerebral infarction following focal ischemia in the rat: influence of strain, arterial
pressure, blood glucose concentration, and age. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab. 1988;8(4):449–61.
Hoff JT, Nishimura M, Newfield P. Pentobarbital protection from
cerebral infarction without suppression of edema. Stroke.
1982;13(5):623–8.
Jiang Q, Chopp M, Zhang ZG, Knight RA, Jacobs M, Windham JP,
et al. The temporal evolution of MRI tissue signatures after transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion in rat. J Neurol Sci. 1997;145(1):
15–23.
Jones PG, Coyle P. Microcomputer assisted lesion size measurements in spontaneously hypertensive stroke-prone rats. J
Electrophysiol Tech. 1984;11:71–8.
Lundy EF, Solik BS, Frank RS, Lacy PS, Combs DJ, Zelenock GB,
et al. Morphometric evaluation of brain infarcts in rats and gerbils. J
Pharmacol Methods. 1986;16(3):201–14.
Nemoto E, Mendez O, Kerr M, Firlik A, Stevenson K, Jovin T, et al.
CT density changes with rapid onset acute, severe, focal cerebral
ischemia in monkeys. Translat Stroke Res. 2012;3(3):369–74.
Lin TN, He YY, Wu G, Khan M, Hsu CY. Effect of brain edema on
infarct volume in a focal cerebral ischemia model in rats. Stroke.
1993;24(1):117–21.
Khanna A, Kahle KT, Walcott BP, Gerzanich V, Simard JM.
Disruption of ion homeostasis in the neurogliovascular unit underlies the pathogenesis of ischemic cerebral edema. Translat Stroke
Res. 2014;5(1):3–16.
Seifert HA, Pennypacker KR. Molecular and cellular immune responses to ischemic brain injury. Translat Stroke Res. 2014;5(5):
543–53.
Song M, Yu SP. Ionic regulation of cell volume changes and cell
death after ischemic stroke. Translat Stroke Res. 2014;5(1):17–27.
Swanson RA, Sharp FR. Infarct measurement methodology. J
Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1994;14(4):697–8.
Kawamura S, Yasui N, Shirasawa M, Fukasawa H. Rat middle
cerebral artery occlusion using an intraluminal thread technique.
Acta Neurochir. 1991;109(3–4):126–32.
Gartshore G, Patterson J, Macrae IM. Influence of ischemia and
reperfusion on the course of brain tissue swelling and blood-brain
barrier permeability in a rodent model of transient focal cerebral
ischemia. Exp Neurol. 1997;147(2):353–60.
Kondo T, Reaume AG, Huang TT, Carlson E, Murakami K, Chen
SF, et al. Reduction of CuZn-superoxide dismutase activity exacerbates neuronal cell injury and edema formation after transient focal
cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci. 1997;17(11):4180–9.
Osborne KA, Shigeno T, Balarsky AM, Ford I, McCulloch J,
Teasdale GM, et al. Quantitative assessment of early brain damage
in a rat model of focal cerebral ischaemia. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry. 1987;50(4):402–10.
Geng X, Elmadhoun O, Peng C, Ji X, Hafeez A, Liu Z, et al.
Ethanol and normobaric oxygen: novel approach in modulating
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex after severe transient and permanent ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2015;46(2):492–9.
Liang X, Hu Q, Li B, McBride D, Bian H, Spagnoli P, et al.
Follistatin-like 1 attenuates apoptosis via disco-interacting protein
2 homolog A/Akt pathway after middle cerebral artery occlusion in
rats. Stroke. 2014;45(10):3048–54.
Liu X, Zhao S, Liu F, Kang J, Xiao A, Li F, et al. Remote ischemic
postconditioning alleviates cerebral ischemic injury by attenuating
endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated apoptosis. Translat Stroke
Res. 2014;5(6):692–700.
Su J, Zhang T, Wang K, Zhu T, Li X. Autophagy activation contributes to the neuroprotection of remote ischemic perconditioning

337
against focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Neurochem Res.
2014;39(11):2068–77.
25. Harvey J, Rasmussen T. Occlusion of the middle cerebral artery: an
experimental study. Arch Neurol Psychiatry. 1951;66(1):20–9.
26. Meyer JS, Denny-Brown D. The cerebral collateral circulation. I.
Factors influencing collateral blood flow. Neurology. 1957;7(7):
447–58.
27. Sundt Jr TM, Waltz AG. Experimental cerebral infarction: retroorbital, extradural approach for occluding the middle cerebral artery. Mayo Clin Proc. 1966;41(3):159–68.
28. Robinson RG, Shoemaker WJ, Schlumpf M, Valk T, Bloom FE.
Effect of experimental cerebral infarction in rat brain on catecholamines and behaviour. Nature. 1975;255(5506):332–4.
29. Chen ST, Hsu CY, Hogan EL, Maricq H, Balentine JD. A model of
focal ischemic stroke in the rat: reproducible extensive cortical infarction. Stroke. 1986;17(4):738–43.
30. Chen ST, Hsu CY, Hogan EL, Juan HY, Banik NL, Balentine JD.
Brain calcium content in ischemic infarction. Neurology.
1987;37(7):1227–9.
31. Swanson RA, Morton MT, Tsao-Wu G, Savalos RA, Davidson C,
Sharp FR. A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct
volume. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1990;10(2):290–3.
32. Belayev L, Khoutorova L, Deisher TA, Belayev A, Busto R, Zhang
Y, et al. Neuroprotective effect of SolCD39, a novel platelet aggregation inhibitor, on transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in
rats. Stroke. 2003;34(3):758–63.
33. Lee J, Lee JK, Han K. InfarctSizer: computing infarct volume from
brain images of a stroke animal model. Comput Methods Biomech
Biomed Eng. 2011;14(6):497–504.
34. Recommendations for standards regarding preclinical neuroprotective and restorative drug development. Stroke. 1999;30(12):2752–
8.
35. Tureyen K, Vemuganti R, Sailor KA, Dempsey RJ. Infarct volume
quantification in mouse focal cerebral ischemia: a comparison of
triphenyltetrazolium chloride and cresyl violet staining techniques.
J Neurosci Methods. 2004;139(2):203–7.
36. Boltze J, Nitzsche B, Geiger KD, Schoon H-A. Histopathological
investigation of different MCAO modalities and impact of autologous bone marrow mononuclear cell administration in an ovine
stroke model. Translat Stroke Res. 2011;2(3):279–93.
37. Leach MJ, Swan JH, Eisenthal D, Dopson M, Nobbs M.
BW619C89, a glutamate release inhibitor, protects against focal
cerebral ischemic damage. Stroke. 1993;24(7):1063–7.
38. Liu X, Ye M, An C, Pan L, Ji L. The effect of cationic albuminconjugated PEGylated tanshinone IIA nanoparticles on neuronal
signal pathways and neuroprotection in cerebral ischemia.
Biomaterials. 2013;34(28):6893–905.
39. Ostrowski RP, Schulte RW, Nie Y, Ling T, Lee T, Manaenko A,
et al. Acute splenic irradiation reduces brain injury in the rat focal
ischemic stroke model. Translat Stroke Res. 2012;3(4):473–81.
40. Anderson DC, Bottini AG, Jagiella WM, Westphal B, Ford S,
Rockswold GL, et al. A pilot study of hyperbaric oxygen in the
treatment of human stroke. Stroke. 1991;22(9):1137–42.
41. England TJ, Gibson CL, Bath PM. Granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor in experimental stroke and its effects on infarct size and
functional outcome: a systematic review. Brain Res Rev.
2009;62(1):71–82.
42. Singhal AB, Benner T, Roccatagliata L, Koroshetz WJ, Schaefer
PW, Lo EH, et al. A pilot study of normobaric oxygen therapy in
acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2005;36(4):797–802.
43. Jin G, Sun PZ, Singhal AB, Ayata C, Lo EH. First-order mathematical modeling of brain swelling in focal cerebral ischemia. Translat
Stroke Res. 2010;1(1):65–70.
44. Mitkari B, Kerkela E, Nystedt J, Korhonen M, Jolkkonen J.
Unexpected complication in a rat stroke model: exacerbation of
secondary pathology in the thalamus by subacute intraarterial

338
administration of human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem
cells. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2015;35(3):363–6.
45. Bhattacharya P, Pandey AK, Paul S, Patnaik R, Yavagal DR.
Aquaporin-4 inhibition mediates piroxicam-induced neuroprotection against cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in rodents. PLoS
ONE. 2013;8, e73481.
46. Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, Hurn PD, Kent TA, Savitz
SI, et al. Update of the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable
preclinical recommendations. Stroke. 2009;40(6):2244–50.

Transl. Stroke Res. (2015) 6:323–338
47.

48.

49.

Lapchak PA, Zhang JH, Noble-Haeusslein LJ. RIGOR guidelines:
escalating STAIR and STEPS for effective translational research.
Translat Stroke Res. 2013;4(3):279–85.
Fisher M, Tatlisumak T. Use of animal models has not contributed
to development of acute stroke therapies: con. Stroke. 2005;36(10):
2324–5.
Bland JM, Altman DG. Statistical methods for assessing agreement
between two methods of clinical measurement. Lancet.
1986;1(8476):307–10.

