Letter to the Editor
Stroke welcomes Letters to the Editor and will publish them, if suitable, as space permits. Letters must reference a Stroke published-ahead-of-print
article or an article printed within the past 3 weeks. The maximum length is 750 words including no more than 5 references and 3 authors. Please submit
letters typed double-spaced. Letters may be shortened or edited.

Letter by Gauberti and Vivien Regarding
Article, “Amplification of Regulatory T Cells
Using a CD28 Superagonist Reduces Brain
Damage After Ischemic Stroke in Mice”

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

target the thromboinflammation pathway. Notably, secondary
microthrombosis does not occur either after ischemia reperfusion
in nonhuman primates.3
In humans, the presence of secondary microthrombosis is not
observed in all patients. For instance, when recanalization is complete after fibrinolysis, there is almost no further lesion growth as
assessed by longitudinal MRI.4 Moreover, whereas argatroban (a
direct thrombin inhibitor blocking secondary microthrombosis)
reduces ischemic lesion size by ≈70% in rodent TMVO models,
no evidence for efficacy has come from the randomized trial of
argatroban ARGIS (Argatroban Anticoagulation in Patients With
Acute Ischemic Stroke)-1 and anticoagulation therapies have consistently been found to be ineffective in multiple clinical trials. In
fact, unlike what was found in TMVO models, once reperfusion
is achieved either spontaneously or pharmacologically, the cerebral blood flow does not secondary worsen in the vast majority of
patients with stroke. However, intriguing data are available from
patients with stroke who benefit from endovascular reperfusion.
Indeed, longitudinal MRI data showed that, in 18% of them, there
is a delayed infarction,5 which may correspond to thromboinflammation. Moreover, these patients present transient reversal of the
cytotoxic edema after reperfusion, another specific and probably
thromboinflammation-related feature of TMVO models.
To conclude, the absence of thromboinflammation in nonTMVO stroke models and, probably, in many patients with stroke
should be reinsuring for further preclinical development of Treg
amplification as a potential therapeutic strategy. Nevertheless, we
should be particularly cautious about treatments interfering with
the thromboinflammatory reaction in patients benefiting from
endovascular reperfusion procedures, especially because their
number will probably grow in the next future. Moreover, to our
opinion, TMVO models should be used with caution as generic
ischemic stroke models. Several alternative models are now available (permanent ischemia, thrombin-induced thromboembolic
stroke, autologous clot, ferric-chloride–induced thrombosis, etc)
and should be considered. The underlying risk is to develop general therapeutics that target pathophysiological mechanisms that
exist in only a subgroup of human strokes.

To the Editor:
The recent article by Na et al1 shows that amplification of regulatory T-cell (Treg) improves stroke outcome in both permanent
and transient mechanical vascular occlusion (TMVO) models in
mice. Surprisingly, Schuhmann et al2 published the exact opposite finding 1 month before, ie, amplification of Treg worsens
stroke outcome by increasing thromboinflammation. One year
after publication of a controversy in Stroke on the role of Treg in
acute ischemic stroke, we thought how to explain this persisting
discrepancy in preclinical research results? We thought that the
basis for all the paradoxical results on Treg has not been correctly
identified and can be resumed as follows: thromboinflammation
is not a universal response to cerebral ischemia-reperfusion, but,
rather, a specific feature of TMVO models.
Treg are double-edged sword in acute ischemic stroke. On the
one hand, they protect neurons from inflammation-related death
and, on the other, they promote secondary microthrombosis (the
final step of the thromboinflammatory reaction). Therefore, in permanent models (eg, without secondary microthrombosis), Treg are
protective, as consistently shown by several studies. In transient
models, the beneficial or deleterious role of Treg depends on the
occurrence of thromboinflammation. Whether the thromboinflammation occurs or not in a TMVO model depends most probably
on laboratory-specific methods influencing the severity of the ischemia after filament insertion, such as size of the embolus, occlusion
time (30 versus 60 minutes), speed of filament retrieval, persistence
of common carotid artery occlusion after filament removal (such as
in the study of Schuhmann et al2 but not in the study of Na et al1),
etc. These apparently small but, however, important differences
most likely led to the occurrence of thromboinflammation in the
study of Schuhmann et al2 but not in the study of Na et al1. Then,
who is right? More precisely, who is clinically relevant? Is there
thromboinflammation and secondary microthrombosis after stroke
in humans? Both are probably right.
The thromboinflammation concept suggests that after arterial
recanalization, an inflammatory reaction takes place in the reperfused brain, ultimately leading to the reocclusion of distal vessels (secondary microthrombosis). Hence, despite recanalization
and early cerebral blood flow improvement in TMVO models, the
cerebral blood flow worsens in a delayed manner in the affected
arterial territory. In fact, in TMVO models with thromboinflammation, 80% of the ischemic lesion growth occurs after recanalization because of secondary microthrombosis. Thus, blockade
of this phenomenon ≤3 hours after ischemic onset using different strategies in TMVO models allows to reduce ischemic lesion
size by ≈80%. Of note, the same neuroprotective strategies are
not efficient in non-TMVO models, such as permanent middle
cerebral artery occlusion or in situ thrombin-induced ischemiareperfusion because there is no secondary microthrombosis.3 In
fact, there are many putative neuroprotective drugs that are efficient in TMVO but not in other models, probably because they

Disclosures
None.

Maxime Gauberti, PhD
Denis Vivien, PhD
INSERM, INSERM UMR-S U919
Serine Proteases and Pathophysiology of the Neurovascular
Unit, GIP Cyceron
University Caen Lower-Normandy
Bd Henri Becquerel, Caen, France
	 1.	 Na S-Y, Mracsko E, Liesz A, Hünig T, Veltkamp R. Amplification of
regulatory T cells using a CD28 superagonist reduces brain damage
after ischemic stroke in mice. Stroke. 2015;46:212–220. doi: 10.1161/
STROKEAHA.114.007756.
	 2.	 Schuhmann MK, Kraft P, Stoll G, Lorenz K, Meuth SG, Wiendl H,
et al. Cd28 superagonist-mediated boost of regulatory T cells increases

(Stroke. 2015;46:e50-e51. DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.008071.)
© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org	

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.008071

e50

	
thrombo-inflammation and ischemic neurodegeneration during
the acute phase of experimental stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
2015;35:6–10. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2014.175.
	 3.	 Gauberti M, Martinez de Lizarrondo S, Orset C, Vivien D. Lack of secondary microthrombosis after thrombin-induced stroke in mice and nonhuman primates. J Thromb Haemost. 2014;12:409–414. doi: 10.1111/
jth.12487.

Letters to the Editor   e51
	 4.	 Delgado-Mederos R, Rovira A, Alvarez-Sabín J, Ribó M, Munuera J,
Rubiera M, et al. Speed of tPA-induced clot lysis predicts DWI lesion
evolution in acute stroke. Stroke. 2007;38:955–960. doi: 10.1161/01.
STR.0000257977.32525.6e.
	 5.	 Kidwell CS, Saver JL, Starkman S, Duckwiler G, Jahan R, Vespa P, et al.
Late secondary ischemic injury in patients receiving intraarterial thrombolysis. Ann Neurol. 2002;52:698–703. doi: 10.1002/ana.10380.

Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Letter by Gauberti and Vivien Regarding Article, ''Amplification of Regulatory T Cells
Using a CD28 Superagonist Reduces Brain Damage After Ischemic Stroke in Mice''
Maxime Gauberti and Denis Vivien
Downloaded from http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ by guest on October 4, 2016

Stroke. 2015;46:e50-e51; originally published online January 13, 2015;
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.008071
Stroke is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231
Copyright © 2015 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628

The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
World Wide Web at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/46/2/e50

Permissions: Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published
in Stroke can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office.
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
process is available in the Permissions and Rights Question and Answer document.
Reprints: Information about reprints can be found online at:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
Subscriptions: Information about subscribing to Stroke is online at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/

