[Link]
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70101-7&domain=pdf
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013 677
Review
Treatment of acute ischaemic stroke with thrombolysis 
or thrombectomy in patients receiving anti-thrombotic 
treatment
Hans-Christoph Diener, Christian Foerch, Hanno Riess, Joachim Röther, Gerhard Schroth, Ralph Weber
Systemic thrombolysis with alteplase is the only approved medical treatment for patients with acute ischaemic stroke. 
Thrombectomy is also increasingly  used to treat proximal occlusions of the cerebral arteries, but has not shown 
superiority over systemic thrombolysis with alteplase. Many patients with acute ischaemic stroke are pretreated with 
antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs, which can increase the bleeding risk of thrombolysis or thrombectomy. 
Pretreatment with aspirin monotherapy increases the bleeding risk of alteplase in both observational and randomised 
trials with no effect on clinical outcome, and the risk of intracerebral haemorrhage is increased with the combination 
of aspirin and clopidogrel. Antiplatelet drugs should not be given in the first 24 h after alteplase treatment. Data from 
pooled randomised trials and a large observational study show that thrombolysis can probably be done safely in 
patients given vitamin-K antagonists if the international normalised ratio is less than 1·7, although bleeding risk is 
slightly raised. Almost no data are available for the safety of alteplase in patients with atrial fibrillation who have been 
given novel oral anticoagulants (NOAC) for stroke prevention. Some coagulation parameters could help to identify 
patients treated with NOAC who might be eligible for thrombolysis. Thrombectomy can be done in patients given 
antiplatelets and probably in those given anticoagulants; however, conclusions about anticoagulants are based on 
findings from observational studies with small patient numbers.
Introduction
Treatment of acute ischaemic stroke is based on two 
evidence-based approaches: admission and treatment of 
all patients in a stroke unit,1 and intravenous thrombolysis 
with alteplase for a subgroup of patients in a limited time 
window.2 Many patients are given antiplatelet or 
anticoagulant drugs at stroke onset. These drugs could 
have an effect on either systemic thrombolysis or 
thrombectomy in terms of major bleeding complications, 
in particular intracranial haemorrhage. Full antico
agulation with vitamin-K antagonists is a clear contraindication
for systemic thrombolysis. This is also true for 
the novel direct thrombin antagonists or factor Xa 
inhibitors. The target levels of anticoagulation at which 
thrombolyis might be safe after last drug intake needs to 
be studied in future. In this Review we summarise 
current data for bleeding complications and outcome 
after thrombolysis or thrombectomy in patients with 
ischaemic stroke who were given antiplatelets or 
anticoagulants, and data from animal and laboratory 
studies.
Intracranial hemorrhage and functional outcome 
with alteplase after antiplatelet use
Animal studies
Intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase up to 6 h after 
stroke onset increases the odds of symptomatic and 
fatal intracranial haemorrhage by roughly 4 times 
within the first 7 days.2 Antiplatelet drugs used for 
primary and secondary prevention of vascular events 
impair platelet activation and aggregation by diff erent 
biological pathways and are associated with a low, 
but significantly increased risk, of intracranial 
haemorrhage.3 Consequently, safety con cerns have 
been raised about use of alteplase in patients with acute 
stroke who are receiving single or dual antiplatelet 
therapy. About a third of patients with acute stroke 
given alteplase have regularly taken antiplatelet drugs, 
mainly aspirin, before intravenous thrombolysis with 
alteplase.4–7
Whether the effectiveness and safety of thrombolysis 
is affected by concomitant antiplatelet treatment is 
uncertain from a translational point of view because of 
insuffi  cient animal data. In the early 1990s, a few 
experimental animal studies were published investigating
the combination of aspirin and alteplase for 
ischaemic stroke. An increased incidence of cerebral 
haemorrhage was reported with no reduction in infarct 
volume in animals treated with alteplase in combination 
with aspirin.8,9 Thomas and colleagues10 pretreated 
rabbits with aspirin or placebo for 18 h. At the end of 
the treatment period, ischaemic stroke was induced by 
clot embolisation. The investigators noted the reduced 
ability of alteplase to lyse the clots in the aspirin group 
compared with the placebo group, a finding that was 
also seen with aspirin but not ticlopidine in a study by 
Bednar and coworkers.11 Loss of endothelial prostacyclin 
production in animals pretreated with aspirin was 
suggested to be responsible for the diff erences. 
A Japanese study reported a reduced risk of 
haemorrhagic transformation in mice after a 7 day 
pretreatment regime with the platelet inhibitor 
cilostazol.12 By contrast, pretreatment with aspirin did 
not change the risk of haemorrhagic transformation 
compared with controls. One theory for this was that 
cilostazol increased the intracellular cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate concentration in endothelial cells, 
thereby stabilising the blood–brain barrier.
Lancet Neurol 2013; 12: 677–88
Published Online
May 31, 2013
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S1474-4422(13)70101-7
Department of Neurology and 
Stroke Centre 
(Prof H-C Diener MD), 
Department of Neurology 
(R Weber MD), University 
Hospital Essen, Essen, 
Germany; Department of 
Neurology, Goethe University, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany 
(C Foerch MD); Department of 
Oncology and Hematology, 
Charité, University Medicine 
Berlin, Germany 
(Prof H Riess MD); Department 
of Neurology, Stroke Unit and 
Intensive Care Unit, Asklepios 
Klinik Altona, Hamburg, 
Germany (Prof J Röther MD); 
Institute of Diagnostic and 
Interventional Neuroradiology, 
University of Berne, Inselspital, 
Switzerland
(Prof G Schroth MD); and 
Department of Neurology, 
Alfried Krupp Hospital Essen, 
Germany (R Weber)
Correspondence to:
Prof Hans-Christoph Diener, 
Department of Neurology, 
University Hospital Essen, 
Essen 45147, Germany
h.diener@uni-essen.de
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.840391948)
678 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013
Review
Studies in human beings
A meta-analysis with data from four randomised trials 
and 11 prospective cohort studies showed a signifi cantly 
increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage in patients 
receiving antiplatelet drugs at the time of treatment with 
alteplase (odds ratio [OR] 2·08, 95% CI 1·46–2·97).13
However, there was high between-study heterogeneity 
and evidence of publication bias for the association 
between intracranial haemorrhage with antiplatelet pretreatment.
Furthermore, not all the included observational
studies used multivariable analyses to account 
for baseline differences between patients given antiplatelets
and those who were antiplatelet-naive, potentially
resulting in a perceived increase in rate of 
intra cranial haemorrhage, because patients in 
observational studies receiving antiplatelet drugs were 
signifi cantly older, and more often had vascular risk 
factors (hypertension) and a history of stroke than did 
those in other studies.7,14,15 However, the most crucial 
point is whether the increased risk of intracranial 
haemorrhage after alteplase in patients receiving antiplatelets
results in a poor clinical outcome. 
In a pooled analysis of the randomised National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) I 
and II trials, Grotta and coworkers16 fi  rst showed that 
clinical deterioration in the first 24 h (defi ned as a ≥4 point 
increase on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale 
[NIHSS] compared with baseline) arose signifi cantly 
more often in patients with no previous aspirin use 
(OR 0·53, 95% CI 0·32–0·88). Patients who had early 
clinical deterioration were less likely to have a favourable 
outcome 3 months after stroke than were those whose 
condition remained stable. Possible explanations for this 
were prevention of early reocclusion and antiinfl ammatory neuroprotective effects by aspirin. Longterm
clinical outcome at 3 months and mortality were 
investigated thereafter in various post-hoc analyses of 
randomised and prospective observational stroke studies 
(table 1). None of these fi ndings showed a signifi cantly 
worse outcome in patients given alteplase who were 
receiving antiplatelet treatment than in those who were 
antiplatelet-naive. Notably, previous antiplatelet treatment 
was independently associated with favourable clinical 
outcome (OR 2·0, 95% CI 1·0–4·3) in a prospective 
Year Study design Number of 
patients 
given 
alteplase
Number of 
alteplase patients 
with previous 
antiplatelet use
Study defi nition of 
sICH
sICH Good clinical 
outcome at 
3 months*
Mortality at 3 months
Schmülling et al17 2003 Prospective 
single-centre study 
300 92 NINDS Unadjusted OR 2·66 
(0·79–8·93) 
Unadjusted OR 0·72 
(0·44–1·19)
Unadjusted OR 2·10 
(1·04–4·25)
Uyttenboogaart et al14 2008 Prospective 
single-centre study
301 89 SITS-MOST Adjusted OR 5·96 
(2·01–17·11)
Adjusted OR 2·01 
(1·03–4·26)
NA
Wahlgren et al 
(SITS-MOST)4
2008 Prospective 
multicentre registry
6444 1902 SITS-MOST Adjusted OR for 
aspirin 
1·58 (1·04–2·39)
NA in multivariable 
analysis
Adjusted OR for 
antiplatelets other than 
aspirin 1·43 (1·04–1·96) 
Bluhmki et al (ECASS III)5 2009 Randomised trial 418 130 NINDS Unadjusted OR 1·12 
(0·53–2·38)
Unadjusted OR for 
mRS score of 0–1 1·00 
(0·66–1·51)
Unadjusted OR 1·18 
(0·55–2·52)
Cucchiara et al 
(SAINT I and II)6
2009 Randomised trial 965 337 Haemorrhage on 
neuroimaging and 
worsening of NIHSS 
score by ≥4 points 
Adjusted OR for single 
antiplatelet 2·04 
(1·07–3·87) 
Adjusted OR for dual 
antiplatelet 9·29 
(3·28–26·32) 
Adjusted OR for single 
antiplatelet 0·98 
(0·68–1·43) 
Adjusted OR for dual 
antiplatelet 0·74 
(0·32–1·73) 
NA
Diedler et al (SITS–ISTR)7 2010 Prospective 
multicentre registry
11 736 3782 SITS-MOST Adjusted OR 2·36 
(1·76–317)
Adjusted OR 1·02 
(0·97–1·08) 
Adjusted OR 1·06 
(0·98–1·14)
Dorado et al15 2010 Prospective 
single-centre study
235 72 Haemorrhage on 
neuroimaging and 
worsening of NIHSS 
score of ≥4 points
Adjusted OR 1·9 
(0·7–5·9)
Adjusted OR for mRS 
score of >2 1·4 
(0·7–3·1) 
NA
Ibrahim et al18 2010 Retrospective 
analysis of the 
prospective 
CLOTBUST database
284 95 Haemorrhage on 
imaging and 
worsening of NIHSS 
score of 4 ≥points
Unadjusted OR 1·99 
(0·76–5·19) 
Unadjusted OR 0·57 
(0·33–0·98)
NA
The IST–3 Collaborative 
Group19
2012 Randomised trial 1511 775 SITS-MOST NA Unadjusted OR for 
being alive and 
independent 0·81 
(0·66–1·0)
NA
Data in parentheses are 95% CIs. sICH=symptomatic intracerebral haemorrhage. OR=odds ratio. NINDS=National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. SITS-MOST=Safe Implementation of 
Thrombolysis in Stroke-Monitoring Study. ECASS=European Co-operative Acute Stroke Study. NA=not assessed. mRS=modified Rankin scale. SITS–ISTR=Safe Implementation of Thrombolysis in Stroke 
International Stroke Thrombolysis Register. NIHSS=National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale. IST–3=third International Stroke Trial. *Score of 0–2 on mRS, unless otherwise indicated.
Table 1: Characteristics of studies assessing long-term outcome in patients with acute stroke given alteplase with previous antiplatelet use
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013 679
Review
single-centre study that also showed the highest rate of 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage.14 The Registry of 
the Canadian Stroke Network also noted no association 
between alteplase treatment, previous antiplatelet use, 
and short-term outcome at hospital discharge in 
642 patients.20 Similarly, an adjusted subgroup analysis in 
the randomised, open-label Third International 
Stroke Trial (IST-3), which assigned 3035 patients (of 
whom 53% were older than 80 years) to receive either 
alteplase within 6 h of stroke onset or aspirin and placebo, 
did not show a treatment interaction between alteplase 
and antiplatelet use in the previous 48 h.19 In the Virtual 
International Stroke Trials Archive (VISTA), a substantial 
number of patients (n=656) who had previous single 
antiplatelet treatment gained a signifi cant  functional 
benefi t from systemic thrombolysis with alteplase 
compared with control patients who had no antiplatelet 
treatment (OR 1·42, 95 % CI 1·19–1·70).21
Mortality rates at 3 months were assessed in four 
studies (table 1). Increased mortality was associated with 
previous treatment with antiplatelets other than aspirin 
in the Safe Implementation of Thrombolysis in Stroke-
Monitoring Study (SITS-MOST) registry, but this fi nding 
was not attributable to increases in rates of symptomatic 
intracranial haemorrhage. Patients with previous aspirin 
intake did not have an increased mortality rate.4
The increased mortality risk in the aspirin pretreatment 
group in Schmüelling and coworkers’ study17 should be 
interpreted in view of early concomitant use of 
anticoagulants. Low-dose heparin (10 000 IU per day) was 
started immediately after thrombolysis with alteplase in 
41% of 300 consecutive stroke patients treated from 1996 
to 2001, and high-dose heparin (>15 000–25 000 IU) was 
started in 51% of patients. Current stroke guidelines 
recommend delaying the use of anticoagulants and 
antiplatelet drugs for 24 h after alteplase treatment.22
Data are scarce for antiplatelets other than aspirin or 
dual antiplatelet treatment in patients given alteplase, 
and patient numbers and rates of intracranial 
haemorrhage are too low to draw defi nite conclusions. 
Data from randomised trials and large-scale prospective 
registries show that intravenous thrombolysis with 
alteplase should be used with caution in patients given 
dual antiplatelet treatment, especially the combination of 
aspirin and clopidogrel.6,7,21 The rate of symptomatic 
intracranial haemorrhage in patients who had previous 
dual antiplatelet treatment was the highest in those 
receiving thrombolysis in the randomised trials included 
in the VISTA database: six (9%) of 71 patients.21 The 
highest incidence of symptomatic intracranial 
haemorrhage was noted in patients receiving aspirin 
plus clopidogrel.6,7 All symptomatic intra cranial 
haemorrhages in the double antiplatelet group were in 
patients receiving aspirin and clopidogrel before alteplase 
in the SAINT I and II trials , with an OR of 9·29 (95% CI 
3·28–26·32) in multivariable analysis.6 The adjusted OR 
for symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage, according to 
the NINDS and the European Cooperative Acute Stroke 
Study (ECASS) II definitions, was 1·78 (95% CI 
0·78–4·06) in 151 stroke patients given aspirin plus 
clopidogrel pretreatment in the SITS International 
Stroke Thrombolysis Register.7 There was no signifi cant 
diff erence after multivariable analyses in the odds of 
functional independence or mortality after 3 months 
between the diff  erent antiplatelet subgroups.7 By contrast, 
the combination of aspirin and dipyridamole did not 
increase the rate of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage
according to the SITS-MOST, NINDS, and 
ECASS II definitions in 175 patients. Data are not 
available for thrombolysis in patients given cilostazol or 
trifl usal or the new antiplatelet drugs prasugrel or 
ticagrelor. 
In summary, pretreatment with one antiplatelet drug, 
especially aspirin monotherapy, increases the incidence 
of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage, but does not 
aff ect the net clinical benefit of intravenous thrombolysis 
with alteplase in patients with acute stroke. More studies 
are needed to assess the safety of dual pretreatment, but 
available data from randomised trials and observational 
studies show a substantially increased risk of 
symptomatic haemorrhage in patients who have received 
previous dual therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel.
Early antiplatelet therapy after alteplase
Recanalisation of cerebral blood vessels is one of the 
main predictors for good long-term functional outcome 
and reduced mortality in patients with acute ischaemic 
stroke.23 However, early reocclusion after successful 
recanalisation happens in up to a third of patients with 
stroke given intravenous alteplase, because of concomitant
platelet activation and aggregation.24 Data are 
con fl icting as to whether previous treatment with antiplatelet
drugs can result in an increased rate of early recanalisation
and prevent reocclusion in patients given 
intra venous  alteplase.18,25 Combination treatment with 
antiplatelet drugs given together with or directly after 
intravenous alteplase might increase vessel patency, but 
could also result in an unacceptably high rate of intracranial
haemorrhage. 
Two randomised trials have investigated augmentation 
thrombolysis treatment for acute ischaemic stroke. The 
Combined Approach to Lysis Utilizing Eptifibatide and rt-
PA in Acute Ischemic Stroke (CLEAR) trial assessed the 
safety of the intravenously administered glycoprotein IIb/
IIIa inhibitor eptifibatide with diff erent doses of 
alteplase.26 94 patients were randomly assigned in a 
3:1 ratio to receive either low-dose alteplase (0·3 mg/kg or 
0·45 mg/kg) and intravenous eptifi batide (75 µg/kg bolus 
followed by 0·75 µg/kg per min for 2 h) or standard-dose 
alteplase (0·9 mg/kg). The primary safety endpoint of 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage within 36 h was 
reported in one patient assigned to 0·3 mg/kg alteplase 
plus eptifi batide, and in two patients in the standard dose 
group. Findings for the secondary outcome and mortality 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
680 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013
Review
analyses should be interpreted with caution because the 
trial was underpowered to address these endpoints, and 
baseline variables diff ered  signifi cantly  between 
treatment groups in favour of the standard alteplase 
group. Mortality rates at 90 days were increased in 
patients receiving eptifi batide and both doses of alteplase 
compared with those in the standard alteplase dose group 
(22% vs 12%) and more patients in the standard-dose 
group achieved an excellent outcome than in the lower 
dose groups (modifi ed Rankin Scale score of 0–1; 48% vs
30%). A larger follow-up study combining alteplase and 
eptifi batide has not yet been done.
The open-label randomised Antiplatelet therapy in 
combination with rt-PA Thrombolysis in Ischemic 
Stroke (ARTIS) trial investigated whether infusion of 
300 mg aspirin started within 90 min of intravenous 
thrombolysis with alteplase resulted in improved 
functional outcome in 642 patients.24 More patients in the 
aspirin group than in the standard-care group had 
hypertension (44% vs 40%), diabetes (12% vs 8%), or 
previous stroke (3% vs 1%). The investigators did not 
provide data for previous antiplatelet use at baseline. 
Masked assessment was done of the primary endpoint of 
good functional outcome (defi ned as a score of 0–2 on 
the modifi ed Rankin Scale) at 3 months. The investigators 
had initially planned to include 800 patients, but the 
ARTIS trial was stopped early by the data and safety 
monitoring board because of an increased rate of 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage in the 
combination group (4% vs 2%; p=0·04), which resulted 
in poor functional outcome. Of the 14 patients who had 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage in the aspirin 
plus alteplase group, the bleeding event was the cause of 
poor outcome in 11. Most cases of symptomatic 
intracranial haemorrhage took place within 36 h after 
randomisation in both groups. Functional outcome did 
not diff er  signifi cantly after 3 months between both 
treatments (57·2% in the alteplase alone group vs 54·0% 
in the combination group; crude relative risk 0·94, 
95% CI 0·82–1·09; p=0·42). Mortality was 11·2% (n=36) 
in the aspirin group and 9·7% (n=31) in the standardtreatment
group (p=0·54).
On the basis of the available data, a combination of 
intravenous antiplatelet drugs and alteplase cannot be 
recommended in the acute phase (ie, the first hours) of 
ischaemic stroke.  
Alteplase after oral anticoagulation with warfarin
Animal data 
Full oral anticoagulation (international normalised 
ratio [INR] >2·0) with vitamin-K antagonists such as 
warfarin is a clear contraindication for systemic 
thrombolysis with alteplase in patients with acute 
ischaemic stroke: patients taking oral anticoagulants were 
excluded from the randomised, placebo-controlled trials 
investigating alteplase in acute stroke. However, these 
patients might have taken a too low dose of anticoagulant 
or might have stopped anticoagulation some time before 
they had a stroke and therefore would have had an INR of 
less than the target range of 2·0–3·0. Several mostly 
retrospective studies have investigated whether use of 
alteplase is safe in patients with an INR of 1·7 or less.
A few experimental studies provide translational 
insights into the safety of thrombolysis in the presence 
of thera peutic levels of warfarin anticoagulation. 
Pfeilschifter and colleagues27 developed an animal model 
of ischaemic stroke with anticoagulation with warfarin: 
mice that were pretreated orally with warfarin had a 3 h 
suture occlusion of the middle cerebral artery. Compared 
with non-anticoagulated controls, mice on warfarin 
had a dose-dependent increase in haemorrhagic 
transformation of the ischaemic tissue. On the basis of 
this model, the same group later showed that 
thrombolysis after a 3 h middle cerebral artery occlusion 
caused much larger amounts of haemorrhagic 
transformation in warfarin-treated mice (INR of about 3) 
than in non-anticoagulated controls.28 Additionally, this 
study investigated whether the rapid reversal of 
anticoagulation at the end of the 3 h occlusion period 
(but before alteplase admini stration) might constitute a 
potential therapeutic strategy to overcome the dilemma 
of not treating anticoagulated patients with stroke at all. 
Anticoagulated mice that received concentrated 
coagulation factors (prothrombin complex concentrate) 
before thrombolysis showed a vastly reduced risk of 
haemorrhagic transformation compared with mice 
whose anticoagulation was not reversed. 
Sun and colleagues29 developed a model of thromboembolic
middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats given 
warfarin. In line with the findings of Pfeilschifter and 
colleagues,27 anticoagulation was associated with an 
increased risk of haemorrhagic transformation after 
thrombolysis compared with non-anticoagulated controls. 
Again, rapid reversal of anticoagulation with con centrated 
coagulation factors reduced the risk of haemorrhagic 
transformation in moderately anti coagulated rats 
(INR 2–3). Despite the major limitations in translating 
animal research to the human setting, the experimental 
data leave no doubt that warfarin anticoagulation within 
the therapeutic range increases the risk of haemorrhagic 
transformation after thrombolytic treatment. Reversal of 
anticoagulation before alteplase injection might enable 
patients with high INR values to be treated. However, 
potential prothrombotic complications should be carefully 
addressed in the future. 
Studies of human beings
Table 2 summarises findings from four retrospective 
single-centre studies with small to moderate sample 
sizes, showing that the risk of symptomatic intracranial 
or parenchymal haemorrhage in patients given warfarin 
with an INR of 1·7 or less is increased by a factor of 
4 to 15.30–33 The trials used diff erent  defi nitions  of 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage and only a few 
( 8.0.0.2542.1791100697 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013 681
Review
patients were receiving warfarin. Table 3 shows the 
results of five moderately powered observational 
studies24,34–37 and a large prospective analyses,38  which,   
together with Frank and colleagues’ study,21 show no 
increased risk of intracerebral haemorrhage with 
alteplase in patients with an INR of 1·7 or less. 
The study by Xian and colleagues38 is based on the 
observational prospective American Heart Association 
Get With The Guidelines Stroke Registry. In this registry, 
data were obtained from 23 437 patients with ischaemic 
stroke who were treated with alteplase. 1802 (8%) patients 
were receiving warfarin and had an INR of 1·7 or less. 
The adjusted OR for symptomatic intracerebral 
haemorrhage in these patients was 1·01 (95% CI 
0·82–1·25). No diff erences were noted between the two 
groups of patients for severe systemic haemorrhage or 
in-hospital mortality (0·94, 95% CI 0·79–1·13). The 
VISTA database analysed data from 9613 patients with 
ischaemic stroke, of whom 2755 were treated with 
alteplase. The adjusted OR showed favourable 3 month 
outcomes associated with alteplase in patients given oral 
anticoagulation who had INR values of 1·7 or less (n=157; 
OR 1·50, 95% CI 1·15–1·97).21
Three groups of researchers have published metaanalyses
, but none included the study by Xian and 
colleagues.38 Miedema and colleagues39 identifi ed seven 
studies with 3631 patients given alteplase, in which 
240 (7%) patients used warfarin before stroke onset. The 
OR for the risk of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage 
was 2·6 (95% CI 1·1–5·9). No diff erence was reported for 
functional outcome or death from all causes. Ruecker 
and colleagues33 assessed nine studies with 4856 patients 
who received intravenous thrombolysis. 284 (6%) 
patients were receiving warfarin. The pooled OR for 
intracranial bleeding for patients receiving warfarin 
when given alteplase was 2·31 (1·15–4·62). However, 
there was significant heterogeneity between studies. In a 
meta-analysis of 55 studies, Whiteley and colleagues13
investigated risk factors for intracranial haemorrhage in 
65 264 patients with acute stroke given alteplase. Any use 
of warfarin increased the risk of intracranial bleeding by 
an OR of 2·46 (0·92–6·59).
Treatment guidelines were published before all these 
data were available. According to the 2007 American 
Heart Association and American Stroke Association 
guideline, patients not taking an oral anticoagulant can 
be given alteplase.22 If an anticoagulant is taken, 
thrombolysis can be done if the INR is 1·7 or less. 
No European stroke guidelines are available for this 
topic.40 The European label for use of alteplase in patients 
with ischaemic stroke states that the use of 
anticoagulation is an absolute contraindication for 
systemic thrombolysis.
In summary, treatment of patients with ischaemic 
stroke who were given warfarin at subtherapeutic INR 
values (≤1·7) is probably safe. This recommendation 
assumes that no additional factors exist for increasing of 
bleeding risk and is based on one large prospective 
registry.38 Patients were not randomised for the presence 
or absence of warfarin treatment in any of these studies. 
Furthermore, a bias towards treatment of patients with 
low severity strokes and patients with few risk factors for 
intracranial haemorrhage (eg, age) cannot be excluded 
in the observational studies. The studies with opposing 
results were mostly underpowered. One properly 
undertaken large study, such as the one by Xian and 
colleagues,38 is more reliable than is a meta-analyses of 
underpowered studies. Alternatively, translational data 
show a high risk of haemorrhagic transformation after 
altreplase treatment in fully anticoagulated mice, thereby 
justifying the restrictive guidelines for patients with an 
INR of greater than 1·7.
Year Study design Number of 
patients 
given 
alteplase
Number of 
alteplase patients 
with previous 
warfarin use
Study defi nition of
sICH
sICH (previous vs no 
warfarin )
Good clinical 
outcome 
at 3 months*
Mortality at 3 months
Prabhakaran et al30 2010 Retrospective, 
single centre
107 13 (INR <1·7) Parenchymatous 
haemorrhage, 
NIHSS 4-point 
increase
4/13 vs 3/94; 
unadjusted OR 13·5 
(2·6–69·9)
NA 2/13 vs 9/94
Seet et al31 2011 Retrospective, 
single centre
212 14 (INR <1·7) ECASS 5/14 vs 13/198; 
adjusted OR 14·7 
(1·3–54·3)
·· 5/14 vs 38/198 
Kim et al32 2011 Retrospective, 
single centre
452 14 (INR NA) Any type of cerebral 
haemorrhage
4/13 vs 40/134; 
adjusted OR 2·0 
(0·5–8·3)
14·3% vs 43·6% ··
Ruecker et al33 2012 Prospective, single 
centre
548 15 (INR NA) NINDS 3/15 vs 30/533; 
adjusted OR 4·2 
(1·1–17·7)
26·7% vs 40%; 
adjusted OR 0·7 
(0·2–2·7)
··
Data are n/N or OR (95% CI), unless otherwise indicated. Some ORs were taken from Ruecker and colleagues’ report.33 sICH=symptomatic intracerebral haemorrhage. OR=odds ratio. INR=international normalised 
ratio. NIHSS=National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale. ECASS=European Cooperative Acute Stroke Study. NINDS=National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. NA=not assessed.  *Score of 0–2 on 
mRS, unless otherwise indicated.
Table 2: Studies with increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage in anticoagulated patients given alteplase  
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.646029261)
682 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013
Review
Thrombolysis in patients given novel oral 
anticoagulants
Animal studies
The novel oral anticoagulant drugs (NOAC) are an 
important alternative to vitamin-K antagonists in patients 
with atrial fibrillation. Dabigatran, rivaroxaban, and 
apixaban were studied versus warfarin in patients with 
atrial fibrillation at increased risk of stroke.41–43
In situations where clinical data are insuffi  cient or not 
conclusive, translational studies are of particular 
importance. In an experimental series, mice were orally 
anticoagulated with either warfarin or dabigatran and 
had a 3 h middle cerebral artery suture occlusion 
followed by alteplase administration at the time of 
reperfusion.44 Compared with non-anticoagulated 
controls, warfarin anticoagulation increased haemorrhagic
transformation. By contrast, dabigatran 
anticoagulation with plasma concentrations similar to 
those used in human beings (ie, therapeutic range) did 
not increase haemorrhagic complications after alteplase 
treatment. However, high (supratherapeutic) dabigatran 
concentrations, which can result from renal 
insuffi  ciency, for example, were associated with 
increased rates of haemorrhagic transformation. 
Findings from experi mental studies of (primary) 
intracerebral haemorrhage associated with high-dose 
dabigatran treatment suggest that haematoma growth 
can be prevented with prothrombin complex 
concentrate.45 However, whether this treatment can 
also ameliorate haemorrhagic transformation after 
treatment with alteplase in NOAC-treated mice with 
ischaemic stroke is unknown.
Bohmann and colleagues46 investigated the eff ect  of 
dabigatran anticoagulation in a mouse model of 
experimental ischaemic stroke without alteplase treatment.
Both therapeutic and supratherapeutic plasma concentrations
of dabigatran did not increase haemor rhagic 
transformation in the ischaemic tissue compared with 
non-anticoagulated controls. However, warfarin clearly 
increased haemorrhagic transformation in alteplase-naive 
mice with ischaemic stroke.28 Gliem and colleagues47
reported data for de-novo anticoagulation after experimental
ischaemic stroke in mice. Although warfarin 
increased the risk of haemorrhagic transformation, mice 
pretreated with dabigatran did not have a higher rate of 
haemorrhagic complications than did anticoagulationnaive
controls. All these findings show a reduced risk of 
dabigatran on haemorrhagic complications in acute 
ischaemic stroke, with and without thrombolytic 
treatment, which is in line with the reduced rate of 
intracerebral haemorrhage in patients receiving anticoagulation
with dabigatran for stroke prevention in atrial 
fi brillation. From a pathophysiological point of view, the 
smaller overall effect that dabigatran has on the coagulation 
system compared with warfarin (isolated and reversible 
factor II inhibition vs reduction of factors II, VII, IX, and X) 
results in enough haemostasis to prevent excessive 
haemorrhagic transformation in the ischaemic tissue.44
Before a defi nite conclusion can be made, these fi ndings 
should be independently replicated in diff erent animals.48
Studies of human beings
In patients with acute stroke who are eligible for systemic 
thrombolysis, the uncertainty of anticoagulant intake 
poses new problems for stroke management. Whereas 
anticoagulation with vitamin-K antagonists can be easily 
verifi ed and its intensity estimated via a point-of-care 
INR test, no comparable bedside test is yet available for 
Year Study design Number of 
patients 
given 
alteplase
Number of alteplase 
patients with 
previous warfarin 
use
Study defi nition 
of sICH
sICH (previous vs no 
warfarin)
Good clinical 
outcome at 
3 months
Mortality at 3 months 
(previous vs no warfarin)
Levin et al34 2011 Retrospective, 
multicentre
580 26 (INR <1·7) NA 0/26 vs 27/554; 
unadjusted OR 0·39 
(0·02–6·59)
NA NA
Vergouwen et al35 2011 Retrospective, 
multicentre
1739 125 (INR <1·7) Imaging and 
clinical worsening
10/125 vs 1/1614; 
adjusted OR 1·1 
(0·5–2·3)
NA 24/125 vs 260/1614; 
adjusted OR 0·6 (0·3–1·0)
Meretoja et al36 2010 Retrospective, 
monocentre
985 39 NINDS 3/39 vs 50/486; 
adjusted OR 0·29 
(0·04–2·37)
NA 2/39 vs 41/470; OR NA
Ibrahim et al18 2010 Retrospective, 
multicentre
284 9 SITS-MOST 0/9 vs 9/180; 
unadjusted OR 0·9 
(0·05–2·51)
NA
Brunner et al37 2011 Prospective 688 36 Two reviewers 0/36 vs 29/652 NA 3/36 vs 57/652
Xian et al38 2012 Prospective, 
multicentre
23 437 1802 NINDS 102/1802 vs
1005/21 635; adjusted 
OR 1·01 (0·82–1·25)
NA 202/1772 vs 1676/21 304; 
adjusted OR 0·94 (0·79–1·13)*
Data are n/N or OR (95% CI), unless otherwise indicated. Some ORs were taken from Ruecker and colleagues’ report.33 sICH=symptomatic intracerebral haemorrhage. OR=odds ratio. INR=international normalised 
ratio. NA=not assessed. NINDS=National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. SITS-MOST=Safe Implementation of Thrombolysis in Stroke-Monitoring Study. *In-hospital mortality.
Table 3: Studies without increased risk of intracranial haemorrhage in anticoagulated patients given alteplase
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013 683
Review
the NOAC. In daily practice, the start of intravenous 
thrombolytic treatment should not be delayed while 
waiting for the results of routine laboratory tests.49,50
INR can be rapidly measured in the emergency room 
with a point-of-care method. In the unlikely case 
of abnormal laboratory test results prohibiting 
thrombolysis, the infusion of tissue plasminogen 
activator can be stopped. This acute stroke management 
allows for door-to-needle times of less than 30 min.51
However, if the drug taken previously is unknown, or if 
patients are receiving NOAC treatment, more timeconsuming
coagulation tests are needed to rule out 
eff ective anticoagulation. Until point-of-care methods for 
the detection and measurement of plasma levels 
of NOAC are available, the management of patients with 
acute stroke receiving these drugs, and indication for 
thrombolytic treatment, remains a diffi  cult  challenge 
and the risks of bleeding and the benefi ts of thrombolysis 
need to be balanced. 
Coagulation tests show diff erent  sensitivities 
dependent on the kind of NOAC and on the use of nonstandardised
test systems (table 4). Even if the time of 
last intake of a specific NOAC is known or if anticoagulant 
activity or drug concentration is detected in the plasma, 
the definition of a specifi c  cut-off  value that allows 
thrombolytic treatment (in the context of other 
established parameters such as renal function) remains 
widely arbitrary because of missing data. Six case reports 
have been published of thrombolysis in patients with 
acute stroke receiving anticoagulation treatment with 
dabigatran, with a fatal intraparenchymal bleeding 
complication shown in one patient with very recent 
dabigatran intake, and a good outcome in the others.52–57
All NOAC potentially affect the activated partial 
thromboplastin time, the prothrombin time, and INR. 
But even if these parameters are within normal range, 
these tests are not reliable indicators of normal—ie, 
unaltered by NOAC—coagulation, particularly if the 
time of the last drug intake is unknown.58,59 Plasma 
concentrations for dabigatran peak after 3–4 h and for 
rivaroxaban and apixaban after 4–5 hours. Half-life, peak 
plasma concentrations, and elimination rate are 
dependent on the type of NOAC, and therefore the 
interval between last drug intake and start of blood 
sampling will have an effect on plasma concentrations of 
NOAC and the results of coagulation tests.60–62 With an 
assumed normal rate of renal elimination, normal 
coagulation can be expected 24 h after ingestion, but 
individual plasma concentration curves vary greatly for 
all NOAC. 
Peak concentrations of dabigatran, and less reliably of 
rivaroxaban and apixaban, prolong the activated partial 
thromboplastin time.63,64 High dabigatran concentrations 
also prolong this time. When the dabigatran plasma 
concentrations are low a normal activated partial 
thromboplastin time does not reliably exclude a 
meaningful residual anticoagulant effect. For patients 
receiving dabigatran treatment, normal values for 
thrombin time, ecarin clotting time, or the Hemoclot test 
rule out residual dabigatran plasma concentrations.65,66
For patients taking rivaroxaban or apixaban, peak plasma 
concentration might or might not prolong the 
prothrombin time, or less likely the activated partial 
thromboplastin time, dependent on the individual 
baseline coagulation and the assay used. If an antifactor-
Xa assay does not detect antifactor-Xa activity in plasma, 
residual rivaroxaban or apixaban plasma concentrations 
are definitively ruled out. For more refi ned management, 
calibrated antifactor-Xa assays allow the measurement of 
factor-Xa inhibitors in ng/mL. These tests can be helpful 
before invasive procedures such as thrombolysis are 
done. Bedside tests for the detection and quantifi cation 
of direct thrombin inhibitors and factor Xa inhibitors are 
in development. Until point-of-care tests are available 
and implemented, time-consuming test results might 
need to be awaited before thrombolysis can be started in 
patients with unknown drug histories.66,67
Methods to reverse NOAC are not yet well established. 
To reduce the area under the curve after NOAC intake, 
dialysis for dabigatran and charcoal ingestion for 
dabigatran and apixaban have been recommended; specifi c 
antidotes are in development.68 Prothrombin concentrates 
or recombinant activated human factor VII, or both, have 
been recommended for major haemor rhage.68 Although 
preliminary reports of patients with acute stroke treated 
with thrombolysis while taking dabigatran show a low 
bleeding rate, patients with unknown last intake of NOAC 
should not be given alteplase when a relevant 
prohaemorrhagic anticoagulant effect is not excluded by 
specifi c tests—ie, normal thrombin time, ecarin clotting 
time, or Hemoclot test for patients taking dabigatran, and 
normal antifactor-Xa activity in patients taking rivaroxaban 
or apixaban. Cautious advice has been published, in which 
intravenous alteplase should be considered only if the 
patient has not taken dabigatran in at least the past 48 h 
Dabigatran Rivaroxaban  Apixaban 
aPTT ↑↑ ↑ to ↔ ↔ to ↑ 
Prothrombin time* ↑ ↑ – ↑↑ ↑
INR* ↑ ↑ – ↑↑ ↑ 
Thrombin time ↑↑↑↑  ↔ ↑
Ecarin clotting time ↑↑↑↑  ↔ ↔
Anti-Xa activity ↔ to ↑  ↑↑↑ ↑↑↑ 
Peak value aPTT  Anti-Xa activity 
(prothrombin time, aPTT)
Anti-Xa activity 
(prothrombin time, aPTT) 
Trough value Thrombin time Anti-Xa activity Anti-Xa activity
Specific test system Hemoclot test Calibrated anti-Xa activity Calibrated anti-Xa activity
↑=small increase or prolongation. ↑↑=medium increase or prolongation. ↑↑↑=large increase or 
prolongation. ↑↑↑↑=very large increase or prolongation.  ↔=neutral eff ect. aPTT=activated partial 
thromboplastin time. INR=international normalised ratio. *Conversion of prothrombin time to INR increases 
variability, thus prothrombin time is more reliable.
Table 4: Effect of the novel oral anticoagulants dabigatran, rivaroxaban, and apixaban on selected 
coagulation tests
(8.0.0.2542,1596738010 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
684 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013
Review
and has entirely normal coagulation testing results 
(activated partial thromboplastin time, INR, platelet 
count).69 However, individual therapeutic options should 
be considered in patients with known last NOAC intake. 
For example, if a patient took dabigatran at least 12 h ago 
and activated partial thromboplastin time is normal, and 
the results of the other coagulation tests are only slightly 
raised (thrombin time <4 ×upper normal range; ecarin 
clotting time <2×upper normal range, or Hemoclot test 
<50 ng/mL dabigatran), treatment with intravenous 
thrombolysis could be considered if established exclusion 
criteria for thrombolysis are ruled out. The severity of 
stroke symptoms, the vessel status, and the perfusion 
defi cit as assessed by stroke imaging might be helpful in 
decision making.
No reports are available of patients with acute stroke 
undergoing thrombolysis while taking rivaroxaban or 
apixaban. The situation is complex in these patients 
because the prothrombin time, and to a lesser extent the 
activated partial thromboplastin time, are only 
inconsistently prolonged because of diff erences in the 
sensitivity of thromboplastin and activated partial 
thromboplastin time reagents.70,71 Thus, thrombolytic 
treatment should be considered with caution when 
normal activated partial thromboplastin time and 
prothrombin time levels of 6 h or more after drug 
administration are documented.
Thrombectomy in patients given antiplatelets 
or anticoagulants
In patients with proximal vessel occlusion, rates of 
recanalisation with intravenous alteplase are low if the 
length of the thrombus is greater than 8 mm, which is 
often the case with cardioembolic stroke.72 In these 
patients a good strategy might be to consider endovascular 
mechanical thrombectomy as a first treatment choice. 
However, data from three randomised trials comparing 
intravenous thrombolysis with thrombectomy alone or 
combined thrombolysis and thrombectomy (bridging 
concept) showed no superiority of the interventional 
approach compared with systemic thrombolysis with 
alteplase.73–75 These important trials confi rm  that 
endovascular treatment of stroke is as safe as intravenous 
alteplase, without increases in mortality and haemorrhagic
risk, and despite the use of obsolete fi rst-generation 
devices and techniques (eg, Merci Clot Retriever, 
thrombus fragmentation with a guidewire74) and that new 
developments in CT and MRI to visualise the length of the 
thrombus were not applied. The time until endovascular 
treatment was surprisingly long, emphasising that many 
of the small enrolling centres had little experience and 
training in endovascular stroke treatment. Patients 
receiving anticoagulation were not included in these trials.
Patients with acute ischaemic stroke and known 
haemorrhagic diathesis, decreased platelet count, INR 
values of greater than 1·7, and prolonged activated 
partial thromboplastin time were excluded from the 
initial prospective randomised trials with selective local 
intra-arterial thrombolysis.76,77 A rate of symptomatic 
intra cranial haemorrhage of 4·8% was reported in a 
monocentre study with a moderate sample size of 
294 patients with acute stroke who were given local 
intra-arterial thrombolysis.78 Patients with abnormal 
haemo stasis were not excluded. Symptomatic 
intracranial haemorrhage correlated with poor 
collaterals identified by angiography, early signs of 
ischaemia on CT scans, high-doses of urokinase, high 
diastolic pressure, and low recanalisation rates. In 
patients pretreated with aspirin or vitamin-K 
antagonists, no increase in symptomatic intracranial 
haemorrhage was noted. 
The rate of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage in 
the Multi MERCI trial was 9·8% and rates of 
recanalisation reached up to 70%;79 however, good clinical 
outcome could be achieved in only 36% of patients. A 
subgroup analysis compared patients with normal and 
abnormal haemostasis.80 Patient groups were separated 
according to INR (cutoff  value 1·7), prothrombin time 
(45 s), and platelet count (100 000/µL). The rate of 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage was almost 
identical between the normal and abnormal haemostasis 
groups (8·6% vs 8·5%), whereas good clinical outcome 
was less frequent in the group with disturbed 
haemostasis. 
A retrospective study investigated 714 patients with 
acute stroke treated with an endovascular approach in a 
timeframe of 6 h. 28 (4%) patients were pretreated with 
oral anticoagulants at onset of acute stroke, of whom 
13 (46%) had an INR of less than 1·7.81 Compared with the 
other 686 patients, this subgroup more often had atrial 
fi brillation, previous stroke, a higher NIHSS, higher INR 
and longer activated partial thromboplastin time, and a 
seemingly higher thrombus load. No signifi cant increase 
of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage was noted 
(7·1% in the oral anticoagulant group vs 6·0% in the 
endovascular-only group). One possible explanation 
might be that the recanalisation strategy was adapted to 
the INR because of the individualised treatment decision: 
dose of locally injected urokinase was signifi cantly lower 
(375 000  IU vs 1 000 000 IU) and mechanical-only 
recanalisation was done more frequently in the oral 
anticoagulant group than in the endovascular-only group 
(46·4 % vs 12·8 %). This fi nding might also explain why 
the rate of asymptomatic haemorrhage was even lower in 
patients in the oral anticoagulant group than in the 
endovascular-only group (10·7% vs 17·4%). Recanalisation 
rates were similar between the two groups (71·4% in the 
oral anticoagulant group vs 70·0% in the endovascularonly
group).
Splitting of these patients into those with strokes 
aff ecting the posterior (n=106)82 or anterior (n=623) 
circulation83 resulted in rates of symptomatic intracranial 
haemorrhage of 0·9% in the vertebro-basilar territory 
versus 5·5% in the territory of the carotid arteries. Again, 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013 685
Review
poor collaterals, as assessed by angiography, were the 
only independent predictor for symptomatic intracranial 
haemorrhage, but not previous antithrombotic treatment, 
which was, however, a weak predictor of poor clinical 
outcome after 3 months (p=0·036). 
Modern endovascular image-guided microsurgical 
thrombectomy with high-fl ow aspiration catheters 
and stent-retriever technology in combination with 
balloon-mounted aspiration-guiding catheters were 
developed and introduced in Europe in 2010, and 
became rapidly available in daily practice. Effi  cient 
recanalisation rates of 80–100% could be achieved in 
experimental studies84 and single-centre registries.85,86
Although the timeframe was increased to 8 h and 
patients with primary or drug-induced abnormalities 
of haemostasis have not been excluded, rates of 
symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage were remarkably 
low. The SWIFT study87 compared the effi  cacy and safety 
of the Solitaire fl ow restoration device with the Merci 
retriever. Symptomatic intra cranial haemorrhage was 
noted in 2% of patients in the Solitaire group compared 
with 11% in the Merci group.87 83% of patients achieved 
recanalisation in the Solitaire group (vs 48% in the Merci 
group), resulting in good clinical outcome after 3 months 
in 58% (vs 33% of Merci patients). Similar results were 
reported in the TREVO2 trial.88
On the basis of the limited evidence from the small 
non-randomised observational studies (all of which have 
several potential biases), previous treatment with 
antithrombotic therapy and altered haemostasis did not 
seem to be associated with a substantial increase in 
risk of symptomatic intracranial haemorrhage if 
individualised revascularisation strategies are applied 
and if endovascular microsurgical thrombectomy is done 
by an expert team of interventional neuroradiologists. 
Whether this is also the case for thrombectomy in 
patients treated with NOAC needs to be investigated. 
Conclusions
This Review shows that most of our knowledge about the 
safety and risk of thrombolysis or thrombectomy in 
patients given antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs is 
based on case series or registries, and only very few 
randomised trials. The risk of symptomatic intracranial 
haemorrhage is increased in patients on aspirin who are 
treated with intravenous alteplase; however, this increase 
does not translate into poor outcome (table 5). 
Unfortunately, no data are available to confirm that this 
is also true for patients treated after acute coronary 
syndrome with the more potent new antiplatelet drugs 
prasugrel and ticagrelor. On the basis of pharmacological 
assumptions, an increase in bleeding risk would be 
expected. There is evidence from one randomised trial 
(ARTIS)24 that antiplatelet treatment should be withheld 
for 24 h after intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase. 
Systemic thrombolysis of acute ischaemic strokes 
seems to be safe in patients given warfarin who have an 
INR of less than 1·7. This recommendation was largely 
based on assumption and is now confi rmed by the 
results of one large registry.38 However, the possible risk 
of thrombolysis in patients given NOAC remains 
unclear. Therefore, prospective registries are urgently 
needed that obtain information about this topic; so too 
are studies to identify which coagulation test provides 
quick and reliable information about the safety of 
intravenous thrombolysis. Point-of-care coagulation 
tests are urgently warranted for management of acute 
stroke, especially in patients pretreated with NOAC and 
who are eligible for intravenous thrombolysis. Therefore, 
at present we are restricted to the more time-consuming 
central laboratory-based tests (table 4). Additionally, 
Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched PubMed from 1990, to March 1, 2013, with the
search terms “acetylsalicylic acid”, “alteplase”, 
“anticoagulation”, “antiplatelet”, “apixaban”, “aspirin”, 
“cilostazol”, “clopidogrel”, “coumadin”, “dabigatran”, 
“dipyridamole”, “factor X inhibitor”, “glycoprotein 
IIb”,  “heparin”, “phenprocoumon”, “prasugrel”, “rivaroxaban”, 
“rt-PA”, “stroke”, “thrombectomy”, “thrombin inhibitor”, 
“thrombolysis”, “ticagrelor”, “ticlopidine”, “tissue plasminogen 
activator”, “trifl usal”, “vitamin k antagonist”, “warfarin”. We 
handsearched bibliographies of relevant articles and identifi ed 
articles through searches of the authors› own fi les. We 
reviewed only animal, experimental, and observational studies, 
and randomised trials published in English. The fi nal reference 
list was generated on the basis of relevance to the scope of this 
Review.
Risk of intracranial 
haemorrhage*
Comment
Intravenous alteplase and any 
antiplatelet drug (mainly aspirin)
Increased (OR 2·08, 
95% CI 1·46–2·97)
Net clinical benefit of alteplase is not 
reversed by increased risk of intracranial 
haemorrhage
Intravenous alteplase and aspirin 
plus clopidogrel
Increased Small patient numbers
Intravenous alteplase and prasugrel 
or ticagrelor
No data available ..
Intravenous alteplase and aspirin 
after alteplase
Increased (RR 2·78, 
95% CI 1·01–7·63)
No benefi t
Intravenous alteplase and warfarin Increased Risk not significantly increased if INR ≤1·7
Intravenous alteplase and NOAC Probably increased
Dabigatran Probably increased Alteplase possible if thrombin time or 
activated partial thromboplastin time 
normal or last intake >48 h
Apixaban or rivaroxaban Probably increased Alteplase possible if anti-Xa activity normal
Thrombectomy and aspirin Probably not increased Small patient numbers
Thrombectomy and warfarin Probably not increased Small patient numbers
OR=odds ratio. RR=relative risk. INR=international normalised ratio. NOAC=new oral anticoagulants. *Compared with 
thrombolysis or thrombectomy only.
Table 5: Risk of intracranial haemorrhage in patients with acute ischaemic stroke given systemic 
thrombolysis or thrombectomy on antiplatelet treatment or anticoagulation
( 8.0.0.2542.1357762794 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
686 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013
Review
most of these tests have a wide interassay range of 
sensitivity for NOAC. The scarce data from case series of 
patients undergoing thrombectomy seem to show that 
patients receiving anticoagulation have no increased risk 
of intracerebral haemorrhage. Whether this point is true 
for NOAC is unknown, and again should be studied 
prospectively in controlled trials.
Contributors
H-CD drafted the introduction and discussion and wrote the paragraphs 
about thrombolyis in patients receiving warfarin. CF provided text about 
animal experiments. HR wrote the sections about the pharmacology and 
effectiveness of anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs. JR wrote the 
section about thrombolysis in patients given new anticoagulants and GS 
wrote the section about thrombectomy. RW wrote the paragraphs about 
thrombolysis in patients given antiplatelet drugs. All authors revised the 
final version of the manuscript. 
Confl icts of interests
H-CD received honoraria for participation in clinical trials, contribution to 
advisory boards or oral presentations from Abbott, Allergan, AstraZeneca, 
Bayer Vital, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, CoAxia, 
Corimmun, Covidien, Daichii-Sankyo, D-Pharm, EV3, Fresenius, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen Cilag, Knoll, MSD, Medtronic, MindFrame, 
Neurobiological Technologies, Novartis, Novo-Nordisk, Paion, 
Parke-Davis, Pfi zer, Sanofi -Aventis, Schering-Plough, Servier, Solvay, 
Thrombogenics, Wyeth and Yamanouchi; financial support for research 
projects was provided by AstraZeneca, GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Lundbeck, Novartis, Janssen-Cilag, Sanofi-Aventis, Syngis, and Talecris. 
The Department of Neurology at the University Duisburg-Essen received 
research grants from the German Research Council DFG, German 
Ministry of Education and Research BMBF, European Union, National 
Institutes of Health, Bertelsmann Foundation, and Heinz-Nixdorf 
Foundation. H-CD has no ownership interest and does not own stocks of 
any pharmaceutical company. CF is designated as an inventor in the 
European patent application “Use of GFAP for identifi cation of 
intracerebral hemorrhage” (number 03021571.9); financial support for 
research projects was provided by Boehringer Ingelheim, CSL Behring, 
and Roche Diagnostics. CF received honoraria for contribution to advisory 
boards from Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Serono, Roche Diagnostics, 
and Sanofi-Aventis. HR received honoraria for contribution to advisory 
boards or oral presentations from Bayer Vital, BMS, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Daichii-Sankyo, Fresenius, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, 
Novo-Nordisk, Pfi zer, Sanofi-Aventis; fi nancial support for research 
projects was provided by Bayer Vital, Novartis, Sanofi-Aventis. JR received 
honoraria for contribution to advisory boards or oral presentations from 
Bayer Vital, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Lundbeck, 
Pfizer, and Sanofi-Aventis. JR has no ownership interest and does not own 
stocks of any pharmaceutical company. RW received travel grants from 
Bayer Vital for the European Stroke Conference 2011 and Boehringer 
Ingelheim for the Annual Meeting 2012 of the German Neurological 
Society, and honoria for oral presentation from Covidien. RW has no 
ownership interest and does not own stocks of any pharmaceutical 
company. GS is member of the steering committee of the STAR study. 
He received institutional research grants from Swiss National Scientifi c 
Foundation, European Cooperation in Science and Technology, Siemens, 
Covidien, Balt, Bracco, Bayer, Stryker, and Acandis. GS has no ownership 
interest and does not own stocks of any medical company.
References
1  Stroke Unit Trialists C. Organised inpatient (stroke unit) care for 
stroke. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 4: CD000197.
2  Wardlaw JM, Murray V, Berge E, et al. Recombinant tissue 
plasminogen activator for acute ischaemic stroke: an updated 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012; 379: 2364–72.
3  Weber R, Brenck J, Diener HC. Antiplatelet therapy in 
cerebrovascular disorders. Handb Exp Pharmacol 2012; 210: 519–46.
4  Wahlgren N, Ahmed N, Eriksson N, et al. Multivariable analysis of 
outcome predictors and adjustment of main outcome results to 
baseline data profile in randomized controlled trials: Safe 
Implementation of Thrombolysis in Stroke-MOnitoring STudy 
(SITS-MOST). Stroke 2008; 39: 3316–22.
5  Bluhmki E, Chamorro A, Davalos A, et al. Stroke treatment with 
alteplase given 3.0-4.5 h after onset of acute ischaemic stroke 
(ECASS III): additional outcomes and subgroup analysis of a 
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Neurol 2009; 8: 1095–102.
6  Cucchiara B, Kasner SE, Tanne D, et al. Factors associated with 
intracerebral hemorrhage after thrombolytic therapy for ischemic 
stroke: pooled analysis of placebo data from the Stroke-Acute 
Ischemic NXY Treatment (SAINT) I and SAINT II Trials. 
Stroke 2009; 40: 3067–72.
7  Diedler J, Ahmed N, Sykora M, et al. Safety of intravenous 
thrombolysis for acute ischemic stroke in patients receiving 
antiplatelet therapy at stroke onset. Stroke 2010; 41: 288–94.
8  Clark WM, Madden KP, Lyden PD, Zivin JA. Cerebral hemorrhagic 
risk of aspirin or heparin therapy with thrombolytic treatment in 
rabbits. Stroke 1991; 22: 872–76.
9  Overgaard K, Sereghy T, Pedersen H, Boysen G. Dose-response of 
rt-PA and its combination with aspirin in a rat embolic stroke 
model. Neuroreport 1992; 3: 925–28.
10  Thomas GR, Thibodeaux H, Errett CJ, Bednar MM, Gross CE, 
Bennett WF. Intravenous aspirin causes a paradoxical attenuation 
of cerebrovascular thrombolysis. Stroke 1995; 26: 1039–46.
11  Bednar MM, Quilley J, Russell SR, et al. The effect of oral 
antiplatelet agents on tissue plasminogen activator-mediated 
thrombolysis in a rabbit model of thromboembolic stroke. 
Neurosurgery 1996; 39: 352–59.
12  Kasahara Y, Nakagomi T, Matsuyama T, Stern D, Taguchi A. 
Cilostazol reduces the risk of hemorrhagic infarction after 
administration of tissue-type plasminogen activator in a murine 
stroke model. Stroke 2012; 43: 499–506. 
13 Whiteley WN, Slot KB, Fernandes P, Sandercock P, Wardlaw J. Risk 
factors for intracranial hemorrhage in acute ischemic stroke patients 
treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of 55 studies. Stroke 2012; 43: 2904–09.
14  Uyttenboogaart M, Koch MW, Koopman K, Vroomen PC, De Keyser J, 
Luijckx GJ. Safety of antiplatelet therapy prior to intravenous 
thrombolysis in acute ischemic stroke. Arch Neurol 2008; 65: 607–11.
15  Dorado L, Millan M, de la Ossa NP, et al. Influence of antiplatelet 
pre-treatment on the risk of intracranial haemorrhage in acute 
ischaemic stroke after intravenous thrombolysis. Eur J Neurol 2010; 
17: 301–06.
16  Grotta JC, Welch KM, Fagan SC, et al. Clinical deterioration 
following improvement in the NINDS rt-PA Stroke Trial. Stroke. 
2001; 32: 661–68.
17  Schmulling SRJ, Strotmann-Tack T, Grond M, et al. Acetylsalicylic 
acid pretreatment, concomitant heparin therapy and the risk of 
early intracranial hemorrhage following systemic thrombolysis for 
acute ischemic stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis 2003; 16: 183–90. 
18  Ibrahim MM, Sebastian J, Hussain M, et al. Does current oral 
antiplatelet agent or subtherapeutic anticoagulation use have an eff ect 
on tissue-plasminogen-activator-mediated recanalization rate in 
patients with acute ischemic stroke? Cerebrovasc Dis 2010; 30: 508–13. 
19  IST-3 Collaborative Group, Sandercock P, Wardlaw JM, Lindley RI, 
et al. The benefits and harms of intravenous thrombolysis with 
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator within 6 h of acute 
ischaemic stroke (the third international stroke trial [IST-3]): 
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012; 379: 2352–63. 
20  Dowlatshahi D, Hakim A, Fang J, Sharma M, Investigators of the 
Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network. Pre admission 
antithrombotics are associated with improved outcomes following 
ischaemic stroke: a cohort from the Registry of the Canadian Stroke 
Network. Int J Stroke 2009; 4: 328–34.
21  Frank B, Grotta JC, Alexandrov AV, et al. Thrombolysis in stroke 
despite contraindications or warnings? Stroke 2013; 44: 727–33. 
22  Adams HP Jr, del Zoppo G, Alberts MJ, et al. Guidelines for the 
early management of adults with ischemic stroke: a guideline from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association 
Stroke Council, Clinical Cardiology Council, Cardiovascular 
Radiology and Intervention Council, and the Atherosclerotic 
Peripheral Vascular Disease and Quality of Care Outcomes in 
Research Interdisciplinary Working Groups: The American 
Academy of Neurology affirms the value of this guideline as an 
educational tool for neurologists. Circulation 2007; 115: e478–534.
23  Rha JH, Saver JL. The impact of recanalization on ischemic stroke 
outcome: a meta-analysis. Stroke 2007; 38: 967–73.
( 8.0.0.2542.1170491040 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013 687
Review
24  Zinkstok SM, Roos YB, on behalf of the Artis Investigators. Early 
administration of aspirin in patients treated with alteplase for acute 
ischaemic stroke: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012; 
380: 731–37.
25  Sanak D, Kuliha M, Herzig R, et al. Prior use of antiplatelet 
therapy can be associated with a higher chance for early 
recanalization of the occluded middle cerebral artery in acute 
stroke patients treated with intravenous thrombolysis. Eur Neurol
2012; 67: 52–56.
26  Pancioli AM, Broderick J, Brott T, et al. The combined approach to 
lysis utilizing eptifibatide and rt-PA in acute ischemic stroke: the 
CLEAR stroke trial. Stroke 2008; 39: 268–76.
27  Pfeilschifter W, Spitzer D, Czech-Zechmeister B, Steinmetz H, 
Foerch C. Increased risk of hemorrhagic transformation in 
ischemic stroke occurring during warfarin anticoagulation: 
an experimental study in mice. Stroke 2011; 42: 1116–21.
28  Pfeilschifter W, Spitzer D, Pfeilschifter J, Steinmetz H, Foerch C. 
Warfarin anticoagulation exacerbates the risk of hemorrhagic 
transformation after rt-PA treatment in experimental stroke: 
therapeutic potential of PCC. PLoS One 2011; 6: e26087.
29  Sun L, Zhou W, Ploen R, Heiland S, Zorn M, Veltkamp R. Rapid 
reversal of anticoagulation prevents excessive secondary hemorrhage 
after thrombolysis in a thromboembolic model in rats. Stroke 2011; 
42: 3524–29.
30  Prabhakaran S, Rivolta J, Vieira JR, et al. Symptomatic intracerebral 
hemorrhage among eligible warfarin-treated patients receiving 
intravenous tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke. 
Arch Neurol 2010; 67: 559–63.
31  Seet RC, Zhang Y, Moore SA, Wijdicks EF, Rabinstein AA. 
Subtherapeutic international normalized ratio in warfarin-treated 
patients increases the risk for symptomatic intracerebral hemorrhage 
after intravenous thrombolysis. Stroke 2011; 42: 2333–35.
32  Kim YD, Lee JH, Jung YH, et al. Effect of warfarin withdrawal on 
thrombolytic treatment in patients with ischaemic stroke. 
Eur J Neurol 2011; 18: 1165–70.
33  Ruecker M, Matosevic B, Willeit P, et al. Subtherapeutic warfarin 
therapy entails an increased bleeding risk after stroke thrombolysis. 
Neurology 2012; 79: 31–38.
34  Levin D, Smith DB, Cumbler E, Carter J, Glasheen JJ, Jones W. 
Warfarin therapy does not increase risk of symptomatic 
intracerebral hemorrhage in eligible patients after intravenous 
thrombolysis. Arch Neurol 2011; 68: 135.
35  Vergouwen MD, Casaubon LK, Swartz RH, et al. Subtherapeutic 
warfarin is not associated with increased hemorrhage rates in 
ischemic strokes treated with tissue plasminogen activator. Stroke
2011; 42: 1041–45.
36  Meretoja A, Putaala J, Tatlisumak T, et al. Off-label thrombolysis is 
not associated with poor outcome in patients with stroke. Stroke
2010; 41: 1450–58.
37  Brunner F, Tomandl B, Schroter A, et al. Hemorrhagic 
complications after systemic thrombolysis in acute stroke 
patients with abnormal baseline coagulation. Eur J Neurol 2011; 
18: 1407–11.
38  Xian Y, Liang L, Smith EE, et al. Risks of intracranial hemorrhage 
among patients with acute ischemic stroke receiving warfarin and 
treated with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator. JAMA 2012; 
307: 2600–08.
39  Miedema I, Luijckx GJ, De Keyser J, Koch M, Uyttenboogaart M. 
Thrombolytic therapy for ischaemic stroke in patients using 
warfarin: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2012; 83: 537–40.
40  European Stroke Organisation (ESO) Executive Committee and 
ESO Writing Committee. Guidelines for management of ischaemic 
stroke and transient ischaemic attack 2008. Cerebrovasc Dis 2008; 
25: 457–507.
41  Connolly SJ, Ezekowitz MD, Yusuf S, et al. Dabigatran versus 
warfarin in patients with atrial fi brillation. N Engl J Med 2009; 
361: 1139–51.
42  Granger CB, Alexander JH, McMurray JJ, et al. Apixaban versus 
warfarin in patients with atrial fi brillation. N Engl J Med 2011; 
365: 981–92.
43  Patel MR, Mahaffey KW, Garg J, et al. Rivaroxaban versus 
warfarin in nonvalvular atrial fi brillation. N Engl J Med 2011; 
365: 883–91.
44  Pfeilschifter W, Bohmann F, Baumgarten P, et al. Thrombolysis 
with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator under dabigatran 
anticoagulation in experimental stroke. Ann Neurol 2012; 71: 624–33.
45  Zhou W, Schwarting S, Illanes S, et al. Hemostatic therapy in 
experimental intracerebral hemorrhage associated with the direct 
thrombin inhibitor dabigatran. Stroke 2011; 42: 3594–99.
46  Bohmann F, Mirceska A, Pfeilschifter J, et al. No infl uence of 
dabigatran anticoagulation on hemorrhagic transformation in 
an experimental model of ischemic stroke. PLoS One 2012; 7: e40804.
47  Gliem M, Hermsen D, van Rooijen N, Hartung HP, Jander S. 
Secondary intracerebral hemorrhage due to Eearly Initiation of Oral 
Anticoagulation After Ischemic Stroke: An Experimental Study in 
Mice. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation. 2012.
48  Landis SC, Amara SG, Asadullah K, et al. A call for transparent 
reporting to optimize the predictive value of preclinical research. 
Nature 2012; 490: 187–91.
49  Walter S, Kostopoulos P, Haass A, et al. Point-of-care laboratory 
halves door-to-therapy-decision time in acute stroke. Ann Neurol
2011; 69: 581–86.
50  Rizos T, Herweh C, Jenetzky E, et al. Point-of-care international 
normalized ratio testing accelerates thrombolysis in patients with 
acute ischemic stroke using oral anticoagulants. Stroke 2009; 
40: 3547–51.
51  Meretoja A, Strbian D, Mustanoja S, Tatlisumak T, Lindsberg PJ, 
Kaste M. Reducing in-hospital delay to 20 minutes in stroke 
thrombolysis. Neurology 2012; 79: 306–13.
52  Casado Naranjo I, Portilla-Cuenca JC, Jimenez Caballero PE, 
Calle Escobar ML, Romero Sevilla RM. Fatal intracerebral 
hemorrhage associated with administration of recombinant tissue 
plasminogen activator in a stroke patient on treatment with 
dabigatran. Cerebrovasc Dis 2011; 32: 614–15.
53  De Smedt A, De Raedt S, Nieboer K, De Keyser J, Brouns R. 
Intravenous thrombolysis with recombinant tissue plasminogen 
activator in a stroke patient treated with dabigatran. Cerebrovasc Dis 
2010; 30: 533–34.
54  Lee VH, Conners JJ, Prabhakaran S. Intravenous thrombolysis in a 
stroke patient taking dabigatran. J Stroke Cerebro Dis 2012; 
21: 916.e11–916.e12.
55  Marrone LC, Marrone AC. Thrombolysis in an ischemic stroke 
patient on dabigatran anticoagulation: a case report. Cerebrovasc Dis
2012; 34: 246–47.
56  Matute MC, Guillan M, Garcia-Caldentey J, et al. Thrombolysis 
treatment for acute ischaemic stroke in a patient on treatment with 
dabigatran. Thromb Haemos 2011; 106: 178–79.
57  Sangha N, El Khoury R, Misra V, Lopez G. Acute ischemic stroke 
treated with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator in a patient 
taking dabigatran with radiographic evidence of 
recanalization. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 2012; 8: 917.e5–e8.
58 Dempfl e CE, Hennerici MG. Dabigatran and stroke thrombolysis. 
Cerebrovasc Dis 2010; 30: 203–05. 
59 Dempfl e CE, Hennerici MG. Fibrinolytic treatment of acute 
ischemic stroke for patients on new oral anticoagulant drugs. 
Cerebrovasc Dis 2011; 32: 616–19.
60  van Ryn J, Stangier J, Haertter S, et al. Dabigatran etexilate—a 
novel, reversible, oral direct thrombin inhibitor: Interpretation of 
coagulation assays and reversal of anticoagulant activity. 
Thromb Haemost 2010; 103: 1116–27.
61  van Ryn J, Baruch L, Clemens A. Interpretation of point-of-care INR 
results in patients treated with dabigatran. Am J Med 2012; 125: 417–20. 
62  Samama MM, Guinet C. Laboratory assessment of new 
anticoagulants. Clin Chem Lab Med 2011; 49: 761–72. 
63  Frost C, Wang J, Nepal S, et al. Apixaban, an oral, direct factor Xa 
inhibitor: single dose safety, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics 
and food effect in healthy subjects. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2013; 
75: 476–87. 
64  Mani H, Hesse C, Stratmann G, Lindhoff-Last E. Rivaroxaban 
diff erentially infl uences ex vivo global coagulation assays based on 
the administration time. Thromb Haemost 2011; 106: 156–64. 
65 Douxfi ls J, Mullier F, Robert S, Chatelain C, Chatelain B, 
Dogne JM. Impact of dabigatran on a large panel of routine or 
specific coagulation assays. Laboratory recommendations for 
monitoring of dabigatran etexilate. Thrombosis and haemostasis 2012; 
107: 985–97. 
( 8.0.0.2542.1238275186 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
688 www.thelancet.com/neurology Vol 12   July 2013
Review
66  Harenberg J, Kraemer R. Measurement of the new anticoagulants. 
Thromb Research 2012; 129 (suppl 1): S106–13.
67  Lindahl TL, Baghaei F, Blixter IF, et al. Effects of the oral, direct 
thrombin inhibitor dabigatran on five common coagulation assays. 
Thromb Haemost 2011; 105: 371–78. 
68  Miyares MA, Davis K. Newer oral anticoagulants: a review of 
laboratory monitoring options and reversal agents in the 
hemorrhagic patient. American journal of health-system pharmacy: 
AJHP 2012; 69: 1473–84. 
69  Bushnell CD, Olson DM, Zhao X, et al. Secondary preventive 
medication persistence and adherence 1 year after stroke. 
Neurology 2012; 77: 1182–90.
70  Harenberg J, Erdle S, Marx S, Kramer R. Determination of 
rivaroxaban in human plasma samples. Semin Thromb Hemost 2012; 
38: 178–84. 
71 Lindhoff -Last E, Samama MM, Ortel TL, Weitz JI, Spiro TE. Assays 
for measuring rivaroxaban: their suitability and limitations. 
Ther Drug Monit 2010; 32: 673–79. 
72  Riedel CH, Zimmermann P, Jensen-Kondering U, Stingele R, 
Deuschl G, Jansen O. The importance of size: successful 
recanalization by intravenous thrombolysis in acute anterior stroke 
depends on thrombus length. Stroke 2011; 42: 1775–77.
73  Broderick JP, Palesch YY, Demchuk AM, et al. Endovascular therapy 
after intravenous t-PA versus t-PA alone for stroke. N Engl J Med
2013; 368: 893–903. 
74  Ciccone A, Valvassori L, Nichelatti M, et al. Endovascular treatment 
for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 904–13. 
75  Kidwell CS, Jahan R, Gornbein J, et al. A trial of imaging selection 
and endovascular treatment for ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 2013; 
368: 914–23.
76  Furlan A, Higashida R, Wechsler L, et al. Intra-arterial prourokinase 
for acute ischemic stroke. The PROACT II study: a randomized 
controlled trial. Prolyse in Acute Cerebral Thromboembolism. 
JAMA 1999; 282: 2003–11.
77  Ogawa A, Mori E, Minematsu K, et al, for the MELT Japan Study 
Group. Randomized trial of intraarterial infusion of urokinase 
within 6 hours of middle cerebral artery stroke: the middle cerebral 
artery embolism local fibrinolytic intervention trial (MELT) Japan. 
Stroke 2007; 38: 2633–39. 
78  Brekenfeld C, Remonda L, Nedeltchev K, et al. Symptomatic 
intracranial haemorrhage after intraarterial thrombolysis in acute 
ischaemic stroke: assessment of 294 patients treated with 
urokinase. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2007; 78: 280–85.
79  Smith WS, Sung G, Saver J, et al, for the Multi MERCI 
investigators. Mechanical thrombectomy for acute ischemic stroke 
Final Results of the Multi MERCI Trial. Stroke 2008; 39: 1205–12. 
80   Nogueira RG, Smith WS; MERCI and Multi MERCI Writing 
Committee. Safety and efficacy of endovascular thrombectomy in 
patients with abnormal hemostasis: pooled analysis of the MERCI 
and multi MERCI trials. Stroke 2009; 40: 516–22. 
81  De Marchis GM, Jung S, Colucci G, et al. Intracranial hemorrhage, 
outcome, and mortality after intra-arterial therapy for acute ischemic 
stroke in patients under oral anticoagulants. Stroke 2011; 42: 3061–66.
82  Jung S, Mono ML, Fischer U, et al. Three-month and long-term 
outcomes and their predictors in acute basilar artery occlusion 
treated with intra-arterial thrombolysis. Stroke 2011; 42: 1946–951.
83 Galimanis A, Jung S, Mono ML, et al. Endovascular therapy of 623 
patients with anterior circulation stroke. Stroke 2012; 43: 1052–57.
84  Mordasini P, Frabetti N, Gralla J, et al. In vivo evaluation of the fi rst 
dedicated combined flow-restoration and mechanical 
thrombectomy device in a swine model of acute vessel occlusion. 
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011; 32: 294–300.
85  Castano C, Serena J, Davalos A. Use of the new Solitaire AB device 
for mechanical thrombectomy when Merci Clot Retriever has failed 
to remove the clot. Interv Neuroradiol 2009; 15: 209–14. 
86  Brekenfeld C, Schroth G, Mordasini P, et al. Impact of retrievable 
stents on acute ischemic stroke treatment. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2011; 32: 1269–73.
87  Saver JL, Jahan R, Levy EI, et al; SWIFT Trialists. Solitaire fl ow 
restoration device versus the Merci Retriever in patients with acute 
ischaemic stroke (SWIFT): a randomised, parallel-group, 
non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2012; 6: 1241–49.
88  Nogueira RG, Lutsep HL, Gupta R, et al; TREVO 2 Trialists. Trevo 
versus Merci retrievers for thrombectomy revascularisation of large 
vessel occlusions in acute ischaemic stroke (TREVO 2): 
a randomised trial. Lancet 2012; 6: 1231–40.
( 8.0.0.2542.1051003432 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
