Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Ethnopharmacology
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jep

Research Paper

Preconditioning with the traditional Chinese medicine
Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Tang initiates HIF-1α-dependent
neuroprotection against cerebral ischemia in rats
Qichun Zhang a,b,c, Huimin Bian c, Yu Li c, Liwei Guo a,b, Yuping Tang a, Huaxu Zhu a,b,n
a
Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine,
Nanjing 210023, PR China
b
Jiangsu Botanical Medicine Reﬁne Engineering Research Center, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, 210023, PR China
c
Department of Clinic Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210023, PR China

art ic l e i nf o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 13 January 2014
Received in revised form
7 April 2014
Accepted 11 April 2014
Available online 19 April 2014

Ethnopharmacological relevance: Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Tang (HLJDT) is a classical heat-clearing and detoxicating formula of traditional Chinese medicine that is widely used to treat stroke. The present study was
designed to investigate the effects of HLJDT preconditioning on neurons under oxygen and glucose
deprivation (OGD) and rats subjected to middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO).
Materials and methods: A stroke model of rats was obtained through MCAO. Following HLJDT preconditioning, the cerebral infarction volume, cerebral water content, and neurological deﬁcient score
were determined. Cerebral cortical neurons cultured in vitro were preconditioned with HLJDT and then
subjected to OGD treatment. The release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) from neurons was detected. The
levels of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) and PI3K/Akt signaling were analyzed by western blotting,
and the levels of erythropoietin (EPO) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the supernatant
of the neurons and the plasma of MCAO rats were measured through a radioimmunological assay. The
apoptosis and proliferation of neurons were analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
Results: HLJDT preconditioning signiﬁcantly reduced the cerebral infarction volume and cerebral water
content and ameliorated the neurological deﬁcient score of MCAO rats. In addition, HLJDT preconditioning protected neurons against OGD. Increased HIF-1α, EPO, and VEGF levels and the activation of PI3K/
Akt signaling were observed as a result of HLJDT preconditioning. Furthermore, HLJDT preconditioning
was found to inhibit ischemia-induced neuron apoptosis and to promote neuron proliferation under
conditions of ischemia/reperfusion.
Conclusion: Both rats and neurons subjected to HLJDT preconditioning were able to resist ischemia/
reperfusion or hypoxia injury through the inhibition of apoptosis and the enhancement of proliferation,
and these effects were primarily dependent on the activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway
and HIF-1α.
& 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Tang
Preconditioning
Stroke
PI3K/Akt
HIF-1α

Abbreviations: BrdU, 5-bromo-20-deoxyuridine; CCA, common carotid artery;
CMC-Na, carboxymethyl cellulose sodium; ECA, external carotid artery; EPO,
erythropoietin; ERK1/2, extracelluar signal-regulated kinase1/2; GABA-A, gammaaminobutyric acid A; HIF-1α, hypoxia-inducible factor-1α; HLJDT, Huang-Lian-JieDu-Tang; ICA, internal carotid artery; IL-1, interleukin-1; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; NMDA,
N-methyl-D-aspartate; OGD, oxygen and glucose deprivation; PPAR, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; TTC, 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; TUNEL, terminal transferase-mediated dUTP nick
end-labeling
n
Corresponding author at: Jiangsu Collaborative Innovation Center of
Chinese Medicinal Resources Industrialization, Nanjing University of Chinese
Medicine, 138 Xianlin Rd., Nanjing 210023, PR China. Tel.: þ 86 2585811070;
fax: þ 86 2585811067.
E-mail address: Huaxu72@126.com (H. Zhu).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jep.2014.04.022
0378-8741/& 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Ischemic tolerance established by a preconditioning stimulus
serves as an endogenous defense mechanism to protect cerebral
neurons against a subsequently prolonged ischemia/reperfusion
neurovascular injury in a rapid or delayed manner. Surprisingly,
a wide variety of molecular mediators involved in cell survival
pathways have been validated in considerable preclinical or
clinical investigations of preconditioning and ischemic tolerance
(Dirnagl et al., 2003; Cadet and Krasnova, 2009). Hypoxia-inducible
factor-1 (HIF-1), a hypoxia-induced transcription factor activated in
the adaptation to hypoxia and ischemia, mediates ischemic tolerance through the transactivation of vasculogenesis genes and the

444

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

upregulation of glucose uptake and glycolysis, which results in
improved energy metabolism during an ischemic event (Jones and
Bergeron, 2001; Bernaudin et al., 2002). HIF-1α participates in
isoﬂurane preconditioning processes by activating extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) in an ischemic heart (Wang
et al., 2006). In addition, the activation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor signaling pathway has also been observed in some
ischemic preconditioning models, and antagonists of the NMDA
receptor block the procedure of ischemic tolerance induced by
repeated hypoxic attacks in gerbil brains (Kato et al., 1992;
Hossmann, 2006). Other related investigations on transmitters have
further indicated that preconditioning downregulates glutamate
receptor mRNA in the mouse brain and increases the binding of
[3H]muscimol to gamma-aminobutyric acid A (GABA-A) receptors
in CA1 neurons. Furthermore, ischemic tolerance initiated by
inﬂammatory cytokines, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), suppresses
inﬂammatory responses that commonly exacerbate ischemic brain
injury (Ohtsuki et al., 1996; Wong and Goeddel, 1988; Bordet et al.,
2000). Interestingly, TNF-α induces manganese superoxide dismutase to accomplish cytoprotective preconditioning, which suggests
the close relationship between free radical and ischemic tolerance.
It is well known that the generation of oxygen- and nitrogen-based
free radicals results in more brain injury under the context of
ischemia. The inhibition of the production of free radicals causes a
protective effect on the brain with preconditioning by increasing
superoxide dismutase and heme oxygenase-1 and decreasing nitric
oxide synthases. The later activation is dependent on glutamate
signaling activation during cerebral ischemic injury (Toyoda et al.,
1997; Kapinya et al., 2002; Schipper, 2004). These lines of evidence
depict a complicated survival molecular network that is implicated
in ischemic preconditioning. Any mediator in the above-described
network that is amenable to regulation by a perfect preconditioning
stimulus may be a suitable target for therapeutics, which prompts
endeavors into the development of pharmacological preconditioning. For anticipated cerebral ischemia, deferoxamine, an iron
chelator used in the treatment of assorted chronic anaemias and
iron poisoning, acts as a preconditioning stimuli by stabilizing HIF-1
isoforms HIF-1α and/or HIF-2α (Jones et al., 2008). Other drugs,
such as erythropoietin (EPO), antibiotics, opioids, statins, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) agonists, estrogen, and
certain immunosuppressants, have shown preconditioning efﬁcacy
in ischemic cerebral injury (Gidday, 2010). Compared to the
regulation of a single node of the ischemic tolerance network,
the modulation of multiple nodes may provide more available and
beneﬁcial preconditioning stimuli. It is well known that multipletarget actions are the inherent characteristics of some formulas,
such as traditional Chinese medicine, due to the diversity of their
chemical components.
Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Tang (HLJDT), which is also called Orengedoku-to (OGT), is a classical heat-clearing and detoxicating
formula of traditional Chinese medicine that is comprised of
four common herbs: Coptidis Rhizoma (Coptis chinensis Franch.,
rhizome), Radix Scutellariae (Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi., radix),
Phellodendri Chinensis Cortex (Phellodendron chinense Schneid.,
cortex), and Gardeniae Fructus (Gardenia jasminoides Ellis., fructus).

This formula is widely used for the treatment of stroke (Kondo et al.,
2000; Xu et al., 2000). Several investigations have attempted to
clarify the primary effective components of HLJDT and to explore
the underlining mechanism involved in its treatment of cerebral
ischemia. Several pathways through which HLJDT protects neurons
against cerebral ischemia, including anti-inﬂammation, antioxidation, regulation of energy metabolism, and antiapoptosis, were
revealed. HLJDT signiﬁcantly reversed the amyloid peptide Aβinduced enhancement of inﬂammatory cytokines in rats (Hwang
et al., 2002). Furthermore, HLJDT was documented to enhance Cu/
Zn-SOD expression and reduce myeloperoxidase activity in ischemic
brain tissue (Kondo et al., 2000; Hwang et al., 2002). With respect to
energy metabolism, HLJDT increased cerebral blood ﬂow in the
margins of ischemic areas. In addition, the HLJDT-induced release of
acetylcholine in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and striatum of
mice reversed the impairment of learning and memory (Zhang et al.,
2009). The previous work performed in our laboratory demonstrated that HLJDT exerts an antiapoptosis effect in both in vitro
neurons and an in vivo rat model of hypoxia (Qichun Zhang et al.,
2011). This cerebral protection induced by HLJDT against ischemia by
activating endogenous neuron survival networks prompted the
following investigations to determine whether HLJDT preconditioning exerts widespread effects on protective pathways against cerebral ischemia. Another attractive ﬁnding is that the approach of
preconditioning is markedly consistent with the “preventive treatment of disease”, a theory of traditional Chinese medicine that
advocates superior treatment under health or sub-health conditions.
The present work was designed to elucidate whether the systematic
administration of HLJDT preconditioning can reduce cell death
and improve neuron functional recovery due to cerebral ischemia
induced by middle cerebral artery occlusion.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Herbal Materials
The herbal materials, namely Coptidis Rhizoma (Coptis chinensis
Franch., rhizome), Scutellariae Radix (Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi.,
radix), Phellodendri Chinensis Cortex (Phellodendron chinense
Schneid., cortex), and Gardeniae Fructus (Gardenia jasminoides Ellis.,
fructus), used for the preparation of HLJDT were obtained from
Bozhou Medicine Company (Anhui, China) and kindly authenticated
by Dr. Qi-nan Wu (Professor of Pharmacognosy, Nanjing University
of Chinese Medicine). The composition of HLJDT and the voucher
specimen number are listed in Table 1. The voucher specimen was
deposited in the Museum of Materia Medica at Nanjing University
of Chinese Medicine.

2.2. Preparation of HLJDT extract
The mixture (100 g) of Rhizoma Coptidis, Radix Scutellariae,
Cortex Phellodendri, and Fructus Gardeniae was mixed at the ratio
of 3:2:2:3 and decocted twice by reﬂuxing with water (1:10 and
then 1:8, w/v) for 1 h. The resulting solution was spray-dried, and

Table 1
Recipe of HLJDT formulation, voucher specimen number.
Components

Botanical plant name

Family

Part used

Ratio used

Coptidis Rhizoma
Scutellariae Radix
Phellodendri Chinensis Cortex
Gardeniae Fructus

Coptis chinensis Franch.
Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi.
Phellodendron chinense Schneid.
Gardenia jasminoides Ellis.

Ranunculaceae
Labiatae
Rutaceae
Rubiaceae

Rhizome
Radix
Cortex
Fructus

3
2
2
3

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

25.20 g of the product was collected. The content of baicalin in the
extraction was 4.02%, as was quantitatively determined by HPLC
following ultrasound in methanol for 30 min and ﬁltration. The
HLJDT extract was suspended in 0.5% carboxymethyl cellulose
sodium (CMC-Na) aqueous solution for the rat studies and dissolved in 1% DMSO for the in vitro neuron assay.
2.3. Chemicals and reagents
The cell culture media, PBS, and FBS were purchased from Gibco
(Tulsa, OK, USA). All of the cell culture plasticware (COSTARs) was
purchased from Corning (New York, USA). DMSO, chloral hydrate,
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride, trypsin, deoxyribonuclease I,
NaHCO3, glucose, L-glutamine, insulin, p-aminobenzoic acid, streptomycin, penicillin, poly-L-lysine, β-D-arabinofuranoside, LY294002,
GSK690693, triptolide, rapamycin, L-glutamine, amphotericin B,
HEPES, Tween 20, and protease inhibitor cocktail were obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). The LDH kit was purchased
from Jiancheng (Nanjing, PRC). The HIF-1α, p-PI3K, PI3K, p-Akt, Akt,
and Brdu antibodies and the secondary antibody were obtained
from Cell Signaling Technology Inc. (Danvers, MA, USA). The
enhanced chemiluminescent detection system was purchased from
Applygen (Beijing, PRC). The EPO and VEGF RIA kits were obtained
from Sino-UK (Beijing, PRC). RIPA buffer was purchased from
Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA), and propidium iodide was obtained
from Molecular Probes (Eugene, OR, USA).
2.4. Animals and MCAO models
Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were obtained from Shanghai
Laboratory Animal Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai,
PRC) and maintained at 20–21 1C and 5575% relative humidity
with a 12-h light/12-h dark schedule. Standard rodent chow diets
were provided ad libitum throughout the experimental period.
Transit focal cerebral ischemia models were produced through
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) using the intraluminal
suture method as described previously (Leonardo et al., 2010). Brieﬂy,
the left common carotid artery (CCA) of a rat anesthetized with
chloral hydrate (350 mg/kg) was exposed through a ventral midline
neck incision. All of the other branches are isolated and coagulated
with the terminal lingual maxillary artery branches. The internal
carotid artery (ICA) was then isolated, and its extracranial branch, i.e.,
the pterygopalatine artery, was ligated close to its origin. A 3-0 nylon
monoﬁlament suture with a slightly enlarged and rounded tip was
inserted into the transected lumen of the external carotid artery
(ECA) and gently advanced from the ICA across to the opening of the
MCA. The distance from the tip of the suture to the bifurcation of CCA
was 18–20 mm. After 2 h of MCAO, the suture was withdrawn into
the ECA to restore the ICA-MCA blood ﬂow, and reperfusion was
allowed for 6, 24, and 72 h. HLJDT was intragastrically administered
to rats as a single dose (2.7 g of crude drug/kg, which corresponds to
0.68 g of extract/kg) 24 h before the ischemia/reperfusion insult. Rats
that underwent a similar operation with a 10-mm monoﬁlament
suture into the ICA formed part of the sham group. MCAO rats
treated with CMC-Na (0.5%) formed the model group.
2.5. Cerebral cortical neurons
The procedures used for the preparation and maintenance of
dissociated neuronal cell cultures from embryonic-day-18 rat (Sprague
Dawley) embryos have been described previously (Mattson et al.,
1995). In brief, the abdomen of a pregnant rat was cleaned with 75%
ethanol, and the uterus was then removed and placed in a Petri dish.
The embryos were subsequently collected and transferred to a Petri
dish containing cold PBS (135 mM NaCl, 7.5 mM Na2 HPO4  2H2O, and
1.5 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4). Both cerebral cortices were dissected and

445

collected under a stereoscopic microscope and then chopped thoroughly into small pieces using a sterile razor blade. The minced tissue
was dispersed in Krebs buffer (120.9 mM NaCl, 4.83 mM KCl, 1.22 mM
KH2PO4, 25.5 mM NaHCO3, 12 mM glucose, 3 g/L bovine seroalbumin,
and 0.015 g/L phenol red) and centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min. The
remainder was collected and incubated in Krebs buffer containing
trypsin (2 g/L), deoxyribonuclease I (0.05 g/L), and MgSO4 (1.2 mM) for
15 min at 37 1C with gentle shaking every 5 min. Thereafter, the
disaggregation was blocked by FBS. The softened tissue was dispersed,
and the supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min.
The pellet was then redispersed in complete Dulbecco's Modiﬁed
Eagle medium, pH 7.0 (DMEM, Gibco, Tulsa, OK), supplemented with
26.2 mM NaHCO3, 25 mM glucose, 0.2 mM L-glutamine, 100 mU/L
insulin, 7 mM p-aminobenzoic acid, 10% FBS (Gibco, Tulsa, OK),
100 mg/ml streptomycin, and 100 U/ml penicillin. The cell suspension
was seeded in a poly-L-lysine-coated 24-well culture plate or a 100mm culture dish at a density of 3  105 cells /cm2 and incubated in an
atmosphere of 95% air/5% CO2 at 37 1C. To avoid the proliferation of
non-neuronal cells, cytosine β-D-arabinofuranoside (2 μM) was added
to the culture medium two days after seeding. Neuronal cells cultured
for eight days were identiﬁed by immunostaining with a neuroﬁlament antibody and a Cy3-labeled secondary antibody and were then
used in the following investigations. During the process of preconditioning and oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD), the neuronal cells
were starved in FBS-free culture medium.
HLJDT preconditioning was performed 24 h before OGD treatment for 2 h at concentrations of 1, 10, 100, 300, and 1000 μg/mL.
To determine the roles of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and
NF-κB in the process of HLJDT preconditioning, other groups were
treated with LY294002 (20 μmol/L), GSK690693 (10 μmol/L), triptolide (100 nmol/L), or rapamycin (100 nmol/L) for 30 min before
preconditioning. Neurons treated only with 1% DMSO were used
as blanks.
2.6. OGD treatment
Twenty-four hours after preconditioning, cell injury was induced
by OGD to mimic cerebral ischemia (Goldberg and Choi, 1993). The
cerebral cortical neurons were rinsed and incubated with glucoseand serum-free medium [essential medium (MEM) supplemented
with 25% HBSS, 1 mM L-glutamine, 3.75 μg/mL amphotericin B, and
30 mM HEPES] saturated with 95% N2/5% CO2 in an airtight chamber
ﬂushed with 95% N2/5% CO2. The duration of OGD exposure was
2 h. The control neurons were treated with glucose-containing and
normoxic serum-free medium for the same period of time. At the
end of the insult, the medium was replaced with glucose-containing
and normoxic serum-free medium, and the cells were placed in an
incubator at 37 1C and 100% humidity in 95% air/5% CO2 for recovery.
The neuronal injury was evaluated 24 h later.
2.7. TTC staining
2,3,5-Triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) staining is a rapid
and convenient method to detect and quantify cerebral infraction
in rats 24 h after the onset of ischemia (Bederson et al., 1986). The
brain from a sacriﬁced rat was removed, immersed in ice-cold PBS,
and cut medially into six sections. These sections were incubated
in TTC solution (2%). After turning a light-red color, the brain slices
were rinsed with PBS to stop the reaction.
2.8. Biochemical analysis
The EPO and VEGF levels in the supernatant of neurons in vitro and
in the serum of MCAO rats with or without HLJDT preconditioning
were analyzed through a radioimmunological assay according to the
manufacturer's instructions.

446

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

2.9. TUNEL analysis

3. Results

Terminal transferase-mediated dUTP nick end-labeling (TUNEL)
staining was performed using an in situ cell death detection kit
(Promega, San Leandro, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's
instructions to indicate the degree of cell apoptosis. Brieﬂy, the
prepared parafﬁn-embedded tissue sections (5-μm) were incubated with proteinase K, incubated in equilibration buffer for
5 min, and incubated at 37 1C with biotinylated dUTP and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase for 1 h. The color was developed
using DAB, and the stained area was quantiﬁed using the Image
J software.

3.1. HLJDT preconditioning reduces hypoxia/ischemia-induced
brain injury

2.10. Lactate dehydrogenase assay
Cell death was represented by the amount of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released into the culture medium. The activity of
LDH in medium harvested 24 h after OGD treatment was analyzed
using a standardized colorimetric enzyme kit (Jiancheng, Nanjing,
PRC) and normalized by the protein content of the cerebral
cortical neurons. The protective efﬁcacy of HLJDT preconditioning
on neurons was expressed as a percentage of the maximal LDH
activity without intervention.

2.11. Western blotting analysis
To prepare the total protein sample, the indicated primary
cerebral cortical neurons were lysed in RIPA buffer (500 mmol/L
Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mmol/L EDTA, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% NP-40,
0.25% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride,
and protease inhibitor cocktail). The lysates were then centrifuged
(12,000 rpm) for 10 min at 4 1C, and the protein concentration was
determined using the Lowry protein assay reagent. After boiling
for 5 min in SDS sample buffer, the proteins were separated by
10% sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel and transferred
to luminescence membranes (Millipore). The membranes were
blocked with 5% skim dry milk in TBS and Tween 20 (10 mmol/L
Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mmol/L NaCl, and 0.1% Tween 20) and then
incubated at 4 1C with the corresponding primary antibody
(HIF-1α, p-PI3K, PI3K, p-Akt, and Akt) overnight. The blots were
then incubated with the appropriate second antibodies for 1 h at
room temperature and developed using an enhanced chemiluminescence system. The immunoreactive bands were visualized by
autoradiography, and the density of the bands was quantiﬁed
densitometrically using the Image J analyzer.

To investigate the preconditioning effect of HLJDT on cerebral
ischemic injury in rats with MCAO, the rats were ﬁrst preconditioned
with HLJDT at a dose of 2.7 g/kg for 24 h and then subjected to
middle cerebral artery occlusion for 2 h and subsequent reperfusion
for 6, 24, and 72 h (Fig. 1A–C, respectively). As shown in the ﬁgure,
HLJDT preconditioning reduced the cerebral infarction volume of rats
with MCAO and maintained this reduction for at least 72 h (Fig. 2A).
In addition, a decreased cerebral water content and an ameliorated
neurological deﬁcient score were observed in the MCAO rats after
HLJDT preconditioning (Fig. 2C and D). Although a protective effect of
the preconditioning was detected 72 h after ischemia/reperfusion,
direct evidence is required to clarify the therapeutic window of
HLJDT preconditioning. Therefore, the rats were preconditioned for
72 h and then subjected to ischemia for 2 h and reperfusion for 24 h
(Fig. 1E). A similar result was observed with the 72-h preconditioning
scheme (Fig. 2B, E and F). These data indicate that HLJDT preconditioning has a potential effect on MCAO rats with an extended
therapeutic of 6–72 h.
3.2. HLJDT preconditioning attenuates cerebral cortical neuron
injury induced by OGD
To further determine the neuronal protective efﬁcacy of HLJDT
preconditioning, the LDH released by cerebral cortical neurons
with OGD in vitro was assayed after HLJDT preconditioning. The
LDH levels in the supernatant of the neurons were signiﬁcantly
decreased after preconditioning with HLJDT at a concentration
ranging from 100 to 1000 μg/mL (Fig. 3A). Compared with the
neuron subjected to HLJDT preconditioning, both LY294002, an
inhibitor of PI3K, and GSK690693, an inhibitor of Akt, pronouncedly reversed the reduction in LDH release obtained after HLJDT
preconditioning (Fig. 3B), which indicates that the activation of the
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway plays a key role in the preconditioning
effect of HLJDT. Although a marked LDH enhancement was also
observed in the HLJDT-preconditioned neurons treated with triptolide and rapamycin (Fig. 3B), which inhibit the transcriptional
activation of NF-κB and mTOR, respectively, the variation was

2.12. Determination of cell proliferation
To determine the cell proliferation in vivo, 5-bromo-20deoxyuridine (BrdU, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was introduced into
the MCAO animals at a dosage of 50 mg/kg body weight through a
daily intraperitoneal injection three days after cerebral ischemia for a
period of four days. The level of BrdU in the brain was detected by
immunohistochemistry with an anti-BrdU antibody and was quantiﬁed using the Image J software.

2.13. Statistical analysis
The data are expressed as the means7SE and were analyzed
using one-way ANOVA. A Newman–Keuls post hoc analysis was used
for pairwise multiple comparisons when the ANOVA results indicated signiﬁcance. Po0.05 was considered statistically signiﬁcant.

Fig. 1. Scheme of HLJDT preconditioning in MCAO rats. (A–D) Rats were preconditioned with HLJDT for 24 h and followed by 2 h ischemia and reperfusion for 6, 24,
72 h and 7 d respectively, rats with reperfusion for 7 d were used to determine
neuron proliferation. (E) Rats were preconditioned with HLJDT for 72 h and followed
by 2 h ischemia and reperfusion for 24 h.

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

447

Fig. 2. Effect of HLJDT preconditioning on rats of MCAO. (A) Brain slices were stained with TTC solution for rats of 2 h ischemia and reperfusion for 6 h, 24 h and 72 h
respectively following the HLJDT (2.7 g/kg) preconditioning for 24 h. (B) Brain slice were stained with TTC for rats of 2 h ischemia and reperfusion for 24 h with HLJDT
preconditioning for 72 h. (C) Cerebral water content of MCAO rats with HLJDT preconditioning for 24 h. (D) Neurological deﬁcient score of MCAO rats with HLJDT
preconditioning for 24 h. (E) Cerebral water content of MCAO rats with HLJDT preconditioning for 72 h. (F) Neurological deﬁcient score of MCAO rats with HLJDT
preconditioning for 72 h. Data are expressed as means 7SE; n¼ 8; ## p o 0.01, vs. sham; n p o0.05, nn p o 0.01, vs. model.

not statistically signiﬁcant. These results demonstrate that HLJDT
preconditioning can protect neurons against OGD-induced injury
and that PI3K/Akt signaling is positively involved in the process
of HLJDT preconditioning and the initiation of an endogenous
neuroprotective mechanism.

3.3. HLJDT preconditioning activates PI3K/Akt signaling in cerebral
cortical neurons
The involvement of the PI3K/Akt pathway in the HLJDT preconditioning demonstrated in the preceding section led to an

448

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

Fig. 3. Effect of HLJDT preconditioning on cerebral cortical neurons with OGD. (A) OGD-induced LDH release from neurons preconditioned with HLJDT of 1, 10, 100, 300,
1000 μg/mL for 2 h. (B) Cerebral cortical neurons treated with LY294002, GSK690693, triptolide or rapamycin for 30 min and then preconditioned with HLJDT was
undergoing OGD for 2 h. LDH assay was performed 24 h after OGD. Data are expressed as means 7 SE; n ¼8; ## p o0.01, vs. blank; n p o 0.05, nn p o 0.01, vs. model;
§§
po 0.01, vs. HLJDT.

investigation of the phosphorylation of PI3K and Akt. To further
address this issue, we performed western blotting using antibodies against p-PI3K, PI3K, p-Akt, and Akt. Increased phosphorylation of both PI3K and Akt was observed in cerebral cortical
neurons preconditioned with HLJDT (Fig. 4A and B). Together with
the results of the LDH assay, the present data demonstrate that the
PI3K/Akt pathway makes a marked contribution to the neuronal
protective effect of HLJDT preconditioning.
3.4. HLJDT preconditioning increases HIF-1α levels and activity
Based on the pivotal role of HIF-1α in pharmacological preconditioning and the regulation of the PI3K/Akt pathway, we
subsequently analyzed the levels of HIF-1α in cerebral cortical
neurons after HLJDT preconditioning and determined the levels of
EPO and VEGF, which are the primary transcriptional products
that are commonly used to indicate the activity of HIF-1α, in
the supernatant of neurons and the plasma of rats. It was not
unexpected that enhanced HIF-1α levels were detected in neurons
following HLJDT preconditioning (Fig. 5A), and the levels of both
EPO and VEGF were also increased in the supernatant. In addition,
YC-1, an inhibitor of HIF-1α, was found to block the HLJDT
preconditioning-induced EPO and VEGF production (Fig. 5B
and C). Furthermore, and in vivo assay demonstrated that HLJDT
preconditioning enhances the levels of EPO but not VEGF in the
plasma of MCAO rats (Fig. 5D and E). These data demonstrate that
HIF-1α plays a key role in HLJDT preconditioning and that this role
is partly achieved by the maintenance of the levels and transcriptional activity of HIF-1α.
3.5. HLJDT preconditioning inhibits neuron apoptosis and promotes
neuron proliferation
To further explore the protective effect of HLJDT preconditioning on neuron ischemia, we subsequently performed a TUNEL
analysis and assessed the neuronal proliferation through Brdu
labeling in MCAO rats (Fig. 1D). The results from the TUNEL assay
of the neurons indicated that the preconditioning treatment
with HLJDT signiﬁcantly prevented ischemia-induced neuron
apoptosis (Fig. 6A and B). Moreover, immunohistochemical detection revealed increased Brdu levels in the brain slices from rats
subjected to preconditioning compared with those obtained from

Fig. 4. Effect of HLJDT preconditioning on PI3K/Akt signaling. (A) Phosphorylation
of PI3K in cerebral cortical neurons following HLJDT preconditioning.
(B) Phosphorylation of Akt in cerebral cortical neurons following HLJDT preconditioning. Data are expressed as means 7SE; n¼3; n po 0.05, vs. blank.

rats that were not subjected to preconditioning, which suggests
that neuron proliferation was promoted in the MCAO rats by
HLJDT preconditioning (Fig. 6C and D). Therefore, preconditioning
with HLJDT substantially regulated different pathophysiological
stages of cerebral ischemia or ischemia/reperfusion and thereby

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

449

Fig. 5. Effect of HLJDT preconditioning on HIF-1α levels and activity. (A) HIF-1α in cerebral cortical neurons following HLJDT preconditioning, n ¼3. (B and C) EPO (B) and
VEGF (C) in the supernatant of HLJDT-preconditioned neurons. (D and E) EPO (D) and VEGF (E) in the plasma of MCAO rats with HLJDT preconditioning. Data are expressed as
means 7 SE; n¼ 8; # p o 0.05, ## p o0.01, vs. blank; n po 0.01, vs. HLJDT; §§ p o 0.01, vs. sham; Δ p o0.05, vs. model.

provokes an endogenous protective network that is primarily
dependent on the HIF-1α pathway.

4. Discussion
The ischemic tolerance phenomenon was initially reported to
be induced by a preconditioning stimulus, such as a brief period of
ischemia or hypoxia, which provides therapeutically beneﬁcial
protection against acute cerebral or myocardial ischemia. In
addition, other stimuli, such as LPS and TNF-α, which are capable
of causing injury, can induce a similar phenotype with a subthreshold dose of damage (Nawashiro et al., 1997; Rosenzweig
et al., 2004). Although a less noxious stimulus exerts beneﬁcial
effects toward hypoxia and ischemia, its application is limited due
to its low safety and poor workability. In practice, the underlying

mechanisms, namely the endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms of ischemic tolerance or ischemic preconditioning, are more
favorable to afford potential targets for candidate compounds. It is
well known that a complex pathophysiological cascade is involved
in the hypoxia/ischemic damage in the brain, and this cascade
comprises the processes of excitotoxicity, inﬂammation, oxidation
stress, apoptosis, and autophagy. The endogenous neuroprotective
mechanisms may be related with evolutionary advantage and
may reverse the above-mentioned processes. With the triggers
of ischemic tolerance, modulators in the signaling transduction
cascade include receptors, transcriptional factors, and RNA and
protein proﬁles. Based on the broader investigations of molecular
targets, several expected compounds or peptides have shown
the capability to initiate endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms
to induce ischemic tolerance. This process is known as pharmacological preconditioning or chemical preconditioning and is

450

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

Fig. 6. Effect of HLJDT preconditioning on neuron apoptosis and proliferation. (A and B) Ischemia-induced neurons apoptosis was analyzed by TUNEL with or without HLJDT
preconditioning, n¼ 4. (C and D) Brdu-labeled neurons of MCAO rats visualized by immunohistochemical assay with or without HLJDT preconditioning, n¼ 4; ## p o 0.01, vs.
sham; nn p o0.01, vs. model.

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

particularly attractive and noteworthy due to its characteristics of
low toxicity and minimal side effects. For example, isoﬂurane,
a volatile anesthetic, may be the best-understood pharmacological preconditioning agent and exerts both rapid and delayed
ischemic tolerance mechanisms (Kitano et al., 2007; McAuliffe
et al., 2007). Other agents, such as the KATP channel opener diazoxide
(Watanabe et al., 2008), statins (Domoki et al., 2009), morphine,
and erythromycin (Xiong et al., 2007), have been reported to induce
the ischemic tolerance phenomenon, although these agents act
on different aspects of the endogenous neuroprotective network.
The multiple-target action of a mixture of multiple agents or the
conﬁrmation of a speciﬁc effective target is the most encouraging aim
of investigations on ischemic preconditioning.
HIF-1α plays a key role in the activation of endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms during preconditioning with hypoxia/ischemia or pharmacological agents. First, hypoxia inhibits the modiﬁcation of HIF-1α by proline hydroxylases and then blocks the binding
of HIF-1α to von Hippel-Lindau protein (pVHL), which results in the
accumulation and translocation of HIF-1α to nucleus, where it binds
to HIF-1β to form the active transcription factor HIF-1 (Jaakkola et
al., 2001). During hypoxia preconditioning, the formation and
activation of HIF-1 leads to the transcription of hundreds of genes
related to the processes of angiogenesis, inﬂammation, apoptosis,
energy metabolism, and vasodilation, among others. EPO and VEGF
are the critical downstream factors that are activated by this
transcription factor. Previous evidence indicates that EPO serves
as both an inducer and a transducer of ischemic tolerance depending on a paracrine-based signaling system of hypoxic/ischemic
preconditioning, which results in changes in the HIF-driven gene
expression (Ruscher et al., 2002). In addition to the product of HIF-1,
deferoxamine, an iron chelator for the treatment of assorted chronic
anaemias and iron poisoning, can induce preconditioning in models
of stroke, and this agent achieves this effect through the inhibition
of the iron-dependent prolyl hydroxylase family by binding to iron
(Prass et al., 2002). Another provocative study that investigated the
immunosuppressive drug FTY-720, which is used for the treatment
of multiple sclerosis, showed brain protection against focal ischemia
in mice via preconditioning (Wacker et al., 2009). FTY-720 is the
analog of sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), and its metabolism
shares receptors with that of S1P. In particular, it has been shown
that S1P acts as an effective non-hypoxic regulator of HIF-1α in
tumor, vascular, and brain tissue (Ader et al., 2008; Michaud et al.,
2009). In brain tissue, hypoxia and FTY-720 initiate an ischemic
tolerance phenotype that shares a similar signaling cascade, which
includes HIF-1 and CCL2 (Ader et al., 2008). Although the distinct
interaction between other agents and the HIF-1 signaling pathway
has not been explored, it should not be excluded that HIF-1 is the
key regulating factor of ischemic tolerance induced by these
pharmacological agents due to the intermediary role of HIF-1 as
a transcriptional factor that connects the exogenous stimulus
and the cellular response. Thus, we can conclude that the HIF-1
signaling pathway is the critical regulatory system of the endogenous neuroprotective network, particularly in delayed ischemic
tolerance. The analysis of the induction of rapid ischemic tolerance
within minutes has shown that adenosine and adenosine receptor
type 1 are involved.
Natural medicines are approved due to their characteristics of
efﬁcacy and safety. In ischemic tolerance, resveratrol, a polyphenolic
phytochemical obtained from grape, has been found to protect
neurons against global and focal ischemia through preconditioning
(Della-Morte et al., 2009). Our previous investigations showed that
HLJDT, a heat-clearing and detoxicating formula of traditional Chinese
medicine, can regulate the HIF-1α levels in neurons under hypoxia
(Qichun Zhang et al., 2011). We further studied the effect of HLJDT
preconditioning on the brain and neurons in the present work and
found that HLJDT preconditioning at a dose of 2.7 g/kg attenuates

451

brain and neuron injury following ischemia or OGD. The HLJDTinduced ischemia tolerance is primarily HIF-1-dependent and triggers
the process of delayed ischemic tolerance to result in a protective
effect that lasts for hours or days. This permanent signaling cascade
activation is related to DNA transcription and the de novo synthesis of
a functional protein adapted to hypoxia/ischemia injury. Although it is
was not directly clariﬁed whether HLJDT initiates acute ischemic
tolerance by promoting adenosine release and adenosine receptor
activation in the present work, it has been reported that HLJDT and
berberine, one of the critical alkaloids in HLJDT, inhibit the adenosine
deaminase, a key enzyme of adenosine catabolism, and lead to
elevated adenosine levels that protect mice from indomethacininduced enteropathy (Watanabe-Fukuda et al., 2009). The regulation
of HIF-1α by berberine was also revealed in our previous investigation
(Zhang et al., 2012). Thus, it can be postulated that HLJDT induces
acute and delayed ischemic tolerance based on the multiple different
herbs included in the formulation. Although it remains difﬁcult to
distinguish the exact component in the HLJDT formulation that is
responsible for the preconditioning phenomenon, berberine, which
can pass through the blood-brain barrier, may play a key role in the
realization of HLJDT-induced neuronal protection by inducing ischemic
tolerance (Wang et al., 2005).
Unlike hypoxia-induced ischemic tolerance, pharmacological
agents initiate endogenous neuroprotective mechanisms through
distinct targets. It is hard to clarify the concentration of hypoxic
stimuli that will safely induce tolerance and simultaneously
circumvent the induction of apoptosis and necrosis. Agents with
high toxicity have been found to exhibit a lack of safety. Agents
with a broad therapeutic index that have been used in the clinic
for a long time are being investigated to determine whether their
application in a preconditioning treatment may act as a stimulus
to induce ischemic tolerance. Because a preconditioning treatment
is ideologically consistent with the theory of traditional Chinese
medicine, i.e., the “preventive treatment of disease”, close attention should be paid to the use of traditional medicines for ischemic
tolerance in the brain and other tissues, such as the heart.
In summary, HLJDT, a favorable formula composed of Rhizoma
Coptidis, Radix Scutellariae, Cortex Phellodendri, and Fructus Gardeniae,
demonstrates an intriguing ischemic tolerance phenomenon in MCAO
rats and neurons with OGD against neuronal injury and apoptosis by
promoting neurogenesis. HIF-1α and the related signaling cascade
participate in the effects of HLJDT preconditioning.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Priority Academic Program
Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (PAPD,
ysxk-2010), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project
no. 30873450; 81303230), Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province (Project no. BK 2012855), Administration of Traditional
Chinese Medicine of Jiangsu Province (Project no. LZ13007), and a
project funded by Innovation Research Team of Nanjing University
of Chinese Medicine (2013).

References
Ader, I., Brizuela, L., Bouquerel, P., Malavaud, B., Cuvillier, O., 2008. Sphingosine
kinase 1: a new modulator of hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha during hypoxia in
human cancer cells. Cancer Research 68, 8635–8642.
Bederson, J.B., Pitts, L.H., Germano, S.M., Nishimura, M.C., Davis, R.L., Bartkowski, H.M.,
1986. Evaluation of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride as a stain for detection
and quantiﬁcation of experimental cerebral infarction in rats. Stroke 17,
1304–1308.
Bernaudin, M., Nedelec, A.S., Divoux, D., MacKenzie, E.T., Petit, E., Schumann-Bard, P.,
2002. Normobaric hypoxia induces tolerance to focal permanent cerebral
ischemia in association with an increased expression of hypoxia-inducible

452

Q. Zhang et al. / Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154 (2014) 443–452

factor-1 and its target genes, erythropoietin and VEGF, in the adult mouse brain.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 22, 393–403.
Bordet, R., Deplanque, D., Maboudou, P., Puisieux, F., Pu, Q., Robin, E., Martin, A.,
Bastide, M., Leys, D., Lhermitte, M., Dupuis, B., 2000. Increase in endogenous
brain superoxide dismutase as a potential mechanism of lipopolysaccharideinduced brain ischemic tolerance. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 20, 1190–1196.
Cadet, J.L., Krasnova, I.N., 2009. Cellular and molecular neurobiology of brain
preconditioning. Molecular Neurobiology 39, 50–61.
Della-Morte, D., Dave, K.R., DeFazio, R.A., Bao, Y.C., Raval, A.P., Perez-Pinzon, M.A.,
2009. Resveratrol pretreatment protects rat brain from cerebral ischemic
damage via a sirtuin 1-uncoupling protein 2 pathway. Neuroscience 159,
993–1002.
Dirnagl, U., Simon, R.P., Hallenbeck, J.M., 2003. Ischemic tolerance and endogenous
neuroprotection. Trends in Neurosciences 26, 248–254.
Domoki, F., Kis, B., Gaspar, T., Snipes, J.A., Parks, J.S., Bari, F., Busija, D.W., 2009.
Rosuvastatin induces delayed preconditioning against oxygen–glucose deprivation in cultured cortical neurons. American Journal of Physiology– Cell
Physiology 296, C97–C105.
Gidday, J.M., 2010. Pharmacologic preconditioning: translating the promise. Translation Stroke Research 1, 19–30.
Goldberg, M.P., Choi, D.W., 1993. Combined oxygen and glucose deprivation in
cortical cell culture: calcium-dependent and calcium-independent mechanisms
of neuronal injury. The Journal of Neuroscience 13, 3510–3524.
Hossmann, K.A., 2006. Pathophysiology and therapy of experimental stroke.
Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology 26, 1057–1083.
Hwang, Y.S., Shin, C.Y., Huh, Y., Ryu, J.H., 2002. Hwangryun-Hae-Dok-tang (Huanglian-Jie-Du-Tang) extract and its constituents reduce ischemia-reperfusion
brain injury and neutrophil inﬁltration in rats. Life Sciences 71, 2105–2117.
Jaakkola, P., Mole, D.R., Tian, Y.M., Wilson, M.I., Gielbert, J., Gaskell, S.J., von
Kriegsheim, A., Hebestreit, H.F., Mukherji, M., Schoﬁeld, C.J., Maxwell, P.H.,
Pugh, C.W., Ratcliffe, P.J., 2001. Targeting of HIF-alpha to the von Hippel-Lindau
ubiquitylation complex by O2-regulated prolyl hydroxylation. Science 292,
468–472.
Jones, N.M., Bergeron, M., 2001. Hypoxic preconditioning induces changes in HIF-1
target genes in neonatal rat brain. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and
Metabolism 21, 1105–1114.
Jones, N.M., Kardashyan, L., Callaway, J.K., Lee, E.M., Beart, P.M., 2008. Long-term
functional and protective actions of preconditioning with hypoxia, cobalt
chloride, and desferrioxamine against hypoxic-ischemic injury in neonatal rats.
Pediatriac Research 63, 620–624.
Kapinya, K.J., Lowl, D., Futterer, C., Maurer, M., Waschke, K.F., Isaev, N.K., Dirnagl, U.,
2002. Tolerance against ischemic neuronal injury can be induced by volatile
anesthetics and is inducible NO synthase dependent. Stroke 33, 1889–1898.
Kato, H., Liu, Y., Araki, T., Kogure, K., 1992. MK-801, but not anisomycin, inhibits the
induction of tolerance to ischemia in the gerbil hippocampus. Neuroscience
Letters 139, 118–121.
Kitano, H., Kirsch, J.R., Hurn, P.D., Murphy, S.J., 2007. Inhalational anesthetics as
neuroprotectants or chemical preconditioning agents in ischemic brain. Journal
of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 27, 1108–1128.
Kondo, Y., Kondo, F., Asanuma, M., Tanaka, K., Ogawa, N., 2000. Protective effect of
oren-gedoku-to against induction of neuronal death by transient cerebral
ischemia in the C57BL/6 mouse. Neurochemical Research 25, 205–209.
Leonardo, C.C., Hall, A.A., Collier, L.A., Green, S.M., Willing, A.E., Pennypacker, K.R.,
2010. Administration of a sigma receptor agonist delays MCAO-induced neurodegeneration and white matter injury. Translation Stroke Research 1, 135–145.
Mattson, M.P., Barger, S.W., Begley, J.G., Mark, R.J., 1995. Calcium, free radicals, and
excitotoxic neuronal death in primary cell culture. Methods in Cell Biology 46,
187–216.
McAuliffe, J.J., Joseph, B., Vorhees, C.V., 2007. Isoﬂurane-delayed preconditioning
reduces immediate mortality and improves striatal function in adult mice after
neonatal hypoxia-ischemia. Anesthesia and Analgesia 104, 1066–1077 (tables of
contents).

Michaud, M.D., Robitaille, G.A., Gratton, J.P., Richard, D.E., 2009. Sphingosine-1phosphate: a novel nonhypoxic activator of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 in
vascular cells. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis and Vascular Biology 29, 902–908.
Nawashiro, H., Tasaki, K., Ruetzler, C.A., Hallenbeck, J.M., 1997. TNF-alpha pretreatment induces protective effects against focal cerebral ischemia in mice. Journal
of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 17, 483–490.
Ohtsuki, T., Ruetzler, C.A., Tasaki, K., Hallenbeck, J.M., 1996. Interleukin-1 mediates
induction of tolerance to global ischemia in gerbil hippocampal CA1 neurons.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 16, 1137–1142.
Prass, K., Ruscher, K., Karsch, M., Isaev, N., Megow, D., Priller, J., Scharff, A., Dirnagl, U.,
Meisel, A., 2002. Desferrioxamine induces delayed tolerance against cerebral
ischemia in vivo and in vitro. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism 22,
520–525.
Qichun Zhang, Z.Q., Pan, Linmei, Li, Huan, Zhu, Huaxu, 2011. The traditional Chinese
medicine Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Tang inhibits hypoxia-induced neuronal apoptosis. African Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 5, 2558–2565.
Rosenzweig, H.L., Lessov, N.S., Henshall, D.C., Minami, M., Simon, R.P., StenzelPoore, M.P., 2004. Endotoxin preconditioning prevents cellular inﬂammatory
response during ischemic neuroprotection in mice. Stroke 35, 2576–2581.
Ruscher, K., Freyer, D., Karsch, M., Isaev, N., Megow, D., Sawitzki, B., Priller, J.,
Dirnagl, U., Meisel, A., 2002. Erythropoietin is a paracrine mediator of ischemic
tolerance in the brain: evidence from an in vitro model. The Journal of
Neuroscience 22, 10291–10301.
Schipper, H.M., 2004. Heme oxygenase-1: transducer of pathological brain
iron sequestration under oxidative stress. Annals of the New York Academy
of Sciences 1012, 84–93.
Toyoda, T., Kassell, N.F., Lee, K.S., 1997. Induction of ischemic tolerance and
antioxidant activity by brief focal ischemia. Neuroreport 8, 847–851.
Wacker, B.K., Park, T.S., Gidday, J.M., 2009. Hypoxic preconditioning-induced
cerebral ischemic tolerance: role of microvascular sphingosine kinase 2. Stroke
40, 3342–3348.
Wang, C., Weihrauch, D., Schwabe, D.A., Bienengraeber, M., Warltier, D.C., Kersten, J.R.,
Pratt Jr., P.F., Pagel, P.S., 2006. Extracellular signal-regulated kinases trigger isoﬂurane
preconditioning concomitant with upregulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha
and vascular endothelial growth factor expression in rats. Anesthesia and Analgesia
103, 281–288 (table of contents).
Wang, X., Wang, R., Xing, D., Su, H., Ma, C., Ding, Y., Du, L., 2005. Kinetic difference of
berberine between hippocampus and plasma in rat after intravenous administration of Coptidis rhizoma extract. Life Sciences 77, 3058–3067.
Watanabe-Fukuda, Y., Yamamoto, M., Miura, N., Fukutake, M., Ishige, A., Yamaguchi, R.,
Nagasaki, M., Saito, A., Imoto, S., Miyano, S., Takeda, J., Watanabe, K., 2009.
Orengedokuto and berberine improve indomethacin-induced small intestinal
injury via adenosine. Journal of Gastroenterology 44, 380–389.
Watanabe, M., Katsura, K., Ohsawa, I., Mizukoshi, G., Takahashi, K., Asoh, S., Ohta, S.,
Katayama, Y., 2008. Involvement of mitoKATP channel in protective mechanisms of cerebral ischemic tolerance. Brain Research 1238, 199–207.
Wong, G.H., Goeddel, D.V., 1988. Induction of manganous superoxide dismutase by
tumor necrosis factor: possible protective mechanism. Science 242, 941–944.
Xiong, L.Z., Yang, J., Wang, Q., Lu, Z.H., 2007. Involvement of delta-and mu-opioid
receptors in the delayed cerebral ischemic tolerance induced by repeated
electroacupuncture preconditioning in rats. Chinese Medical Journal (English)
120, 394–399.
Xu, J., Murakami, Y., Matsumoto, K., Tohda, M., Watanabe, H., Zhang, S., Yu, Q., Shen, J.,
2000. Protective effect of Oren-gedoku-to (Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Tang) against
impairment of learning and memory induced by transient cerebral ischemia in
mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 73, 405–413.
Zhang, Q., Qian, Z., Pan, L., Li, H., Zhu, H., 2012. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 mediates
the anti-apoptosis of berberine in neurons during hypoxia/ischemia. Acta
Physiologica Hungarica 99, 311–323.
Zhang, Q., Ye, Y.L., Yan, Y.X., Zhang, W.P., Chu, L.S., Wei, E.Q., Yu, Y.P., 2009. Protective
effects of Huanglian-Jiedu-Tang on chronic brain injury after focal cerebral
ischemia in mice. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban 38, 75–80.

