Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 1–5
© 2015 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/15 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

BRIEF COMMUNICATION

SUMO2/3 is associated with ubiquitinated protein aggregates
in the mouse neocortex after middle cerebral artery occlusion
Karin Hochrainer, Katherine Jackman, Corinne Benakis, Josef Anrather and Costantino Iadecola
Protein modiﬁcations cooperatively act to protect the proteome from cellular stress. Focal cerebral ischemia increases protein
ubiquitination, resulting in formation of ubiquitin-rich aggregates. A concurrent elevation in small ubiquitin-related modiﬁer
(SUMO)-conjugated proteins has also been reported, but a potential connection to ubiquitin remains unexplored. Here we show
that SUMO2/3 conjugates are present in postischemic ubiquitin-rich aggregates, physically associated with ubiquitin. The
coaggregation of SUMO2/3 and ubiquitin is induced rapidly after ischemia, depends on reperfusion, and is also observed in the
absence of ischemic damage. The association between SUMO and ubiquitin suggests overlapping functional roles after ischemia/
reperfusion.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015) 35, 1–5; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.180; published online 29 October 2014
Keywords: ischemic stroke; protein aggregation; small ubiquitin-related modiﬁer; ubiquitin

INTRODUCTION
Ischemic stroke caused by occlusion of major cerebral arteries
produces rapid neuronal death in the center of the ischemic
territory, while cell death is delayed in peripheral regions, the so
called ischemic penumbra.1 The slow evolution of the penumbra
toward irreversible damage renders the tissue potentially salvageable, and elucidating the factors that inﬂuence the survival of
penumbral tissue is of great importance for the development of
new stroke therapies. One such factor might be the modiﬁcation
of proteins with ubiquitin and small ubiquitin-related modiﬁer
(SUMO), which is dramatically increased in the penumbral area
after transient focal cerebral ischemia and not in the ischemic
core.2,3 Ubiquitin and SUMO attachment to proteins has the
potential to inﬂuence protein stability, interaction and localization,
and may therefore represent an effective way to rapidly adapt the
cellular proteome to the changing, stressful environment after
stroke. Indeed, elevated SUMO conjugation has been associated
with neuroprotection,4–6 while the role of increased ubiquitin
accumulation in stroke outcome has not been clariﬁed.
Ubiquitin and SUMO were long thought to have separate
targets and functions, but increasing evidence suggests that a
crosstalk and interdependence exists between these two modiﬁcations.7,8 Along those lines, the temporal proﬁle and conjugation
pattern of SUMO and ubiquitin after focal ischemia were found to
be strikingly similar,2,3 which warrants further examination of a
potential connection between the two modiﬁcations in this setting.
Ubiquitin is enriched in protein aggregates after focal ischemia,2,9
however, it remains unclear if also SUMO is present within such
inclusions. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to investigate
whether SUMO is associated with postischemic ubiquitin aggregates
in a mouse model of middle cerebral artery occlusion.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Experiments were performed in 6- to 8-week-old male C57Bl/6J mice
(mean weight 22.8 g; Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA). All
experimental procedures were approved by the IACUC (Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee) of Weill Cornell Medical College and
were performed according to the IACUC, NIH, and ARRIVE guidelines
(http://www.nc3rs.org/ARRIVE).

Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion
Middle cerebral artery occlusion was induced by the intraluminal suture
method as previously reported.2 Brieﬂy, mice were anesthetized with
isoﬂurane (1.5% to 2%) and a 6-0 surgical nylon monoﬁlament was
introduced into the right internal carotid artery through the external
carotid artery to occlude the origin of the middle cerebral artery. For
transient ischemia, the ﬁlament was left in place for the indicated time
points and then withdrawn. The ﬁlament was not retracted in mice
subjected to permanent ischemia. Cerebral blood ﬂow was measured in
the ischemic hemisphere using transcranial laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry
(Periﬂux System 5010, Perimed, PA, USA). Only animals with 85% reduction
in cerebral blood ﬂow during middle cerebral artery occlusion and 80%
cerebral blood ﬂow recovery after 10 minutes of reperfusion were included
in the study. In all mice, rectal temperature was kept at 37.0°C ± 0.5°C
during surgery and in the recovery period until the animals regained
consciousness. Out of a total of 76 animals used in this study 10 had to be
excluded because they either did not meet cerebral blood ﬂow criteria
(n = 8) or died prematurely (n = 2) during surgery.

Isolation of Ubiquitin/SUMO-Containing Soluble and Aggregate
Fractions and Detection of Proteins by Western Blotting
Soluble and aggregate fractions were obtained from the ipsilateral
neocortex. The cortical sampling and isolation procedure is described in
detail in Hochrainer et al.2 Brieﬂy, cytosolic soluble proteins were extracted

Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY, USA. Correspondence: Dr K Hochrainer or Dr C Iadecola, Feil Family Brain and Mind
Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical College, 407 East 61st Street, New York, NY 10065, USA. E-mail kah2015@med.cornell.edu or coi2001@med.cornell.edu
This work was supported by National Institute of Health Grant R37-NS34179 (CI), American Heart Association Grant 10SDG2600298 (KH), and NHMRC Australia CJ Martin
Fellowship (KJ).
Received 11 June 2014; revised 24 September 2014; accepted 29 September 2014; published online 29 October 2014

SUMO2/3 coaggregates with ubiquitin after MCAO
K Hochrainer et al

2
by mechanical lysis in buffer without detergent (15 mmol/l Tris-HCl, pH 7.6;
250 mmol/l sucrose, 1 mmol/l MgCl2, 2.5 mmol/l ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 1 mmol/l ethylene glycol tetracetic acid, 1 mmol/l Na3VO4,
5 mmol/l NaF, 20 mmol/l phenylphosphate, 20 mmol/l N-ethylmaleimide,
1 mmol/l dithiothreitol, and 1x protease inhibitors (Roche Applied
Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, USA)), followed by high-speed centrifugation.
Residual pellets containing insoluble cytoplasmic material as well as intact
nuclei were sonicated and incubated in the same buffer substituted with
2% Triton X-100 and 150 mmol/l KCl. Aggregates, deﬁned by insolubility
under these conditions, were obtained by centrifugation.
Equal amounts of proteins as determined by protein concentration
measurement of the soluble fraction were loaded and separated by 4% to
20% (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA) or 7% Tris-glycine-sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel electrophoresis. After transfer of proteins to
polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membranes (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA),
total ubiquitin, lysine 48-linked ubiquitin, lysine 63-linked ubiquitin,
SUMO1, and SUMO2/3 were detected by western blotting with antiubiquitin (clone ubi-1, Life Technologies), lysine 48-speciﬁc anti-ubiquitin
(clone Apu2; EMD Millipore), lysine 63-speciﬁc anti-ubiquitin (clone D7A11,
Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA), anti-SUMO1, and antiSUMO2/3 (both Cell Signaling Technology) antibodies, respectively. Protein
bands from free ubiquitin/SUMO as well as protein band smear in the
higher molecular weight range representing conjugated ubiquitin/SUMO
(indicated by brackets in the ﬁgures) were quantiﬁed with Kodak 1D V3.6
image software (Kodak, Rochester, NY, USA). Densitometric data were
obtained in the linear range of blot exposure. The background optical
density of each blot was determined in an empty lane and the obtained
value was subtracted from each speciﬁc signal. Ubiquitin and SUMO levels
in experimental groups were expressed relative to levels in sham animals,
which were set to 1. Free ubiquitin and SUMO were normalized to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase levels. Data are expressed as
mean ± s.d.

Coimmunoprecipitation of Ubiquitin and SUMO from Aggregate
Fractions
Aggregate fractions were solubilized as speciﬁed previously in Shimada
et al.10 Brieﬂy, pellets were denaturated in 2% SDS followed by renaturation through removal of SDS and addition of 0.6% alpha-cyclodextrin/0.6%
Tween-20. Immunoprecipitation was performed with anti-ubiquitin antibody (clone FK2; EMD Millipore), anti-SUMO2/3 antibody (clone 8A2;
Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), or anti-mouse monoclonal IgG1 isotype
control antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) bound to protein-G sepharose
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA, USA). Precipitates were loaded
on 7% Tris-glycine SDS polyacrylamide gels and western blot procedures
were executed as described above.

Statistical Analysis
Sample size was determined based on previous published work on
ubiquitination in ischemia by our laboratory.2 Animals were randomly
assigned to sham and stroke groups and analysis was performed in a
blinded manner. Two group comparisons were statistically analyzed by the
two-tailed Student’s t-test. Multiple comparisons were performed by
one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni post hoc test. Differences were considered
signiﬁcant for Po0.05.

RESULTS
Transient Middle Cerebral Artery Occlusion Leads to Coaggregation
of Ubiquitin and SUMO2/3 in the Ipsilateral Neocortex
To address whether SUMO conjugates found after ischemia are of
soluble or, like ubiquitin conjugates, of insoluble nature we compared their levels in soluble cytosolic and Triton X-100 insoluble
aggregate fractions from mouse neocortices after transient focal
ischemia. SUMO2/3 conjugates were, like ubiquitin, signiﬁcantly
enriched in the aggregate fraction as opposed to its soluble
counterpart (Figure 1A). At the same time, conjugated as well as free
ubiquitin was depleted from the soluble fraction, while SUMO2/3
levels remained constant (Figure 1A). No signiﬁcant changes were
observed in either fraction for free and conjugated SUMO1
(Figure 1A). To evaluate the nature of ubiquitin conjugates after
focal cerebral ischemia we probed blots with lysine 48- and lysine
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 1 – 5

63-speciﬁc antibodies. Interestingly, detection with both antibodies
resulted in a strong signal (Figure 1B), indicating that aggregates
contain ubiquitin chains linked via both lysine 48 and 63.
SUMO2/3 and Ubiquitin Interact within Postischemic Aggregates
To examine the potential association between SUMOylation and
ubiquitination after ischemia, we asked whether SUMO2/3 and
ubiquitin could physically interact within postischemic aggregates.
To this end, we solubilized aggregate fractions by SDS-mediated
denaturation and ensured successful solubilization by exclusive
detection of ubiquitin conjugates in the supernatant (data not
shown). When ubiquitin was pulled down from SDS-solubilized
contents we observed signiﬁcant coprecipitation of SUMO2/3
(Figure 1C). Only minimal ubiquitin or SUMO was detected in the
contralateral cortex or by pull down with an unrelated IgG control
antibody from the ipsilateral cortex, attesting to the speciﬁcity
of the interaction. To further conﬁrm our data obtained with
ubiquitin pull down we performed reciprocal immunoprecipitation with SUMO2/3 and detection of ubiquitin by western blotting.
Analogous to the result with ubiquitin pull down, we found
marked coprecipitation of ubiquitin with SUMO2/3 (Figure 1D).
These results suggest a direct association between ubiquitin and
SUMO2/3 within Triton X-100 insoluble protein aggregates after
focal cerebral ischemia.
SUMO2/3 Accumulation within Ubiquitin-Rich Aggregates is
Induced Rapidly with Reperfusion Independent of the Duration of
Ischemia
Next, we investigated whether SUMO2/3 aggregates are formed
under the same conditions established earlier for ubiquitin aggregation.2 Since reperfusion was absolutely necessary for ubiquitin
accumulation,2 we ﬁrst examined SUMO aggregation levels after
transient ischemia with different periods of reperfusion or times of
permanent ischemia. Reperfusion readily induced SUMO2/3
accumulation peaking after 1 and 3 hours, while permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion failed to increase SUMOylation
levels at any time point (Figure 2A). SUMO2/3 as well as ubiquitin
aggregation occurred rapidly and was observed as early as
5 minutes after reperfusion (Figure 2B). Finally we determined
SUMO2/3 aggregation levels after ischemic episodes of different
durations. As also observed for ubiquitin (Figure 2C and ref. 2),
middle cerebral artery occlusion lasting 10 or 15 minutes, which
produces either no or minimal tissue damage in our model,2 was
sufﬁcient to trigger SUMO2/3 aggregation (Figure 2C).
DISCUSSION
Both SUMO and ubiquitin conjugates are dramatically increased
after focal cerebral ischemia,2,3,6,9 and here we provide evidence
that these events might be linked. We ﬁnd that SUMO conjugation
is not only globally elevated after ischemia/reperfusion, but that it
also, like ubiquitin, accumulates in insoluble protein aggregates.
The accumulation is speciﬁc for SUMO2/3 since we could not
identify any induction of SUMO1 conjugation. While SUMO2 and
SUMO3 are identical except for three amino acids in the aminoterminus and are functionally indistinguishable, SUMO1 shares
only 50% identity and has both distinct and overlapping targets.11
Our ﬁnding of an induction of SUMO2/3, but not SUMO1 after
ischemia is consistent with previous reports showing that
SUMO2/3 constitutes a more abundant protein modiﬁcation than
SUMO1 in response to cellular stress.8,12 Furthermore, our data in
focal ischemia are in line with earlier observations in transient
forebrain ischemia where no major changes in SUMO1 conjugation patterns were observed, while SUMO2/3 accumulation was
signiﬁcantly induced.13
SUMO modiﬁcation was ﬁrst thought to be functionally distinct
from the ubiquitin system. However, over the past decade it has
© 2015 ISCBFM

SUMO2/3 coaggregates with ubiquitin after MCAO
K Hochrainer et al

3

Figure 1. SUMO2/3, but not SUMO1, coaggregates and exhibits a direct interaction with ubiquitin in Triton X-100 insoluble aggregates in the
ipsilateral neocortex after transient MCAO. (A) Ipsilateral neocortical tissue was obtained from mice subjected to either sham-surgery or 30minute MCAO and 3 hours of reperfusion. Aggregated as well as soluble conjugated and free ubiquitin, SUMO1, and SUMO2/3 were
visualized by western blotting with respective antibodies. Optical densities of ubiquitin-, SUMO1-, SUMO2/3-, and GAPDH-stained bands were
quantiﬁed. Brackets indicate areas used for quantiﬁcation of conjugated ubiquitin and SUMO. *P o0.05 from sham; n = 3 per group.
(B) Aggregates were isolated as in A and evaluated for the presence of lysine 48- and lysine 63-linked ubiquitin chains by western blotting
with respective antibodies. Areas marked with brackets were quantiﬁed. *P o0.01 from sham; n = 3 per group. (C) Ubiquitin-containing
aggregates were isolated from ipsilateral and contralateral cortices of mice treated with 30-minute ischemia and 1-hour reperfusion.
Aggregates were solubilized by denaturation in 2% SDS-containing buffer and renaturated as described in the Materials and Methods section.
Ubiquitin was immunoprecipitated from the SDS-soluble supernatant and presence of SUMO2/3 was tested by western blotting. Pull down
with mouse IgG1 isotype control antibody was executed as precipitation control. The shown blots are representative of three independent
experiments. (D) The same assay as in C was performed with immunoprecipitation of SUMO2/3. Ubiquitin coprecipitation was evaluated by
western blotting with anti-ubiquitin antibody. Blots are representative for three experiments. Conj, conjugated; contra, contralateral; GAPDH,
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; h, hours; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IP, immunoprecipitation; ipsi, ipsilateral, kDa, kilodalton;
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; SDS, sodium dodecyl sulfate; SUMO, small ubiquitin-related modiﬁer; S, sham.

become clear that in addition to their structural similarities,
ubiquitin and SUMO have signiﬁcant functional interactions.7,14
These include (1) the competitive targeting of same attachment
sites in common substrates, (2) the interdependent conjugation to
distinct attachment sites in common targets, or (3) the sequential
modiﬁcation of different targets within the same signaling
pathway, leading to antagonistic or synergistic effects on target
protein properties. Our data of coprecipitation of SUMO2/3 and
ubiquitin from SDS-denatured contents of the aggregate fraction
strongly suggest a covalent, direct interaction between the two
modiﬁcations. This could be in the form of SUMO2/3 and ubiquitin
© 2015 ISCBFM

conjugated as monomers or mono-speciﬁc chains to different
acceptor sites or as mixed chains to a common acceptor site
within the same substrates. A potentially direct SUMO and
ubiquitin interaction was suggested previously in a forebrain
ischemia model where removal of SUMO conjugates led to a
reduction in molecular weight of ubiquitinated proteins, indicating attachment to the same substrates.15
An extensive crosstalk exists between SUMOylation and
ubiquitination with potential implications for the functional
consequences of the modiﬁcation.7,14 The signiﬁcance of the
accumulation of ubiquitin and SUMO2/3 conjugates for the
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 1 – 5

SUMO2/3 coaggregates with ubiquitin after MCAO
K Hochrainer et al

4

Figure 2. SUMO2/3 accumulation within ubiquitin-rich aggregates is rapidly induced dependent on reperfusion without a correlation to the
duration and severity of ischemia. (A) Ipsilateral neocortices were harvested from sham-treated animals, after 30-minute MCAO followed by
indicated reperfusion times, or after 1-, 3-, 6-, and 24-hour permanent MCAO. (B) Insoluble SUMO2/3 and ubiquitin aggregate levels were
determined in ipsilateral neocortices of sham-operated animals, or mice, which underwent 30 minutes of ischemia and 5-, 15-, and 60-minute
reperfusion. (C) Tissue was obtained from ipsilateral neocortices of sham-operated animals, or mice, which underwent 5, 10, 15, and
30 minutes of ischemia and 1- hour reperfusion. Optical densities of ubiquitin-, SUMO1- and SUMO2/3-stained bands were quantiﬁed from all
experimental groups. Areas used for quantiﬁcation are marked with a bracket. *P o0.05 from sham; n = 3 per group. h, hours; kDa, kilodalton;
MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; min, minutes; S, sham; SUMO, small ubiquitin-related modiﬁer.

outcome of cerebral ischemia, however, remains unknown. Of
note, the induction of SUMO2/3 as well as ubiquitin conjugation is
dependent on reperfusion, indicating that their presence might be
associated with survival potential. Aggregation of SUMO and
ubiquitin is rapid, transient, resolves before major tissue damage
evolves and is not linked to cerebral infarction in our model,2
suggesting that they are not causative for ischemic injury. In fact,
elevated SUMO conjugation has been associated with neuroprotection, since its induction and suppression resulted in reduced
and increased neuronal damage and infarction, respectively.4–6
The implications of ubiquitin aggregation for the outcome of focal
cerebral ischemia are not clear. However, our previous data
suggest that the presence of ubiquitin aggregates may in fact
indicate a greater potential for tissue viability in this setting.2
Considering the interaction of postischemic SUMO2/3 and
ubiquitin modiﬁcations shown here, we speculate that SUMO2/3
and ubiquitin may work in concert to protect vital constituents of
the cellular proteome from ischemic stress. Future studies must be
directed at (1) understanding the contributing factors for the
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 1 – 5

induction of ubiquitin/SUMO accumulation and (2) identifying
modiﬁed substrates to evaluate the actual implications for brain
survival after stroke.

DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

REFERENCES
1 Moskowitz MA, Lo EH, Iadecola C. The science of stroke: mechanisms in search of
treatments. Neuron 2010; 67: 181–198.
2 Hochrainer K, Jackman K, Anrather J, Iadecola C. Reperfusion rather than ischemia
drives the formation of ubiquitin aggregates after middle cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 2012; 43: 2229–2235.
3 Yang W, Sheng H, Warner DS, Paschen W. Transient focal cerebral ischemia
induces a dramatic activation of small ubiquitin-like modiﬁer conjugation. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2008; 28: 892–896.

© 2015 ISCBFM

SUMO2/3 coaggregates with ubiquitin after MCAO
K Hochrainer et al

5
4 Cimarosti H, Ashikaga E, Jaafari N, Dearden L, Rubin P, Wilkinson KA et al.
Enhanced sumoylation and senp-1 protein levels following oxygen and glucose
deprivation in neurones. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012; 32: 17–22.
5 Datwyler AL, Lattig-Tunnemann G, Yang W, Paschen W, Lee SL, Dirnagl U et al.
Sumo2/3 conjugation is an endogenous neuroprotective mechanism. J Cereb
Blood Flow Metab 2011; 31: 2152–2159.
6 Lee YJ, Mou Y, Maric D, Klimanis D, Auh S, Hallenbeck JM. Elevated global
sumoylation in ubc9 transgenic mice protects their brains against focal cerebral
ischemic damage. PLoS One 2011; 6: e25852.
7 Praefcke GJ, Hofmann K, Dohmen RJ. Sumo playing tag with ubiquitin. Trends
Biochem Sci 2012; 37: 23–31.
8 Schimmel J, Larsen KM, Matic I, van Hagen M, Cox J, Mann M et al. The ubiquitinproteasome system is a key component of the sumo-2/3 cycle. Mol Cell Proteomics
2008; 7: 2107–2122.
9 Hu BR, Janelidze S, Ginsberg MD, Busto R, Perez-Pinzon M, Sick TJ et al. Protein
aggregation after focal brain ischemia and reperfusion. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2001; 21: 865–875.

© 2015 ISCBFM

10 Shimada Y, Fukuda T, Aoki K, Yukawa T, Iwamuro S, Ohkawa K et al. A protocol for
immunoafﬁnity separation of the accumulated ubiquitin-protein conjugates
solubilized with sodium dodecyl sulfate. Anal Biochem 2008; 377: 77–82.
11 Vertegaal AC, Andersen JS, Ogg SC, Hay RT, Mann M, Lamond AI. Distinct and
overlapping sets of sumo-1 and sumo-2 target proteins revealed by quantitative
proteomics. Mol Cell Proteomics 2006; 5: 2298–2310.
12 Saitoh H, Hinchey J. Functional heterogeneity of small ubiquitin-related protein
modiﬁers sumo-1 versus sumo-2/3. J Biol Chem 2000; 275: 6252–6258.
13 Yang W, Sheng H, Warner DS, Paschen W. Transient global cerebral ischemia
induces a massive increase in protein sumoylation. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
2008; 28: 269–279.
14 Denuc A, Marfany G. Sumo and ubiquitin paths converge. Biochem Soc Trans 2010;
38: 34–39.
15 Yang W, Sheng H, Thompson JW, Zhao S, Wang L, Miao P et al. Small ubiquitin-like
modiﬁer 3-modiﬁed proteome regulated by brain ischemia in novel small
ubiquitin-like modiﬁer transgenic mice: putative protective proteins/pathways.
Stroke 2014; 45: 1115–1122.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2015), 1 – 5

