JOURNAL OF NEUROCHEMISTRY

| 2014 | 130 | 733–747

doi: 10.1111/jnc.12747

,1
,

*Vascular Biology Group, ANZAC Research Institute, Concord Hospital, Concord, NSW, Australia
†Discipline of Pathology, School of Medicine, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia

Abstract
Treatments to inhibit or repair neuronal cell damage
sustained during focal ischemia/reperfusion injury in stroke
are largely unavailable. We demonstrate that dietary supplementation with the antioxidant di-tert-butyl-bisphenol (BP)
before injury decreases infarction and vascular complications in experimental stroke in an animal model. We conﬁrm
that BP, a synthetic polyphenol with superior radical-scavenging activity than vitamin E, crosses the blood–brain
barrier and accumulates in rat brain. Supplementation with
BP did not affect blood pressure or endogenous vitamin E
levels in plasma or cerebral tissue. Pre-treatment with BP
signiﬁcantly lowered lipid, protein and thiol oxidation and
decreased infarct size in animals subjected to middle
cerebral artery occlusion (2 h) and reperfusion (24 h) injury.

This neuroprotective action was accompanied by downregulation of hypoxia inducible factor-1a and glucose transporter-1 mRNA levels, maintenance of neuronal tissue ATP
concentration and inhibition of pro-apoptotic factors that
together enhanced cerebral tissue viability after injury. That
pre-treatment with BP ameliorates oxidative damage and
preserves cerebral tissue during focal ischemic insult indicates that oxidative stress plays at least some causal role in
promoting tissue damage in experimental stroke. The data
strongly suggest that inhibition of oxidative stress through
BP scavenging free radicals in vivo contributes signiﬁcantly
to neuroprotection.
Keywords: antioxidant, apoptosis, neuroprotection, polyphenol,
stroke.
J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733–747.

Stroke is a major public health challenge that is projected to
increase in parallel with aging populations (Strong et al.
2007). Stroke is a major cause of morbidity and mortality and
for survivors and their families, the ongoing disability and
distress can be extreme. As major risk factors for stroke are
aging, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus, developing
nations are experiencing increasing prevalence of stroke
owing to the upward trends in these risk factors.
Strokes can be either ischemic or hemorrhagic in nature,
with the majority caused when a culprit thrombus occludes a
blood vessel in the brain leading to acute cerebral ischemia.
At present, post-stroke thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA) is the only approved therapy for acute
ischemic stroke. However, tPA treatment has considerable
limitations that preclude its widespread use. Primarily, tPA
administration is restricted to within the ﬁrst three hours of
stroke, which excludes patients presenting late or with a
delayed diagnosis. It is used in only a minority of cases owing
to clinical exclusion factors (e.g., age), and reperfusion

and recovery in patients is less than 50% with increased risk
of hemorrhage considered a major concern (Davalos 2005).
A recent study suggests that hemorrhage risk following tPA
treatment may be lower than expected (Lyerly et al.
2014), indicating that there is scope to expand the treatment
window for tPA. A major consideration for thrombolytics
such as tPA is the potential for damage to neuronal cells
via reperfusion injury and the expansion of the primary
infarct. Therefore, the development of neuroprotective
Received October 13, 2013; revised manuscript received April 16, 2014;
accepted April 20, 2014.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Paul K. Witting,
Vascular Biology Group, ANZAC Research Institute, Concord Hospital,
Concord, NSW 2139, Australia. E-mail: paul.witting@sydney.edu.au
1
Current address: Postdoctoral Research Fellow, School of Advanced
Medicine, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, 2109, Australia.
Abbreviations used: 4-HNE, 4-Hydroxynonenal; ACh, acetylcholine;
CE, esteriﬁed cholesterol; DQ, diphenoquinone; HIF, hypoxia inducible
factor; MCA, middle cerebral artery.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

733

734

T. T. H. Duong et al.

pharmacological therapies that increase both the treatment
window and prognosis for cerebral ischemia is warranted
(Zhang et al. 2004; McMahon et al. 2006).
Cerebral ischemia reperfusion injury (Puyal et al. 2013)
and associated inﬂammation (Bohacek et al. 2012; Liu et al.
2013) play an important role in the evolution of brain
damage. A hallmark of the pathogenesis of stroke is the early
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Lee et al.
2009). Increased ROS production following stroke leads to
lipid and protein oxidation (Polidori et al. 1998; Kelly et al.
2008), loss of endogenous antioxidants, and damage to
neuronal cells via a mechanism involving ROS-induced
necrosis and apoptosis (Margaill et al. 2005). Diminished
plasma antioxidant activity is linked to larger infarcts and
more severe neurological impairment in stroke (Leinonen
et al. 2000). This suggests that complex antioxidant defenses
are overwhelmed in cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury.
Consistent with this hypothesis, there is some evidence that
supplementation or pre-treatment with endogenous antioxidants (Van der Worp et al.1998; Huang et al. 2001), or other
antioxidant free radical scavengers (Cao and Phillis 1994;
Shichinohe et al. 2004), prior to focal cerebral ischemia can
be neuroprotective in some established animal models of
stroke, indicating that this may be an appropriate target area
for novel and much needed therapeutic development
(McMahon et al. 2006, Behl and Moosmann 2002).
The polyphenolic antioxidant di-tert-butyl-bisphenol (BP)
was designed as a superior radical scavenging agent following
structure/function analysis of more than 60 natural and
synthetic (poly)phenols (Witting et al.1996, 1999a). BP is
an efﬁcient ROS scavenger in vivo and prevents arterial lipid
oxidation in animal models of atherosclerosis (Witting
et al.1999a,b). Interestingly, BP was identiﬁed as a metabolite
of the lipid-lowering phenolic compound Probucol (Barnhart
et al. 1989). The generation of BP from Probucol involves the
oxidation of the latter by one-electron (Barnhart et al. 1989)
and two-electron oxidant species (Witting et al. 2005). We
have demonstrated previously that BP supplementation signiﬁcantly limits ROS generation, modulates acute phase gene
responses, enhances cellular energetics, and improves cell
viability following hypoxia/re-oxygenation injury in cultured
human neuronal cells (Rayner et al. 2006; Duong et al. 2008).
The aim of this study was to extend these cellular studies
to test whether dietary supplementation of BP ameliorates
damage associated with focal cerebral ischemic injury in an
animal model of experimental stroke, thereby providing
proof of concept that the synthetic antioxidant BP can be
neuroprotective.

Materials and methods
Male Wistar rats (90–108 g) were from the Animal Resources
Centre (Perth, Australia) and acclimated for 1 week before use.
Animals were housed at constant temperature (20  2°C) and

relative humidity (38  3%) with 12 h light/dark cycles and free
access to chow and water. Studies were performed according to
national guidelines and approved by the Sydney South West Health
Service Animal Welfare Committee (approval #2006/008) and
reported according to ARRIVE guidelines.
Animals were randomly assigned to a surgical sham group
(n = 25), a vehicle-supplemented chow group (control, n = 26),
and a group pre-treated with 0.12% w/w dietary BP (n = 27). This
level of dietary BP was selected from pilot studies that optimized the
dosage to achieve ~ 50 lM circulating BP (not shown). In rabbits a
similar level of dietary BP yielded ~ 100 lM BP in the circulation
(Witting et al. 1999b). Standard rat chow was soaked with vehicle
(Ethanol; 99.7%) or ethanolic solutions of BP (Polysciences,
Warrington, PA, USA) at 0.12% BP w/w chow. Treated chow was
dried in a fume hood (7 days) to remove residual vehicle and both
control or BP-treated chow was stored (4°C) until used. The surgical
sham group received standard, untreated chow. Dietary supplementation continued for 4 weeks with monitoring of food and ﬂuid intake,
body weight and wellbeing; chow and water were provided ad libitum.
Animal model of experimental stroke
A surgical model of focal cerebral ischemia and reperfusion,
referred to hereafter as the middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion,
was routinely applied (Anderson and Sims 2002). The shamoperated group was used to control for the surgery to expose the
carotid artery, although these animals were not exposed to MCA
occlusion. The vehicle-only supplemented chow group was utilized
to directly compare the effects of experimental stoke with the animal
group treated with 0.12% w/w BP in the diet.
After 4 weeks feeding, animals (body weight 390–400 g) were
anesthetized with 5% v/v isoﬂuorane (Veterinary Companies
Australia, Sydney, Australia), intubated and maintained with
mechanical ventilation on 2% v/v isoﬂuorane. The area around
the carotid region was made sterile and systemic analgesia
(Rimadyl; 1 mg/100 g weight) was administered. The common
carotid artery was exposed via a midline incision and the MCA
occluded using a monoﬁlament suture (4-0 Nylene, Dynek, Sydney,
Australia) coated with poly-L-lysine and blunted at the tip. The
blunt-end monoﬁlament was inserted through the external carotid
artery and advanced ~ 22 mm to the MCA before being tied in
place and the wound sutured. Animals were then transferred to
isolation cages with heat mats and monitored for recovery and
checked against benchmark criteria (anti-clockwise gait and loss of
righting reﬂex). Animals that failed to meet these criteria (~ 12%)
were excluded from the study.
After 2 h of MCA occlusion, animals were re-anesthetized with
5% v/v isoﬂuorane and the monoﬁlament was withdrawn to induce a
cycle of ischemia reperfusion injury. The wound area was treated
with Bupivicane (0.5% v/v in phosphate-buffered saline) and the
animals were recovered in heated isolation cages (appropriate chow/
water provided ad libitum). After 24 h, the animals were reanesthetized with 5% v/v isoﬂuorane and administered analgesia
before organ harvest. Blood samples were collected via the tail vein
into heparin-coated tubes. A thoracotomy was performed to expose
the heart and the vasculature was perfused with phosphate-buffered
saline (50 mM, pH 7.4; 80 mm Hg) for 5 min via the left ventricle.
Brain tissue was isolated, sectioned and stored at 80°C for
biochemical or molecular studies, or ﬁxed in 10% v/v formalin

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

(30 min), washed, stored in ethanol (99.7%) and kept at 4°C for
histologic studies.
Biochemical analyses
Blood was centrifuged to obtain plasma as described previously
(Witting et al. 1999b). Analysis of plasma hemoglobin (tHb),
bicarbonate ion (HCO3), sodium and potassium ions, urea, and
creatinine were performed in a single batch assay by the Biochemistry Department, Concord Hospital (Sydney, Australia).
For analysis of lipids, vitamin E (a-TOH), BP and its oxidation
product tert-butyl diphenoquinone (DQ), frozen brain tissue from
the right parietal cortex was thawed at 20°C then homogenized in
phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4) containing 25 lM butylated
hydroxytoluene (Merck, Sydney, Australia), 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (Sigma, Sydney, Australia) and a proteaseinhibitor cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) using a rotating
piston as described previously (Witting et al.1999b). Samples of
homogenate were added to hexane:methanol (5 : 1; v/v) to extract
lipid-soluble components (Witting et al.1998) that were subjected to
reversed-phase (RP) HPLC to quantify non-esteriﬁed cholesterol
(FC), esteriﬁed cholesterol (CE), oxidized CE (referred to as CE-O
(O)H), and a-TOH (Witting et al.1998).
Assessment of BP and DQ in lipid extracts was determined by
RP-HPLC using a LC18 column (Witting et al. 1999b) eluted with
100% Solvent A (methanol/acetonitrile/H2O; 10 : 10 : 3 v/v/v,
1.5 mL/min) for 10 min monitored at 270 nm, followed by 100%
Solvent B (methanol/acetonitrile; 1 : 1 v/v, 1.5 mL/min) for 20 min
monitored at 214 nm, BP eluted at 16 and DQ at ~ 25 min.
Analytes were quantiﬁed by peak area comparison with standards.
Homogenate protein levels were determined with the bicinchoninic
acid protein assay (Sigma) and used to normalize all biochemical
parameters.
Infarct area analysis
Brains were sectioned sequentially in 2 mm slices and stained in
3% 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride for 15 min. The posterior
surface of each triphenyltetrazolium chloride-stained section was
digitally imaged and infarct area calculated using Image J (v1.4;
Freeware, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA). The right side of the brain
was consistently analyzed as this represented the area predominantly affected by the MCA occlusion procedure. Infarct area
was then determined in the second section from the midline and
expressed as a percentage of the total area of the right side of the
brain.

735

Direct blood pressure measurement
Blood pressure was measured using a separate group of male Wistar
rats with identical mean age to animals designated for experimental
stroke and fed vehicle- or BP-treated diets. Mean arterial pressure
(MAP) was measured in anesthetized rats via cannulation of the
common carotid artery. An incision was made to expose the left
external carotid artery, a cannula inserted and a catheter secured to
this cannula. A three-way valve was connected, which separated a
syringe containing sterile saline with 25 unit of heparin, from a
pressure transducer connected to a multi-channel Powerlab Chart
with ampliﬁer (ADInstruments, Sydney, Australia). Data were
analyzed using Chart (v5.1, ADInstruments) and the MAP was
determined.
Acute phase response gene expression
Total RNA was extracted from homogenates using a GeneElute kit
(Sigma). cDNA was constructed by reverse transcriptase–polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) using SuperScript II RT (Invitrogen, Sydney,
Australia) and a GeneAmp Thermo-Cycler system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Reactions containing total RNA (2 lL),
oligo (dT) (1 lL) and diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated Nanopure
water (9 lL) were denatured (70°C, 5 min), chilled (4°C 5 min) then
treated with 1 lL RNaseOut, 1 lL (dNTP Mix; Proligo), 4 lL of 5x
reaction buffer, 1.75 lL DEPC-treated water, and 0.25 lL Bioscript
(Bioline, Sydney, Australia). Samples were heated (42°C, 60 min)
and the RT-reaction was stopped by increasing temperature to 70°C
(10 min). Transcribed cDNA was stored at 20°C for prior to use.
Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using the Gene2000 RealTime PCR system (Corbett Research, Sydney, Australia) and SYBR
Green PCR Master Mix (Invitrogen). cDNA samples (2 lL) were
mixed with SYBR Green Master Mix (12.5 lL), primers (1.0 lL, 5
pmol/L) as described in Table 1, and RNase-free water (8.5 lL).
Cycling conditions were as for RT-PCR. The average output of
three independent samples was reported and gene expression was
quantiﬁed by the comparative Ct method. Target gene expression
was normalized to b-actin and expressed as a fold-change relative to
the corresponding control (arbitrarily assigned a value of 1).
SDS–PAGE and western blot analysis
Levels of cerebral hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1a protein were
determined with sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE) combined with Western blot analysis.
Brieﬂy, homogenates were centrifuged (1500 g, 4°C, 10 min) and
the supernatants normalized for protein. Samples (20 lg) were

Table 1 Sequences of primers used for mRNA detection by RT-PCR
Gene
b-actin
HIF-1a
HO-1
SOD-1
Glut-1
GPx-1

Sense Primer
0

Anti-sense Primer
0

5 GGACTTCGAGCAAGAGATGG-3
50 -TCAAGTCAGCAACGTGGAAG-30
50 -GAGATTGAGCGCAACAAGGA-30
50 CCACTGCAGGACCTCATTTT-30
50 GCCCTGGATGTCCTATCTGA-30
50 -TGAGAAGTGCGAGGTGAATG-30

0

Anneal Temp°C
0

5 -AGCACTGTGTTGGCGTACAG-3
50 -TATCGAGGCTGTGTCGACT-30
50 -AGCGGTAGAGCTGCTTGAACT-30
50 -CACCTTTGCCCAAGTCATCT-30
50 -CCCACGATGAAGTTTGAGGT-30
50 AACACCGTCTGGACCTACCA-30

62
57
55
60
60
60

Primers were designed using a BLAST search of protein databases and converting sequence data to the primary DNA sequence. Primers were
designed using this consensus sequence with speciﬁc fragments between 100 and 200 bp chosen for each of the genes of interest.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

736

T. T. H. Duong et al.

denatured at 95°C in the presence of SDS, dithiothreitol and
b-mercaptoethanol, loaded onto 8% v/v SDS–PAGE and resolved
by electrophoresis.
Proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and nonspeciﬁc sites were blocked by incubation (4°C) in Tris-buffered
saline containing 0.1% v/v Tween 20 and 5% w/v skim milk
powder. Membranes were incubated with mouse anti-HIF-1a mAb
(Sigma; 1 : 200 v/v dilution, 12 h, 4°C), washed (three times,
5 min), and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-linked secondary
antibody (1 : 2000 v/v, Sigma). After 4 h and consecutive washes
(three times Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% v/v Tween 20),
immune-reactive proteins were detected using a commercial kit
(iNtRON Biotechnology, Songdo, Korea) and quantiﬁed with
densitometry (BioDocAnalyzer, Biometra, Gottingen, Germany).
Tissue ATP concentration
Tissue ATP content was determined with a commercial kit
(ATPliteâ; Perkin Elmer, Melbourne, Australia). Brieﬂy, tissue
homogenates (20 lL) were treated with kit lysis buffer (130 lL)
and gently mixed in an orbital shaker at 386x g for 5 min. Lysates
were then treated with substrate solution (50 lL), agitated for 5 min
and incubated in the dark for 10 min. ATP-dependent luminescence
was determined using a Victor III Multi-label plate reader (Perkin
Elmer) and normalized to total homogenate protein content.
Caspase 3/7 activity
The activity of caspase 3/7 in brain tissue homogenate was
determined using a commercial kit (Caspase-GloTM 3/7 Assay;
Promega, Sydney, Australia). Aliquots of brain homogenate (20 lL)
were added to plates, treated with Caspase-GloTM 3/7 reagent (100 lL)
and gently mixed (30 s, plate shaker). Plates were then incubated
(4°C, 40 min) and caspase 3/7 activity assessed by measuring
luminescence output using a Victor III Multi-label plate reader (Perkin
Elmer). Caspase 3/7 activity was expressed as a fold-change compared
with the activity measured in the corresponding controls.
Assessment of the thiol redox ratio
Total tissue thiol and corresponding oxidized disulﬁde products were
determined in cerebral homogenates. Homogenates were incubated
(37°C. 10 min) with 100 lM 5,50 -dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid)
(DTNB, Sigma). A matched sample was mixed with 10 units/mL
glutathione reductase and 100 lM NADPH and incubated at 37°C to
reduce tissue disulﬁdes. After 1 h, these samples were incubated
with 100 lM DTNB (Sigma) and thiol levels measured (416 nm)
with a multi-label Victor III plate reader. Total thiol was normalized
to cell protein, whereas levels of oxidized thiols were calculated from
the difference between values of thiol in the matched samples and
expressed as: [Total thiol]/([total thiol]+[oxidized thiol]).
Histology
Brain tissue was dehydrated, cleared with organic solvents, and
inﬁltrated with parafﬁn using an automated tissue-processing
machine (TP1020; Leica, Sydney, Australia). Serial sections
(5 lm) were cut with a microtome (RM2125; Leica), dewaxed,
and rehydrated (95% v/v alcohol). Sections were immersed in 0.1%
w/v Luxol fast blue solution (60°C for 2 h) followed by 2 min
differentiation in saturated lithium carbonate. Sections were then
counterstained in 0.5% v/v cresyl violet solution (2 min), washed,

and differentiated in acid alcohol for 8 s. Slides were then washed,
dehydrated, cleared, and mounted in dibutyl phthalate xylene for
visualization with light microscopy (Olympus microscope ﬁtted
with a digital camera; DP Controller; v2.2.1.227, Olympus,
Melbourne, Australia) and converted to JPEG for handling with
MS PowerPoint (v7, Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA).
Immunohistochemistry
Formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn embedded specimens were sectioned (thickness 5 lm) and labeled with a rabbit anti-mouse 4-Hydroxynonenal
(4-HNE) antibody (BIOSS, Boston, MA, USA). The 4-HNE
antibody detects proteins that have been chemically modiﬁed by
aldehydic products of lipid peroxidation. Brieﬂy, specimens were
dewaxed, rehydrated and treated by heat antigen retrieval (pH 9)
using a commercial retrieval solution (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark).
After peroxidase blockade, slides were incubated with anti-4-HNE
(1 : 100 v/v) or an isotype control (rabbit IgG, Dako) for 1 h.
Sections were labeled with an anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Sigma)
and developed with diaminobenzidine (Dako, Sydney, Australia).
Slides were dehydrated, cleared, and mounted in dibutyl phthalate
xylene for visualization with an Olympus light microscope ﬁtted with
a digital camera (DP Controller; v2.2.1.227, Olympus) and converted
to JPEG for handling with MS PowerPoint (v7, Microsoft).
TUNEL analysis
Apoptotic cell death was detected using DeadEndTM Colorimetric
TUNEL system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Brieﬂy, slide sections (5 lm) were deparafﬁnized in
Histoclear, rehydrated and treated with NaCl (0.85% w/v, 5 min)
then 4% w/v paraformaldehyde, washed, and permeabilized with
Proteinase K. Sections were then equilibrated and incubated with
Biotinylated Nucleotide mix and recombinant Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase (rTdT) at 37°C. After 1 h, the reaction was
stopped and endogenous peroxidases blocked with H2O2. Sections
were incubated with Streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase conjugate
solution and color developed with a diaminobenzidine substrate.
Alternate sections were processed in parallel without rTdT as controls.
Sections were visualized with light microscopy and images captured
digitally and analyzed using Image J software as described above.
Vascular reactivity
Aortae were harvested from male Wistar rats (~ 0.20–0.3 kg) fed
normal rodent chow via a thoracotomy procedure to expose the
chest cavity. Prior to removal, the aortae were perfused (phosphate
buffer pH 7.4, 80 mmHg), carefully dissected and placed in
modiﬁed Krebs–Henseleit solution (in mM: 11 D-glucose, 1.2
MgSO4, 12 KH2PO4, 4.7 KCl, 120 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 100 L–
arginine, and 2.5 CaCl22H2O) and cut into 3 mm ring segments,
mounted in a myobath system (World Precision Instruments, Inc.,
Sarasota, FL, USA) bathed in 20 mL of modiﬁed Krebs–Henseleit
solution aerated at 37°C with Carbogen (5% CO2) and contracted by
titrating with phenylepherine as described in detail elsewhere
(Rayner et al. 2005). A dose that caused half maximal contraction
was selected for all further studies using the same ring segment.
A concentration–response curve to acetylcholine (ACh) was
constructed, with relaxation expressed as percentage of initial
constriction. Prior to use, rings were pre-treated with H2O2 (50 lM)
or 200 lM 1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazole[4,3-a]quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ, an

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

150

Results
Dietary supplementation with BP
Pilot studies in rats pre-treated with 0.12% wt/wt BP in
the diet showed circulating BP concentrations of 43.3 
15.4 lM (mean  SD; n = 3 rats) while its oxidation
product DQ was undetected. These data indicate that 100%
of the circulating polyphenol was available in the antioxidant
active form. A similar analysis of brain homogenates
revealed that BP was present at 130  50 pmol/mg protein,
whereas the yield of DQ was 60  20 pmol/mg protein
indicating that the drug entered cerebral tissues and that
~ 70% of the polyphenol was present in the antioxidant
active form.
The dietary uptake of BP was initially examined in the
absence of experimental stroke to observe any adverse
physiological reactions to the drug. Overall, animals tolerated
0.12% wt/wt BP in the diet with no marked change in body
weight, plasma biochemistry, or renal function compared
with animals receiving the control diet (Table 2). Overall,
there were no signiﬁcant changes in the plasma levels of total
hemoglobin (tHb), bicarbonate (HCO3), sodium (Na+), and
potassium (K+) ions (Table 2). Only creatinine levels were
signiﬁcantly decreased in BP-treated animals (Table 2).
Although not signiﬁcant, urea levels tended to be lower in
the BP pre-treated animals, however, the urea:creatinine ratio

MAP (mmHg)

inhibitor of soluble guanylyl cyclase that prevents vascular relaxation) for 60 min followed by washing, pre-constriction (with
phenylepherine, at the dose that yielded half-maximal constriction)
and monitoring relaxation to added ACh. Other rings were pretreated with BP (ﬁnal concentration 50 lM) before addition of H2O2
(50 lM) followed by pre-constriction and assessment of vascular
relaxation. Under pathophysiological conditions concentrations of
H2O2 up to 100 lM are reported in rat striatal tissue following
forebrain ischemic injury (Hyslop et al. 1995) therefore, the dose
used here is within the pathologically relevant range.
Statistical analyses
Differences between groups were assessed with one-way ANOVA
employing the Newman–Keuls multiple comparisons post hoc test.
Signiﬁcance was accepted at the 95% conﬁdence level (p < 0.05).

737

100
50
0
Vehicle
control

Treatment
Fig. 1 Mean arterial blood pressure remains unchanged in BP-treated
animals. Animals were fed vehicle-treated (control) or BP-treated chow
(0.12% w/w) with food and water available ad libitum. After 4 weeks
dietary supplementation, MAP was measured in unconscious rats via
cannulation of the carotid artery. MAP was determined using standard
CHART software (version 6.5, ADInstruments). Data represent
mean  SD; n = 6 rats per group.

was similar in both groups (Table 2) suggesting that renal
function was largely unaffected in BP supplemented animals.
There was no signiﬁcant difference in MAP between the
BP-supplemented and control animals (Fig. 1). These data
indicated that BP was unlikely to confound through a
mechanism involving blood pressure lowering.
Experimental stroke induction in BP-supplemented animals
To study the effects of BP supplementation on experimental
stroke, a MCA occlusion model was employed to mimic
focal cerebral ischemia. To test the neuroprotective efﬁcacy
of the polyphenolic antioxidant, BP- or vehicle-supplemented (control) animals were subjected to MCA occlusion
for 2 h followed by removal of the occluding monoﬁlament
and 24 h reperfusion. Brain infarcts in these two animal
groups were compared with a sham-operated group (Fig. 2a).
MCA occlusion followed by 24 h reperfusion caused focal
cerebral damage that extended to the caudate putamen and
the parietal cortex area 1 and 2. In the absence of BP, the
MCA occlusion/reperfusion insult induced a ~ 5-fold
increase in infarct area compared with the sham (infarct area
6.7  2.4 vs. 34.5  6.7%; mean  SD, respectively)

Table 2 Dietary supplementation with BP (0.12% w/w diet) in rats does not affect renal physiologyaᵃ
Treatment

Weight

tHb (g/L)

HCO3

Na+ (mM)

K+ (mM)

Urea (mM)

Creatinine (lmol/L)

Urea/Creatinine Ratio

Vehicle (control)
BP

481 (49)
465 (57)

138.7 (16.0)
150.0 (5.6)

26.6 (0.9)
25.6 (2.5)

133.1 (6.0)
134.4 (4.1)

7.6 (5.7)
7.3 (5.4)

7.1 (1.0)
4.97 (0.3)

50 (2.1)
36b(9.5)

142
138

a

Animals supplemented with vehicle-treated chow (Vehicle control) or chow-supplemented with BP (0.12% w/w in the diet) for 4 weeks were killed
and samples of whole blood were obtained. These isolated samples were immediately centrifuged to obtain plasma as described previously (Witting
et al. 1999a) and the biochemical parameters listed were measured as described in detail in the Methods section. All work with animals was
performed with approval of the local Ethics Committee. Data presented as mean  (SD); n = 4 except weight where n = 31 (control) or 35 (BP
group).
b
Different from the control group, p < 0.05.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

738

T. T. H. Duong et al.

(a)

Sham

Control

BP

(b)

Fig. 2 Supplementation with BP decreases the proportion of infarct
area in the brain following middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion.
Animals were fed normal chow (Sham-operated), vehicle-treated chow
(Vehicle control), or BP-supplemented chow (0.12% w/w) for a period
of 4 weeks. After that time, animals were anesthetized, analgesia was
administered and the animals were subjected to MCA occlusion (2 h)
with 24 h reperfusion or the sham operation protocol. Animals were

then killed and brains were harvested, sectioned and (a) stained with
triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC). (b) Infarct areas were determined
by encapsulating the pale damaged areas using Image J and
expressing damage as a percent of the total brain. Data represent
mean  SD; n = 25 (Sham-operated), 26 (Vehicle control) and 27 (BP
group). *Different from the surgical Sham-operated group, p < 0.001;
#
Different compared with the Vehicle control, p < 0.05.

(Fig. 2b). Despite the observation that the sham-operation
caused some minor cerebral damage (Fig. 2b), these animals
exhibited no obvious neurological symptoms post-surgery. In
contrast, the size of the infarct in the brain of BPsupplemented animals decreased by 27% (p < 0.05) compared with vehicle-treated controls (Fig. 2b). Although, BPtreatment did not diminish the infarct to the level observed in
the sham-operation group (Fig. 2b).

the total CE (native parent lipid), increased signiﬁcantly, up
to 10-fold, after experimental stroke (Table 3). The increased
cerebral lipid oxidation in control animals was reduced
signiﬁcantly in BP-supplemented animals. In contrast to CEO(O)H, a-TOH levels did not alter following MCA occlusion procedure or with BP supplementation and were similar
across all animal groups (Table 3).
To assess whether oxidant sensitive water-soluble substrates were susceptible to oxidation we compared the
homogenate levels of reduced and oxidized thiols in the
tissue samples and expressed this as the total thiol redox ratio
(Fig. 3a). After MCA occlusion the total thiol redox ratio
was signiﬁcantly lower than the corresponding value in the
sham-operated group indicative of increased oxidative stress
in these tissues. Supplementing BP prior to experimental
stroke markedly improved the total thiol redox ratio returning
this index of oxidative stress to levels similar to the shamoperated group.

Oxidation in brain tissue after MCA occlusion
The effect of oxidative stress in the ischemic brain following
MCA occlusion and reperfusion was examined initially by
measuring tissue antioxidant and oxidized lipid content
(Table 3). Compared with the sham-operated group, the
concentrations of a-TOH, free cholesterol and CE were
similar in brain tissue from the control animals after MCA
occlusion and reperfusion (Table 3). Importantly, the formation of oxidized CE (CE-O(O)H), and also its ratio relative to

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

Table 3 Dietary supplementation with BP affects the level of oxidative
damage in the ischemic braina

n-value
[a-TOH] (pmol/mg P)ᵇ
[FC] (pmol/mg P)
[Total CE] = C18:2
+ C20:4 (pmol/mg P)
[CE-O(O)H]c103
(pmol/mg P)
CE-O(O)H/CE
[BP] (pmol/mg P)

Sham-operatedb

Vehicle
control

BP

25
2.9 (1.6)
80.8 (21.2)
15.1 (8.9)

26
2.5 (0.7)
88.3 (22.6)
19.9 (7.1)

27
2.8 (0.8)
69.5 (15.9)
21.5 (4.3)

2 (1)

22 (6)c

1 (1)d

0.1 (0.1)
ND

1.1 (0.4)c
ND

0.04 (0.5)d
51.1 (16.1)

a

Animals supplemented with normal chow (Sham-operated), vehicletreated chow (Vehicle control) or chow supplemented with BP (0.12%
w/w in the diet) for 4 weeks were subjected to experimental stroke (2 h
MCA occlusion, 24 h reperfusion) or sham-operation then euthanized
and samples of brain tissues were obtained. Isolated tissue samples
were processed as described previously (Witting et al. 1999a,b) and
the biochemical parameters listed were analyzed by liquid chromatography as described in detail in the Methods section. Data are
expressed as mean  (SD). FC = free cholesterol; a-TOH = a-tocopherol (biologically active vitamin E); CE = cholesteryl esters (the sum of
the polyunsaturated lipids: cholesteryl linoleate, C18:2 and cholesteryl
arachidonate, C20:4); CE-O(O)H = CE-derived lipid hydroperoxides
and hydroxides. The ratio of CE-O(O)H/CE represents the proportion
of oxidized lipid per parent lipid.
b
Units of measurement and the numbers of samples tested (n) for all
parameters are as indicated.
c
Different from the Sham-operated group; p < 0.05.
d
Different from the control group, p < 0.001. ND = not detected.

The presence of oxidized proteins was determined to
complement the assessment of lipid and thiol oxidation after
MCA occlusion (Fig. 3b). Low background levels of 4-HNE
modiﬁed proteins were detected in the sham-operated group
when imaging the same cortical region where focal infarcts
were detected in vehicle-treated controls (Fig. 3b, panel i).
This data indicated that the surgical procedure alone
stimulated oxidative stress, which resulted in lipid oxidation
(Table 3) and the formation of 4-HNE modiﬁed proteins.
However, the level of immune-positive staining increased
markedly in the vehicle-treated controls particularly in the
penumbral region surrounding the infarct core (Fig. 3b,
panel ii). Supplementation of BP before MCA occlusion
decreased immune-positive staining in this peri-infarct region
compared with the vehicle-treated control although this
remained slightly higher than in the sham samples (Fig. 3b,
compare panels i and iii). Notably, no staining was apparent
in the isotype control (Fig. 3b, panel iv).
These data are consistent with focal cerebral ischemia
enhancing oxidative damage in the affected brain region.
Furthermore, the data indicate that oxidation of substrates in
both lipid and water-soluble environments can be effectively

739

ameliorated with BP and that dietary supplementation with
BP augments the antioxidant capacity of brain without
altering vitamin E or lipid status.
Gene expression in response to focal ischemia reperfusion
injury
Cerebral ischemia adversely affects oxygen homeostasis and
induces a hypoxic challenge in tissue. An important and early
response gene activated by hypoxia encodes the transcription
factor, HIF-1a. Expression of HIF-1a was examined in brain
tissue following MCA occlusion/reperfusion (Fig. 4). HIF1a gene expression increased 2-fold in control animals
compared with the sham-operated group (Fig. 4a). A detectable amount of HIF-1a mRNA and protein occurred even in
the surgical sham group (Fig. 4a–c), suggesting that either a
basal expression of HIF-1a or that the surgical procedure to
isolate MCA without occlusion/reperfusion induced HIF-1a.
Notably, BP-supplementation restored HIF-1a mRNA levels
to those observed in the surgical sham group (Fig. 4a).
Consistent with the mRNA data, HIF-1a protein tended to
increase in control animals following MCA occlusion/
reperfusion (Fig. 4b). However, the increase in the level of
HIF-1a protein was not signiﬁcant and was unaffected by BP
supplementation (Fig. 4c). The data indicate that changes in
HIF-1a gene expression did not result in signiﬁcant
concomitant changes in its protein level over the time range
tested.
Maintenance of oxygen homeostasis by HIF-1a is thought
to involve activation of other acute response genes against
hypoxia. We therefore examined the changes in expression
of the acute response genes; hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1),
glucose transporter-1 (Glut-1), superoxide dismutase
(SOD1), and glutathione peroxidase (GPx-1) (Fig. 5), as
the products of these genes are thought to mediate adaptive
responses to oxygen imbalances in tissue. The gene expression of HO-1 (Fig. 5a), Glut-1 (Fig. 5b), and SOD1 (Fig. 5c)
in brain homogenates all signiﬁcantly increased (up to 10
times) following experimental stroke. The increases in Glut-1
and SOD1, but not HO-1 gene expression, were signiﬁcantly
abated by BP supplementation (Fig. 5a–c). Notably, GPx-1
gene expression decreased signiﬁcantly following experimental stroke and this decrease was reversed with BP
supplementation (Fig. 5d). The data suggest that hypoxiarelated acute response gene expression induced in brain
tissue is modulated by BP supplementation.
Attenuation of hypoxia-induced low energy levels and
neuronal cell apoptosis
After ischemia reperfusion insult, mitochondria may become
dysfunctional which can adversely affect ATP bioavailability. Compared with the sham-operated group, the concentration of protein-normalized ATP decreased markedly in
damaged rat brain following MCA occlusion (Fig. 6a).
However, ATP levels improved signiﬁcantly with BP

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

740

T. T. H. Duong et al.

(a)

(b)
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Fig. 3 Supplementation with BP improves the thiol redox status and
reduces oxidized protein levels in the brain after middle cerebral artery
(MCA) occlusion. Animals were fed normal chow (Sham), vehicletreated chow (control) or BP-supplemented chow (0.12% w/w). After
4 weeks, animals were anesthetized, analgesia administered and the
animals were subjected to MCA occlusion (2 h) with 24 h reperfusion
or the sham operation protocol. Animals were killed, brains were
harvested and (a) the right parietal cortex was homogenized and the
concentration of total (free thiol) and oxidized thiol determined.
Oxidative stress was then expressed as the thiol redox ratio = [total
thiol]/([total thiol]+[total oxidized thiol]). A decrease in the thiol redox
ratio indicates increased oxidative stress. Note, the Y-axis scale has

been adjusted to start at 0.6. Data are presented as mean  SD,
n = 25 (Sham-operated), 26 (Vehicle control) and 27 (BP pretreatment group). *Different from the Sham-operated group,
p < 0.0001. #Different from the vehicle-treated control group,
p < 0.0001. (b) Thin sections (5 lm) of parietal cortex from the (i)
Sham operated, (ii) vehicle-treated control and (iii) BP treated groups
were immune-stained for 4-hydroxynonenal modiﬁed proteins. Representative images were taken in the penumbral region of the focal
infarct (panels ii and iii) or in a similar region in the samples from the
Sham group (i). Image in panel (iv) shows no meaningful staining with
the rabbit isotype control.

pre-treatment indicating that BP is protective against
hypoxia-induced tissue energy dysfunction (Fig. 6a).
Both dysfunctional energy metabolism, and enhanced
oxidative stress, can facilitate neuronal cell apoptosis after
transient focal cerebral ischemia. The activity of pro-apoptopic
caspases (3/7) in brain tissue were examined as an indication of
increased apoptosis in tissue following MCA occlusion.

Caspase 3/7 activity was markedly enhanced in the control
animal group after cerebral ischemia compared with the sham
(Fig. 6b). Signiﬁcantly, BP pre-treatment effectively inhibited
this activation of pro-apoptopic caspases in experimental stoke
suggesting that the polyphenol may be useful in enhancing
tissue viability in the area-at-risk by limiting apoptosis in the
peri-infarct zone surrounding the primary infarct (Fig. 6b).

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

(a)

(b)
110 kDa
Lane

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12

(c)

Fig. 4 Hypoxia inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) is expressed in the
parietal cortex following middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion.
Animals were fed normal chow (Sham), vehicle- or (control), or BPtreated chow (0.12% w/w). After 4 weeks, animals were anesthetized,
analgesia administered and the animals were subjected to MCA
occlusion (2 h) with 24 h reperfusion or the sham operation protocol.
Animals were then killed, brains harvested, the right parietal cortex was
homogenized and total mRNA was isolated and corresponding cDNA
prepared. Expression of HIF-1a was determined by q-PCR. Data show
(a) fold-change in b-actin normalized HIF-1a mRNA; mean  SEM,
n = 25 (Sham), 26 (control) and 27 (BP group). *Different from the
Sham-operated group, p < 0.05. #Different from the Vehicle control,
p < 0.05. (b) HIF-1a protein in the rat brain parietal cortex following
MCA occlusion. Samples represent: Lane 1-4, Vehicle Control; Lane 58, BP-treated and Lane 9-12, Sham groups. (c) immune-reactive
proteins bands in (b) were quantiﬁed by densitometry. Data represent
mean  SEM, n = 4 independent and randomly selected brain
samples.

Brain tissue was further examined histochemically for
apoptosis and necrosis in neuronal cells following MCA
occlusion (Fig. 6c). Co-staining with Luxol fast blue and
Cresyl violet depicted edema, increased neuronal pyknosis
with cellular debris and focal areas of myelin aggregation in
the border zone of peri-infarcted tissues from the vehicletreated control compared to the corresponding tissue region
in brains from the sham-operated group (Fig. 6c). Also,
Cresyl violet-positive neurons tended to contain fewer
nucleoli in the vehicle-treated control group than the shamoperated group. In the corresponding tissues from BP pretreated animals less myelin aggregation was evident in the
border zone of the peri-infarcted tissue and more neurons

741

tended to contain neucloli, although the extent of edema was
unaffected (Fig. 6c).
The presence of apoptopic nuclei in cells, detected by
TUNEL labeling, was evident in the vehicle-treated control
group after MCA occlusion/reperfusion and this was markedly ameliorated in the BP-supplemented group (Fig. 6c).
Only weak TUNEL labeling was detected in the surgical
sham group (Fig. 6c). Together the data indicate that
development of neuronal cell damage and apoptosis following experimental stroke was signiﬁcantly inhibited by pretreatment with BP.
To assess whether the polyphenolic antioxidant BP protects
the vascular endothelium from oxidative insult, segments
from isolated rat aortic vessels were exposed to H2O2, in the
presence and absence of BP, and vascular response to
vasodilating ACh monitored. Consistent with previous reports
(Thomas et al. 2006; Witting et al. 2007), exposing vessels to
H2O2 in the absence of BP diminished vascular relaxation to
ACh (Figure S1). As expected vascular rings incubated with
the soluble guanylyl cyclase inhibitor ODQ showed little
response to ACh. In contrast, vessels pre-treated with BP
showed a similar vaso-response to the control suggesting that
BP, added at a concentration that matched plasma levels in
BP-supplemented animals, inhibited H2O2-mediated oxidative insult and preserved vascular relaxation to ACh stimulus.

Discussion
In this study, we demonstrated that BP, a synthetic antioxidant with greater radical scavenging activity than vitamin E
[as judged by its lower oxidation potential (Shanu et al.
2010)], permeates the blood–brain barrier and is predominantly in its antioxidant (phenolic) active form. Dietary
supplementation with BP did not affect blood pressure or the
levels of endogenous vitamin E in either plasma or cerebral
tissue. Increasing the antioxidant capacity of cerebral tissue
with BP prior to experimental stroke signiﬁcantly inhibited
oxidative stress and the accumulation of lipid- and watersoluble biomarkers of oxidative damage. Infarct size
decreased in the brain following MCA occlusion as a model
of focal ischemic stroke. Inhibition of oxidative stress and
infarct size by BP supplemented before experimental stroke
was accompanied by a down-regulation of hypoxia-sensitive
gene expression, preservation of cerebral ATP levels and
attenuated neuronal apoptosis. In addition, BP reversed
H2O2-mediated endothelial dysfunction in an ex vivo bioassay for vascular reactivity. The cumulative data suggest that
BP has the potential to enhance the viability of cerebral tissue
in the setting of experimental stroke through increasing
neuronal tissue viability, as suggested by our earlier studies
with neuronal cells in vitro (Rayner et al. 2006; Duong et al.
2008), and potentially maintaining vascular perfusion.
Overall, our data suggest that supplementation with BP
may provide neuroprotection through multiple mechanisms.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

T. T. H. Duong et al.

Fold increase in
HO-1 mRNA

(a)

15

*

(b)
Fold increase in
Glut-1 mRNA

742

10
5

15
*
10

8

4

0

#
0

*

#

Sham

Vehicle
control

BP

Treatment

(d)

4

Fold increase in
GPx-1 mRNA

(c)
Fold increase in
SOD1 mRNA

0

5

2

0

#

*
Sham

Vehicle
control

BP

Treatment

Fig. 5 Gene expression in the parietal cortex following middle cerebral
artery (MCA) occlusion. Animals were fed normal chow (Shamoperated), vehicle- or (Vehicle control) or BP-treated chow (0.12% w/
w). After 4 weeks, animals were anesthetized, analgesia was administered and the animals were subjected to MCA occlusion (2 h) with
24 h reperfusion or the sham operation protocol. The brains were then
harvested, the right parietal cortex tissues homogenized, cDNA

prepared (as described in the legend to Fig. 4) and probed for gene
regulation by q-PCR. Data shows the b-actin-normalized fold-change
in mRNA expression of (a) HO-1, (b) Glut-1, (c) SOD1 and (d) GPX-1.
Data represent mean  SEM, n = 25 (Sham), 26 (treated control) and
27 (BP pre-treatment group). *Different from the Sham-operated group,
p < 0.05. #Different from the Vehicle control, p < 0.05.

Our data showing that BP pre-treatment ameliorates
oxidation during focal ischemia and reperfusion insult and
affords neuroprotection are consistent with the notion that
oxidative stress promotes brain damage following ischemic
stroke (for review see Sugawara and Chan 2003). Oxidative
stress may be a key factor underlying cerebral damage in
stroke, and reperfusion after ischemia has the potential to
increase ROS generation and aggravate tissue damage. There
is substantial evidence for the production of ROS in the brain
during acute cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (Kawase et al.
1999; Morita-Fujimura et al. 2001) leading to the expansion
of damage from the initial focal event (Chen et al. 2009). On
balance the majority of literature suggests that modulation of
antioxidant genes that enhance antioxidant capacity is linked
to neuroprotection in animal models of stroke (Kinouchi et al.
1991; Kondo et al. 1997; Dore et al. 1999; Davis et al. 2007).
We have demonstrated that BP supplemented prior to
stroke successfully inhibits markers of oxidative damage. For
example, the extent of lipid oxidation, the depletion of tissue
thiol content and the formation of protein carbonyl products
(generated by reaction between oxidation susceptible amino
acid residues in proteins and 4-hydroxynonenal) were all
ameliorated in animals pre-treated with BP. Similarly, the
endogenous antioxidant gene response to oxidative insult
was blunted in the presence of BP. Pre-treatment with BP
also signiﬁcantly decreased infarct size consistent with other
studies that assessed the neuroprotective efﬁcacy of antiox-

idant proteins (reviewed in Sugawara and Chan 2003) and
free radical scavengers (reviewed in Margaill et al. 2005) in
animal models of MCA occlusion. However, it remains
possible that oxidative stress may not be the sole contributor
to cerebral damage in stroke. This may explain the discrepancy between inhibition of oxidative stress and a relatively
modest translation of antioxidant action to preventing
neuronal tissue damage. In addition, BP may be differentially
effective against the types of oxidants involved in generating
oxidative stress that may be pertinent in stroke.
The types and extent of ROS generated in stroke are not
fully understood though there is a consensus that superoxide
radical anion (O2˙) is involved together with oxidants
linked to its metabolism such as H2O2. Mitochondria are a
signiﬁcant source of these ROS especially in reperfusion
after ischemia where oxygen intake is high. Even under
physiological conditions, respiratory chain generated O2˙
dismutation to H2O2 (via SOD2) may be as high as 2% of
electron ﬂow (Dikalov 2011). In addition to mitochondria,
NADPH oxidases (NOX) are a signiﬁcant source of O2˙ in
stroke (Radermacher et al. 2013) and a recent study shows
reduced stroke mortality and neurodegeneration in NOX4
gene knockout animals (Kleinschnitz et al. 2010). Interestingly, there may be signiﬁcant interplay between the ROSgenerating systems of mitochondria and NOX with interactivation of these systems leading to uncontrolled ROS
production (Dikalov 2011).

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

743

30

[ATP]
pmol/mg protein

(a)

#

20

*

(c)
10

Sham

BP

Vehicle

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

(vi)

0

Caspase activity
(Fold-change vs. sham)

(b)

1500

*

1000

500
#

0
Sham

Vehicle
control

BP

Treatment
Fig. 6 BP pre-treatment attenuates ATP depletion, pro-apoptotic
caspase activity, the extent of tissue damage and apoptosis after
middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion. Animals were fed normal chow
(Sham-operated), vehicle- or (Vehicle control) or BP-treated chow
(0.12% w/w). After 4 weeks, animals were anesthetized, analgesia was
administered and the animals subjected to MCA (2 h) occlusion with
24 h reperfusion or the sham operation protocol. The brains were then
harvested, the right parietal cortex separated, homogenized and (a) ATP
content or (b) tissue caspase 3/7 activity determined. Data represent
mean  SEM, n = 25 (Sham-operated), 26 (Vehicle-treated, control)
and 27 (BP group). *Different to the Sham-operated group, p < 0.001;
#
Different to the corresponding control in the absence of BP, p < 0.0001.

(c) Histochemical and immuno-histochemical staining of parietal cortex
using (panels i–iii) Luxol fast blue (myelin/myelinated axons) and Cresyl
Violet (neurons) or (panels iv–vi) TUNEL staining (surrogate for
apoptosis). In the peri-infarcted zone, tissue from BP-treated animals
(panels iii, vi) contained greater numbers of neurons containing nucleoli,
normal myelin-positive axons and decreased TUNEL positivity than
controls (panels ii, v). Insets show higher magniﬁcation of the boxed
area. Arrows indicate edema (yellow) and focal aggregation of myelin
positive axons (red). Images were captured with light microscopy (Nikon
Eclipse 80i H550L, 409 magniﬁcation, Sydney, Australia), converted to
TIF and manipulated with Microsoft PowerPoint (v 7, Microsoft). Scale
bars (including insets) represent 50 lm.

Whether BP can inhibit mitochondrial and/or NOXgenerated ROS and whether this leads to decreased oxidative
stress is not clear, although here we have demonstrated a
substantial decrease in lipid and thiol oxidation (that
translates to decreased protein oxidation and activation of
pro-apoptotic proteases) in the brains of BP-treated animals.
In addition, BP supplementation inhibits the accumulation of
O2˙ in cultured neuronal cells exposed to hypoxia
re-oxygenation injury (Rayner et al. 2006; Duong et al.
2008), suggesting that this polyphenol may regulate cellular
pathways involved in O2˙ generation.
Despite the prevailing view that prevention of oxidative
injury by quenching ROS may be therapeutically beneﬁcial,
the efﬁcacy of antioxidant therapy remains unsubstantiated in
stroke. While antioxidant therapy for stroke in animal models
has been largely successful, translation to large-scale human
clinical trials has been disappointing (Margaill et al. 2005;
Shuaib et al. 2007). The success of some antioxidant
therapies in stroke models suggests that these compounds
may have neuroprotective activities that are unrelated or
additive to antioxidant activity. For example, in addition to

its antioxidant activity in the ischemic brain (Yamagata et al.
2010), vitamin E has been reported to have anti-inﬂammatory (Guo et al. 2007) and anti-proliferative activities (Azzi
2007) that may be important in suppressing cerebral tissue
damage in stroke.
Regulation of redox sensitive transcription factors and
signal transduction pathways may be an important consideration in limiting neuronal damage after stroke. For
example, activation of the HIF pathway is generally considered to be neuroprotective as the expression of genes linked
to this pathway, including Glut-1, act to restore glucose and
oxygen delivery to optimize cell survival following ischemic
insult. Inactivation of HIF-1a in neurons exacerbates transient focal ischemic injury in the mouse brain (Baranova
et al. 2007) and stabilization of HIF-1a signaling affords
protection against cerebral ischemia and enhances cell viability
(Siddiq et al. 2007). Also, hypoxic pre-conditioning signiﬁcantly enhances neuroprotection via induction of HIF-1a and
downstream genes (Liu et al. 2005). That BP supplementation
effectively reduced HIF-1a in brain tissue following experimental stroke and normalized hypoxia-related gene expression

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

744

T. T. H. Duong et al.

of Glut-1, GPx-1 and SOD, suggests that ROS are also
involved in promoting HIF-1a expression and that scavenging
of ROS attenuates the response to hypoxia. Our results with BP
are similar to another study showing a SOD-induced reduction
in HIF-1a expression in hypoxic pre-conditioned neurons (Liu
et al. 2005).
It is evident that HO-1-mediated degradation of proteinfree heme to yield products with antioxidant (bilirubin) and
vasodilatory (carbon monoxide) properties is linked to
neuroprotection in the ischemic brain (Zeynalov et al.
2009). In contrast to HIF-1a, BP supplementation had little
effect on HO-1 gene expression in experimental stroke.
While HO-1 expression can be linked to HIF-1a, there are
other independent, antioxidant response pathways that
induce HO-1, such as the Nrf2-KEAP system (Satoh et al.
2006). It is also possible that BP stimulates HO-1 expression
via the Nrf2-KEAP system and that this overrides any
dampening in HO-1 by ROS attenuation in the presence of
BP. This is supported by studies that show HO-1 is
fundamentally required for neuroprotection against cerebral
ischemia afforded by Gingko biloba (EGb 761), a compound
that has ROS scavenging properties (Shah et al. 2011).
Cumulative evidence implicates oxidative stress in promoting cell apoptosis responsible for neuronal cell death and
expansion of damage to the peri-infarct zone after focal
ischemia (Matsuda et al. 2009). For example, decreases in
normal-nucleated neurons and increased levels of shrunken/
atrophic neurons and signiﬁcant DNA strand breakage in
apoptopic neurons are observed after focal ischemia. This is
accompanied by decreases in SOD1 (Ji et al. 2012) and SOD2
(Bonova et al. 2013) protein and activity within the infarct
core. A depletion of SOD activity in the infarct core suggests
that an imbalance in O2˙ clearance leading to oxidative injury
may promote DNA oxidation, neuronal cell apoptosis and
expansion of cerebral damage (Nagayama et al. 2000). By
contrast, regional differences in the expression of SOD2 are
evident between the infarct core and peri-infarct zone with the
penumbra showing marked (~9-fold) increases in SOD2
content after experimental MCA occlusion (Bonova et al.
2013). Our data demonstrating increased SOD1 mRNA in the
homogenized brain samples likely reﬂect changes in the
penumbra region surrounding the primary infarct.
The data presented herein agree with evidence that
apoptosis induced by oxidative stress plays a key role in
neuronal cell death (Kondo et al. 1997; Morita-Fujimura
et al. 2001; Noshita et al. 2003). The hallmarks of
apoptosis are nuclear condensation, cell shrinkage, and
chromosomal DNA fragmentation. Oxidative stress may act
directly on cells to initiate apoptosis or indirectly via
enhancing the production of pro-apoptopic factors such as
caspase-3 and -7 within mammalian cells. The MCA
occlusion model used herein induced a signiﬁcant increase
in cerebral caspase 3/7 activity that was accompanied by
shrinkage of, and shrunken nuclei in, neuronal cells with

evidence of tissue edema. The parallel increase in TUNEL
staining is consistent with DNA fragmentation and induction of apoptosis. Dietary supplementation with BP attenuated tissue caspase 3/7 activity and TUNEL staining
indicating the polyphenol inhibited apoptosis after experimental stroke. Increases in viable cerebral tissue in animals
pre-treated with BP may be important in limiting expansion
of the primary infarct.
In addition to attenuating apoptosis, BP-treatment had a
positive effect on cellular energetics. Thus, BP supplementation
restored cerebral tissue ATP levels following MCA occlusion
and reperfusion, indicating either mitochondrial function was
preserved or ATP consumption was abated. Preservation of
mitochondria function in both the infarct core and surrounding
penumbra is important for limiting damage because mitochondrial dysfunction can exacerbate oxidative damage and/or
inﬂuence cell death pathways (Sims and Muyderman 2010).
Enhanced ATP production stimulated by BP likely provides a
mechanism for neuroprotection. Also, our data demonstrating
that BP can inhibit vascular dysfunction induced by H2O2 ex
vivo suggest that BP may provide additional protective
pathways involved in re-establishing the ﬂow of oxygenated
blood to the affected ischemic tissues.
There are no available treatments to inhibit or repair
neuronal cell damage sustained during stroke, and the
currently available tPA treatment has severe practical
restrictions limiting its usage. Pre-treatment with BP was
used in this model as proof of concept that a synthetic
polyphenol could abrogate focal ischemic brain damage,
although such prophylactic treatment does not reﬂect the
clinical situation of a suitable post-stroke therapy. Thus, pretreatment with BP over 4 weeks to achieve a stable
pharmacologically active level of this antioxidant in the
brain is a clear limitation of this study. To address this
limitation further studies with BP administered after experimental stroke as well as investigations using drug delivery
vehicles to increase the rate of antioxidant uptake into the
brain are warranted.
Despite the limitations of our study, BP could possibly be
considered as a preventative for patients who suffer a
transient ischemic attack, where the risk of future stroke
episodes in the ensuing weeks is high (Wu et al. 2007). Also,
BP may have some potential in combination therapy with
tPA to address ROS production upon re-canalization and
reduce the risk of infarct expansion to the penumbra similar
to the antioxidants Ebselen (Lapchak and Zivin 2003) and
Edaravone (Lapchak and Zivin 2009; Yamashita et al.
2009). Neuroprotection with antioxidants such as BP may
also be beneﬁcial to elective neurosurgery where there is a
signiﬁcant risk of ischemia owing to micro-vessel occlusion
and possibly in neurodegenerative pathologies such as in
Alzheimer’s disease where oxidative stress has been
implicated (reviewed in Sutherland et al. 2013). Despite
these possibilities, long-term antioxidant therapy with BP is

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

unlikely given the poor outcomes documented for vitamin E
in large-scale randomized control studies (Lonn et al. 2005;
Sesso et al. 2008). Although it is noteworthy, that the
antioxidant activity of BP is superior to vitamin E by virtue
of a lower one-electron oxidation potential ~0.31 vs. 0.48 V,
respectively (Shanu et al. 2010).
Natural and synthetic polyphenols may cause oxidative
damage that is toxic to cells, where the measure of
cytotoxicity for a given polyphenol is related to its phenoxyl
radical/phenol one-electron oxidation potential (Sergediene
et al. 1999). The mechanism of cytotoxicity may involve
polyphenol metabolism by cytochrome P450 (Phase 1)
enzymes. Inhibitors of cytochrome P450-hydroxylase partially protect cells from polyphenol cytotoxicity (NemeikaiteCeniene et al. 2005). However, our assessment of renal
toxicity, blood biochemistry, and animal weight indicates
that the di-tert-butyl-bisphenol is well tolerated (Table 2).
This lack of toxicity may be because of some polyphenols
exhibiting lower than anticipated cytotoxic (LD50) dose
despite one-electron oxidation potentials being < 0.4 V
(Nemeikaite-Ceniene et al. 2005).
There is an urgent need for new stroke therapies.
Targeting oxidative stress is promising as a mechanismbased therapy against ischemia reperfusion injury sustained
during stroke and antioxidant therapies have shown some
potential to be neuroprotective. This is in contrast to tPA
which deals only with acute stroke treatment and potentially
generates ROS and aggravates cell damage. That pretreatment with BP attenuates oxidative damage, improves
mitochondrial function and limits cell apoptosis indicates
that oxidative stress plays a causal role in promoting tissue
damage initiated by MCA occlusion. Together, this strongly
suggests that inhibiting oxidative stress through scavenging
free radicals in vivo will improve cell viability, enhance
vascular function and importantly provide neuroprotection.
There is certainly some scope to increase the effective dose
for BP in animals and future studies will employ higher
dietary intake of BP and investigate modes of rapid
administration so that dosage and timing may be optimized.
Such pre-clinical studies would also allow investigation of
the distribution of BP within different brain regions.
Whether the neuroprotective activities of BP are sufﬁcient
to inhibit functional deﬁcits when administered in the poststroke period is not clear. Therefore, an assessment of
whether this synthetic polyphenol can limit reperfusion
damage is warranted, whereas long-term follow-up of
neurological outcomes are also necessary.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grants the Heart Foundation of Australia
(G 07S30435), the Australian Research Council (DP130103711) and
a University of Sydney, Medical Faculty support package. We thank
Professor Neil Sims (Flinders University, School of Medicine) for

745

his assistance in training TTH Duong and AC McMahon in the
surgical procedure for MCA occlusion. The authors have no conﬂicts
of interest to declare.

Supporting information
Additional supporting information may be found in the online
version of this article at the publisher's web-site:
Figure S1. BP ameliorates vascular dysfunction stimulated by
added hydrogen peroxide.

References
Anderson M. F. and Sims N. R. (2002) The effect of focal ischemia and
reperfusion on the glutathione content of mitochondria from rat
brain subregions. J. Neurochem. 81, 541–549.
Azzi A. (2007) Molecular mechanism of alpha-tocopherol action. Free
Radic. Biol. Med. 43, 16–21.
Baranova O., Miranda L. F., Pichiule P., Dragatsis I., Johnson R. S.
and Chavez J. C. (2007) Neuron-speciﬁc inactivation of the
hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha increases brain injury in a mouse
model of transient focal cerebral ischemia. J. Neurosci. 27, 6320–
6332.
Barnhart R. L., Busch S. J. and Jackson R. L. (1989) Concentrationdependent antioxidant activity of probucol in low density
lipoproteins in vitro: probucol degradation precedes lipoprotein
oxidation. J. Lipid Res. 30, 1703–1710.
Behl C. and Moosmann B. (2002) Oxidative nerve cell death in
Alzheimer’s disease and stroke: antioxidants as neuroprotective
compounds. J. Biol. Chem. 383, 521–536.
Bohacek I., Cordeau P., Lalancette-Hebert M., Gorup D., Weng Y. C.,
Gajovic S. and Kriz J. (2012) Toll-like receptor 2 deﬁciency leads
to delayed exacerbation of ischemic injury. J. Neuroinﬂammation
9, 191 (open access).
Bonova P., Burda J., Danielisova V., Nemethova M. and Gottlieb M.
(2013) Development of a pattern in biochemical parameters in the
core and penumbra during infarct evolution after transient MCAO
in rats. Neurochem. Int. 62, 8–14.
Cao X. and Phillis J. W. (1994) alpha-Phenyl-tert-butyl-nitrone reduces
cortical infarct and edema in rats subjected to focal ischemia. Brain
Res. 644, 267–272.
Chen H., Song Y. S. and Chan P. H. (2009) Inhibition of NADPH
oxidase is neuroprotective after ischemia-reperfusion. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 29, 1262–1272.
Davalos A. (2005) Thrombolysis in acute ischaemic stroke: successes,
failures, and new hopes. Cerebrovasc. Dis. 2, 135–139.
Davis A. S., Zhao H., Sun G. H., Sapolsky R. M. and Steinberg G. K.
(2007) Gene therapy using SOD1 protects striatal neurons from
experimental stroke. Neurosci. Lett. 411, 32–36.
Dikalov S. (2011) Crosstalk between mitochondria and NADPH
oxidases. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 51, 1289–1301.
Dore S., Sampei K., Goto S. et al. (1999) Heme oxygenase-2 is
neuroprotective in cerebral ischemia. Mol. Med. 5, 656–663.
Duong T. T., Antao S., Ellis N. A., Myers S. J. and Witting P. K. (2008)
Supplementation with a synthetic polyphenol limits oxidative
stress and enhances neuronal cell viability in response to hypoxiare-oxygenation injury. Brain Res. 1219, 8–18.
Guo W., Zingg J. M., Meydani M. and Azzi A. (2007) Alpha-tocopherol
counteracts
ritonavir-induced
proinﬂammatory
cytokines
expression in differentiated THP-1 cells. BioFactors 31, 171–179.
Huang J., Agus D. B., Winfree C. J. et al. (2001) Dehydroascorbic acid,
a blood-brain barrier transportable form of vitamin C, mediates

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

746

T. T. H. Duong et al.

potent cerebroprotection in experimental stroke. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA 98, 11720–11724.
Hyslop P. A., Zhang Z., Pearson D. V. and Phebus L. A. (1995)
Measurement of striatal H2O2 by microdialysis following global
forebrain ischemia and reperfusion in the rat: correlation with the
cytotoxic potential of H2O2 in vitro. Brain Res. 671, 181–186.
Ji H., Miao J., Zhang X., Du Y., Liu H., Li S. and Li L. (2012) Inhibition
of sonic hedgehog signaling aggravates brain damage associated
with the down-regulation of Gli1, Ptch1 and SOD1 expression in
acute ischemic stroke. Neurosci. Lett. 506, 1–6.
Kawase M., Murakami K., Fujimura M., Morita-Fujimura Y., Gasche
Y., Kondo T., Scott R. W. and Chan P. H. (1999) Exacerbation of
delayed cell injury after transient global ischemia in mutant mice
with CuZn superoxide dismutase deﬁciency. Stroke 30, 1962–
1968.
Kelly P. J., Morrow J. D., Ning M. et al. (2008) Oxidative stress and
matrix metalloproteinase-9 in acute ischemic stroke: the biomarker
evaluation for antioxidant therapies in stroke (BEAT-stroke) study.
Stroke 39, 100–104.
Kinouchi H., Epstein C. J., Mizui T., Carlson E., Chen S. F. and Chan P.
H. (1991) Attenuation of focal cerebral ischemic injury in
transgenic mice overexpressing CuZn superoxide dismutase.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 88, 11158–11162.
Kleinschnitz C., Grund H., Wingler K. et al. (2010) Post-stroke
inhibition of induced NADPH oxidase type 4 prevents oxidative
stress and neurodegeneration. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000479.
Kondo T., Reaume A. G., Huang T. T., Carlson E., Murakami K., Chen
S. F., Hoffman E. K., Scott R. W., Epstein C. J. and Chan P. H.
(1997) Reduction of CuZn-superoxide dismutase activity
exacerbates neuronal cell injury and edema formation after
transient focal cerebral ischemia. J. Neurosci. 17, 4180–4189.
Lapchak P. A. and Zivin J. A. (2003) Ebselen, a seleno-organic
antioxidant, is neuroprotective after embolic strokes in rabbits:
synergism with low-dose tissue plasminogen activator. Stroke 34,
2013–2018.
Lapchak P. A. and Zivin J. A. (2009) The lipophilic multifunctional
antioxidant edaravone (radicut) improves behavior following
embolic strokes in rabbits: a combination therapy study with
tissue plasminogen activator. Exp. Neurol. 215, 95–100.
Lee D. R., Helps S. C., Macardle P. J., Nilsson M. and Sims N. R. (2009)
Alterations in membrane potential in mitochondria isolated from
brain subregions during focal cerebral ischemia and early
reperfusion: evaluation using ﬂow cytometry. Neurochem. Res.
34, 1857–1866.
Leinonen J. S., Ahonen J. P., L€onnrot K., Jehkonen M., Dastidar P.,
Molnar G. and Alho H. (2000) Low plasma antioxidant activity is
associated with high lesion volume and neurological impairment in
stroke. Stroke 31, 33–39.
Liu J., Narasimhan P., Yu F. and Chan P. H. (2005) Neuroprotection by
hypoxic preconditioning involves oxidative stress-mediated
expression of hypoxia-inducible factor and erythropoietin. Stroke
36, 1264–1269.
Liu S., Zhang L., Wu Q., Wu Q. and Wang T. (2013) Chemokine CCL2
induces apoptosis in cortex following traumatic brain injury. J.
Mol. Neurosci. 51, 1021–1029.
Lonn E., Bosch J., Yusuf S. et al. (2005) HOPE and HOPE-TOO Trial
Investigators. Effects of long-term vitamin E supplementation on
cardiovascular events and cancer: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 293, 1338–1347.
Lyerly M. J., Albright K. C., Boehme A. K. et al. (2014) Safety of
protocol violations in acute stroke tPA administration. J. Stroke
Cerebrovasc. Dis. 23, 855–860.
Margaill I., Plotkine M. and Lerouet D. (2005) Antioxidant strategies in
the treatment of stroke. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 39, 429–443.

Matsuda S., Umeda M., Uchida H., Kato H. and Araki T. (2009)
Alterations of oxidative stress markers and apoptosis markers in the
striatum after transient focal cerebral ischaemia in rats. J. Neural
Transm. 116, 395–404.
McMahon A. C., Duong T. T. H., Brieger D. and Witting P. K. (2006) Is
there potential for antioxidants to enhance thrombolysis therapy in
patients with ischemic stroke? Future Cardiol. 2, 659–665.
Morita-Fujimura Y., Fujimura M., Yoshimoto T. and Chan P. H. (2001)
Superoxide during reperfusion contributes to caspase-8 expression
and apoptosis after transient focal stroke. Stroke 32, 2356–2361.
Nagayama T., Lan J., Henshall D. C., Chen D., O’Horo C., Simon R. P.
and Chen J. (2000) Induction of oxidative DNA damage in the
peri-infarct region after permanent focal cerebral ischemia. J.
Neurochem. 75, 1716–1728.
Nemeikaite-Ceniene A., Imbrasaite A., Sergediene E. and Cenas N.
(2005) Quantitative structure-activity relationships in prooxidant
cytotoxicity of polyphenols: role of potential of phenoxyl radical/
phenol redox couple. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 441, 182–190.
Noshita N., Sugawara T., Lewen A., Hayashi T. and Chan P. H.
(2003) Copper-zinc superoxide dismutase affects Akt activation
after transient focal cerebral ischemia in mice. Stroke 34, 1513–
1518.
Polidori M. C., Frei B., Cherubini A., Nelles G., Rordorf G., Keaney J.
F., Jr, Schwamm L., Mecocci P., Koroshetz W. J. and Beal M. F.
(1998) Increased plasma levels of lipid hydroperoxides in patients
with ischemic stroke. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 25, 561–567.
Puyal J., Ginet V. and Clarke P. G. (2013) Multiple interacting cell death
mechanisms in the mediation of excitotoxicity and ischemic brain
damage: a challenge for neuroprotection. Prog. Neurobiol. 105,
24–48.
Radermacher K. A., Wingler K., Langhauser F., Altenh€ofer S., Kleikers
P., Hermans J. J., Hrabe de Angelis M., Kleinschnitz C. and
Schmidt H. H. (2013) Neuroprotection After Stroke by Targeting
NOX4 as a Source of Oxidative Stress. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 18,
1418–1427.
Rayner B. S., Wu B.-J., Raftery M., Stocker R. and Witting P. K. (2005)
Human S-nitroso-oxymyoglobin is a store of vasoactive nitric
oxide. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 9985–9993.
Rayner B. S., Duong T. T., Myers S. J. and Witting P. K. (2006)
Protective effect of a synthetic anti-oxidant on neuronal cell
apoptosis resulting from experimental hypoxia re-oxygenation
injury. J. Neurochem. 97, 211–221.
Satoh T., Okamoto S.-I., Cui J., Watanabe Y., Furuta K., Suzuki M.,
Tohyama K. and Lipton S. A. (2006) Activation of the Keap/Nrf2
pathway for neuroprotection by electrophilic phase II inducers.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 103, 768–773.
Sergediene E., J€onsson K., Szymusiak H., Tyrakowska B., Rietjens I. M.
and Cenas N. (1999) Prooxidant toxicity of polyphenolic
antioxidants to HL-60 cells: description of quantitative structureactivity relationships. FEBS Lett. 462, 392–396.
Sesso H. D., Buring J. E., Christen W. G., Kurth T., Belanger C.,
MacFadyen J., Bubes V., Manson J. E., Glynn R. J. and Gaziano J.
M. (2008) Vitamins E and C in the prevention of cardiovascular
disease in men: the Physicians’ Health Study II randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 300, 2123–2133.
Shah Z. A., Nada S. E. and Dore S. (2011) Heme oxygenase 1, beneﬁcial
role in permanent ischemic stroke and in Gingko biloba (EGb 761)
neuroprotection. Neuroscience 180, 248–255.
Shanu A., Parry S. N., Wood S., Rodas E. and Witting P. K. (2010) The
synthetic polyphenol tert-butyl-bisphenol inhibits myoglobininduced dysfunction in cultured kidney epithelial cells. Free
Radic. Res. 4, 843–853.
Shichinohe H., Kuroda S., Yasuda H., Ishikawa T., Iwai M., Horiuchi M.
and Iwasaki Y. (2004) Neuroprotective effects of the free radical

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

Neuroprotective polyphenolic antioxidant

scavenger Edaravone (MCI-186) in mice permanent focal brain
ischemia. Brain Res. 1029, 200–206.
Shuaib A., Lees K. R., Lyden P., Grotta J., Davalos A., Davis S. M.,
Diener H. C., Ashwood T., Wasiewski W. W. and Emeribe U.
(2007) NXY-059 for the treatment of acute ischaemic stroke. N.
Engl. J. Med. 357, 562–571.
Siddiq A., Aminova L. R. and Ratan R. R. (2007) Hypoxia inducible
factor prolyl 4-hydroxylase enzymes: center stage in the battle
against hypoxia, metabolic compromise and oxidative stress.
Neurochem. Res. 32, 931–946.
Sims N. R. and Muyderman H. (2010) Mitochondria, oxidative
metabolism and cell death in stroke. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1802, 1880.
Strong K., Mathers C. and Bonita R. (2007) Preventing stroke:saving
lives around the world. Lancet Neurol. 6, 182–187.
Sugawara T. and Chan P. H. (2003) Reactive oxygen radicals and
pathogenesis of neuronal death after cerebral ischemia. Antioxid.
Redox Signal. 5, 597–607.
Sutherland G. T., Chami B., Youssef P. and Witting P. K. (2013)
Oxidative stress in Alzheimer’s disease: Primary villain or
physiological by-product? Redox Rep. 18, 134–141.
Thomas S. R., Schulz E. and Keaney J. F., Jr (2006) Hydrogen peroxide
restrains endothelium-derived nitric oxide bioactivity-role for irondependent oxidative stress. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 41, 681–688.
Van der Worp H. B., Bar P. R., Kapepelle L. J. and de Wildt D. J. (1998)
Dietary vitamin E levels affect outcome of permanent focal
cerebral ischaemia in rats. Stroke 29, 1002–1006.
Witting P. K., Westerlund C. and Stocker R. (1996) A rapid and simple
screening test for potential inhibitors of tocopherol-mediated
peroxidation of LDL lipids. J. Lipid Res. 37, 853–867.
Witting P. K., Mohr D. and Stocker R. (1998) Assessment of the Proand antioxidant activity of vitamin E in human low density
lipoprotein and plasma. Methods Enzymol. 299, 362–375.
Witting P. K., Pettersson K., Ostlund-Lindqvist A. M., Westerlund C.,
Eriksson A. W. and Stocker R. (1999a) Inhibition by a
coantioxidant of aortic lipoprotein lipid peroxidation and

747

atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E and low density lipoprotein
receptor gene double knockout mice. FASEB J. 13, 667–675.
Witting P., Pettersson K., Ostlund-Lindqvist A. M., Westerlund C.,
W^agberg M. and Stocker R. (1999b) Dissociation of atherogenesis
from aortic accumulation of lipid hydro(pero)xides in Watanabe
heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits. J. Clin. Invest. 104, 213–220.
Witting P. K., Wu B. J., Raftery M., Southwell-Keely P. and Stocker R.
(2005) Probucol protects against hypochlorite-induced endothelial
dysfunction: identiﬁcation of a novel pathway of probucol
oxidation to a biologically active intermediate. J. Biol. Chem.
280, 15612–15618.
Witting P. K., Rayner B. S., Wu B. J., Ellis N. A. and Stocker R. (2007)
Hydrogen peroxide promotes endothelial dysfunction by
stimulating multiple sources of superoxide anion radical
production and decreasing nitric oxide bioavailability. Cell.
Physiol. Biochem. 20, 255–268.
Wu C. M., McLaughlin K., Lorenzetti D. L., Hill M. D., Manns B. J. and
Ghali W. A. (2007) Early risk of stroke after transient ischemic
attack: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch. Intern. Med.
167, 2417–2422.
Yamagata K., Tagami M. and Yamori Y. (2010) Neuronal vulnerability
of stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rats to ischemia and its
prevention with antioxidants such as vitamin E. Neuroscience 170,
1–7.
Yamashita T., Kamiya T., Deguchi K., Inaba T., Zhang H., Shang J.,
Miyazaki K., Ohtsuka A., Katayama Y. and Abe K. (2009)
Dissociation and protection of the neurovascular unit after
thrombolysis and reperfusion in ischemic rat brain. J. Cereb.
Blood Flow Metab. 29, 715–725.
Zeynalov E., Shah Z. A., Li R. C. and Dore S. (2009) Heme oxygenase 1
is associated with ischemic preconditioning-induced protection
against brain ischemia. Neurobiol. Dis. 35, 264–269.
Zhang W., Sato K., Hayashi T., Omori N., Nagano I., Kato S., Horiuchi
S. and Abe K. (2004) Extension of ischemic therapeutic time
window by a free radical scavenger, Edaravone, reperfused with
tPA in rat brain. Neurol. Res. 26, 342–348.

© 2014 International Society for Neurochemistry, J. Neurochem. (2014) 130, 733--747

