J Basic Clin Physiol Pharmacol 2016; 27(1): 1–8

Sruthi Ramagiri and Rajeev Taliyan*

Neuroprotective effect of hydroxy safflor yellow
A against cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
in rats: putative role of mPTP
DOI 10.1515/jbcpp-2015-0021
Received March 3, 2015; accepted May 23, 2015; previously published
online August 15, 2015

Abstract
Background: Hydroxy safflor yellow A (HSYA) has been
translated clinically for cardiovascular diseases. HSYA is
also greatly acknowledged for its protective effects against
cerebral ischemic-reperfusion (I/R) injury. Although
the precise mechanism of cerebral I/R injury is not fully
understood, oxygen-derived free radicals and mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) opening during
I/R injury are widely recognized as an important contributor to neuronal injury. Thus, we speculated that the neuroprotective effects of HSYA against cerebral I/R injury may
be associated with mPTP modulation.
Methods: Induction of I/R injury was achieved by 60 min
of middle cerebral artery occlusion, followed by reperfusion for 24 h. For behavior and cognitive assessment,
neurological scoring (NSS), rotarod, and Y-maze task were
performed. Oxidative damage was measured in terms of
markers such as malondialdehyde, reduced glutathione,
and catalase levels and cerebral infarct volumes were
quantified using 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolinium chloride
staining. I/R injury-induced inflammation was determined using tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) levels.
Results: Animals exposed to I/R injury showed neurological severity, functional and cognitive disability, elevated
oxidative markers, and TNF-α levels along with large
infarct volumes. HSYA treatment during onset of reperfusion ameliorated performance in NSS, rotarod and Y-maze
attenuated oxidative damage, TNF-α levels, and infarction
rate. However, treatment with carboxyatractyloside, an
mPTP opener, 20 min before HSYA, attenuated the protective effect of HSYA.

*Corresponding author: Rajeev Taliyan, Assistant Professor, Birla
Institute of Technology and Science, Department of Pharmacy, 333031
Pilani, Rajasthan, India, E-mail: rajeev.taliyan@pilani.bits-pilani
Sruthi Ramagiri: Birla Institute of Technology and Science,
Department of Pharmacy, Pilani, Rajasthan, India

Conclusions: Our study confirmed that protective effect of
HSYA may be conferred through its free radical scavenger
action followed by inhibiting the opening of mPTP during
reperfusion and HSYA might act as a promising therapeutic agent against cerebral I/R injury.
Keywords: carboxyatractyloside; cerebral ischemic-­
reperfusion injury; hydroxy safflor yellow A (HSYA);
­mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP).

Introduction
Restoration of blood flow with effective oxygenation to
brain, which is temporarily deprived of vascular supply,
often paradoxically results in cerebral ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury. Recent studies on several pharmacological agents aimed at various metabolic pathways, apoptotic
inhibition, immune system modulation, and promotion of
angiogenesis could not successfully translate to clinical
application. Moreover, endogenous restoration of blood
flow during reperfusion injury leads to production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) which contributes in neuronal
I/R injury [1]. Therefore, the interest dwelt in developing
neuroprotective strategies to target ROS. Compelling evidence also supports the primary role of ROS in opening of
mitochondrial permeability transition pore (mPTP) during
I/R injury. In fact, post-ischemic reperfusion conditions,
such as overproduction/accumulation of ROS, elevated
phosphate concentration, rise in intracellular Ca+2, and
pH normalization, ideally pave the way to mPTP opening.
mPTP is a non-specific pore in the inner mitochondrial
membrane penetrating both membranes. Mitochondrial
Ca+2 triggers the opening of mPTP in the first few minutes
of reperfusion phase after I/R injury, which results in mitochondrial swelling, collapse of mitochondrial membrane
potential, uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, and cytochrome c release, leading to both
necrosis and apoptosis depending on duration of opening
[2, 3]. It was demonstrated that protection in isolated perfused hearts may be achieved by preventing mPTP opening
[4]. Moreover, inhibition of mPTP opening induced both
Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

2      Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
cardio- and neuroprotective effects in several in vitro and
in vivo models [5, 6]. In addition, suppression of mPTP
opening induces neuroprotection in vitro against Ca+2 and
H2O2 mitochondrial swelling [6]. However, it is still questionable whether modulation of mPTP opening in experimental animal models limits the cerebral I/R injury.
The flowers of safflower plant Carthamus ­tinctorius L.
have been most promising in traditional Chinese medicine
for the treatment of various ischemic cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular disorders [7]. The extract of C.  ­tinctorius
contains several pigments, including hydroxy safflor
yellow A (HSYA), safflor yellow B, safflomin A, ­safflomin C,
and other pigments. HSYA, the main chemical component
of the safflower yellow pigments, has been demonstrated
to prevent dopaminergic neurodegeneration mediated
through oxidative stress in rats by decreasing ROS production [8]. In addition, HSYA is also able to reduce myocardial
injury in isolated perfused heart of rat through its antioxidant action by regulating nitric oxide and nitric oxide
synthase activity [9]. Moreover, HSYA has been shown to
reduce brain injury caused by experimental cerebral stroke
animal model by attenuating the elevation of malondialdehyde (MDA) and decreasing reduced glutathione (GSH)
[10]. Further, recent in vitro data on isolated mitochondria from rat brain suggest that ATP levels and respiratory
control ratio were enhanced, besides improving mitochondrial energy metabolism [11]. However, whether HSYA
provides cerebroprotection against I/R injury affecting
mitochondrial pathway remains poorly understood.
Thus, based on above reports, the present study has
been designed to investigate neuroprotective role of HSYA
during reperfusion through a mitochondrial pathway, specifically targeting the inhibition of mPTP opening during
I/R injury.

Materials and methods
Animals and drugs
Adult male Wistar rats (220–250 g) were procured from the animal
house of Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani,
India. The animals were maintained in standard laboratory conditions (temperature 22 °C±2 °C and room humidity 60%±10%) with a
12:12-h light/dark cycle. The animals were fed standard diet and filtered water ad libitum. All the behavioral experiments were carried
in between 09:00 and 17:00  h (IST). The experimental procedures
on animals were in compliance with the Institutional Animal Ethics
Committee of BITS Pilani, India (Protocol No. IAEC/RES/17/07).
HSYA (ChemFaces, Wuhan, Hubei, China; 98% pure, PubChem:
6443665), carboxyatractyloside (CAT; Sigma, MO, USA), nylon filament (Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson), other biochemical reagents and

solvents (Central Drug House, New Delhi, India) used in the current
study were of analytical grade. Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) ELISA
kit was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. In the present study,
doses of HSYA (8 mg/kg. i.v.) and CAT (1 mg/kg, i.p.) were selected
based upon pilot study conducted in our laboratory (data not shown)
and from available literature [12, 13]. Solution of drugs and chemicals
were always prepared afresh before use.

Surgical protocol
Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced in male Wistar rats by
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model. The rats were anesthetized using ketamine (80 mg/kg) and xylazine (10 mg/kg). After
retraction of soft tissues over the trachea, right MCAO was achieved
by using the intraluminal filament insertion technique (popularly
known as suture technique). Briefly, a 3-0 mm poly-L-lysine-coated
nylon monofilament was inserted into the internal carotid artery,
via the external carotid artery. Once the filament was secured, the
incision was sutured back, sterilized with 70% ethanol, and rat was
allowed to come out of anesthesia in its home cage. After 60 min of
occlusion, rat was briefly reanesthetized to initiate withdrawal of the
filament, followed by 24  h of reperfusion. Throughout the surgery,
body temperature was monitored at 37 °C using laser Doppler perfusion (LDF) and temperature monitor (moor VMF-LDF2, UK). The rats
were maintained in a well-ventilated room at 25 °C±3 °C until they
gained full consciousness and were housed together in a group of
two animals per cage. Food and water was kept inside the cages for
the 1st week for easy access to animals [14, 15].

Experimental design
Rats were randomized into different groups, each group comprising
eight animals.
Group 1: Rats in sham control were subjected to surgical procedure to expose the cerebral artery without any occlusion.
Group 2: Rats in I/R group were subjected to MCAO. Cerebral
blood flow (CBF) was monitored by LDF using a flexible probe over
the skull. CBF was measured before ischemia, during global ischemia,
and during reperfusion. Animals who showed a CBF reduction of at
least 70% and animals who were associated with bleeding and died
after ischemia induction were excluded from the experimental group.
Group 3: After induction of focal ischemia, rats received HSYA
(8 mg/kg i.v.) during onset of reperfusion.
Group 4: After induction of focal ischemia, rats were treated
with CAT (1 mg/kg, i.p.), 20 min before HSYA administration.

Behavioral and cognitive parameters
Assessment of neurological scoring: Neurological findings were
scored on a 5-point scale. No neurological deficit = 0; failure to extend
right paw fully = 1; circling to paretic side = 2; falling to paretic side = 3;
no spontaneous walking and had depressed levels of consciousness = 4 [16, 17].
Assessment of motor coordination: Motor coordination and balance alterations in rodents were assessed by testing the latency to

Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury      3

Assessment of spatial working memory: In Y-maze, three arms
(40 cm long, 8 cm wide, 20 cm high) of maze were 120° angle from
center, named as A, B and C. The animal was placed at start arm
and allowed to move freely in all the arms. An entry into arm was
recorded manually when four limbs are within the arm. After testing
each rat, the floor was cleaned with 70% ethanol to avoid olfactory
clues. Consecutive entry into all the three arms – A, B, and C – is considered to be spontaneous alteration. Over the course of multiple arm
entries, rats should show a tendency to enter a less recently visited
arm. The spontaneous alteration was calculated as the total number
of arm entries minus two, and the percentage of alteration was calculated as (actual alteration/maximum alteration × 100). To estimate
spontaneous activity, total number of arm entries was recorded. Data
were expressed as percentage of alterations behavior and total number of arm entries [19, 20].

Biochemical analysis
Brain homogenate preparation: Animals were sacrificed by decapitation, and brains were removed and rinsed with ice-cold sterile
saline (0.9%). The whole brain samples were homogenized with 10
times (w/v) of ice-cold 0.1 M phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 g (4 °C) for 15 min to remove cellular
debris, and aliquots of supernatant were separated and used for biochemical estimations [21].
Estimation of oxidative markers and anti-oxidant enzymes: ­Oxidative
stress marker, MDA, was quantitatively estimated as described by
Wills [21]. Endogenous antioxidant such as GSH and catalase were
estimated by Ellman [22] and Sinha [23], respectively. For detailed
procedure, see SI materials and methods.
Protein estimation: The protein content in whole brain samples
for antioxidant and oxidant activity was estimated by biuret method
using bovine serum albumin (BSA) (1 mg/mL) as standard [24].

Estimation of TNF-α
Rat brain homogenate was used to estimate the level of pro-inflammatory cytokine (TNF-α) using ELISA kit as per manufacturer’s
instructions.

Estimation of infarct volume
Brains with intact morphology were stained with 2% (w/v)
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolnium chloride (TTC). In brief, brains were
­

sliced into 2 mm thick coronal sections in a brain matrix and stained
with 2% (w/v) 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolnium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich,
USA) for 30  min at 37 °C followed by immersion in 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffer overnight for color fixation.
The non-infarct region turns red, whereas infarct region remained
unstained (white). The infarct area was demarcated and analyzed
using image J software. The corrected infarct volume was calculated
to compensate the effect of brain edema as follows: [contralateral
hemisphere area – (ipsilateral hemisphere – measured infarct area)/
contralateral hemisphere area] × 100%. Animals who underwent subarachnoid hemorrhage were excluded from the study [25].

Statistical analysis
All data were expressed as mean±SEM. The data obtained from
various groups were statistically analyzed using one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) followed by the post-hoc Tukey’s test in SigmaStat
software 3.5 (San Jose, CA, USA). A p-value < 0.05 was considered as
statistically significant.

Results
Effect of I/R injury and HSYA on neurological
scoring
The effect of I/R injury and HSYA on neurological scoring
is shown in Figure 1. The induction of I/R injury resulted
in significant (p < 0.001) increase in the neurological deficits when compared to sham control rats. HSYA administration had significantly (p < 0.001) greater functional
recovery, whereas CAT treatment significantly reversed
(p < 0.001) the protective neurological outcome offered by
HSYA.
4

Neurological scores

fall from accelerated rotarod. The rotarod apparatus consisted of
horizontal metal rod (3  cm diameter, 70  cm long) which rotates at
an adjustable speed. The rod was adjusted at height of 50 cm to discourage jumping of animals from rotating rod. The speed of the rod
increases (2 rpm to 15 rpm) with time (300 s), and the amount of time
the animal remains on the device was recorded. The rats were given
three sessions of habituation trial on stationary rod for 5  min and
test was repeated post stroke, and latency to fall off from the rod was
determined [18].

*

3

#

2
@
1

0

Sham

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

Figure 1: Effect of HSYA on neurological scoring.
Values are expressed as mean±SEM; n = 8. *p < 0.001 vs. sham
control group, @p < 0.001 vs. I/R group, #p < 0.001 vs. HSYA. I/R,
ischemia-reperfusion group; HSYA, hydroxy safflor yellow A; CAT,
carboxyatractyloside.

Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

In this experiment, we examined the impact of HSYA on
treatment on skilled motor abilities using rotarod test.
After induction of I/R injury, rats spent significantly
(p < 0.001) less time on rotating rod when compared to
sham control (Figure  2). Treatment with HSYA significantly (p < 0.001) increased latency time on rotarod, conversely administration of CAT (mPTP opener) attenuated
the time spent on rotarod significantly (p < 0.001) as compared to HSYA-treated rats.

Effect of I/R injury and HSYA on spatial
working memory
When compared to sham control, I/R injured rats showed
significantly (p < 0.001) reduced alteration behavior. Moreover, HSYA group significantly (p < 0.001) displayed high
alteration behavior (Figure 3A) as compared to I/R group,
whereas CAT treatment significantly (p < 0.01) resulted in
low alterations. However, there was no significant difference among the groups in number of entries indicating
the similar extent of spontaneous activity (Figure 3B).

Effect of I/R injury and HSYA on MDA, GSH,
and catalase levels
I/R injury significantly increased (p < 0.001) lipid peroxidation along with reduction of antioxidant enzyme levels, that
is, GSH and catalase as compared to sham control. Treatment with HSYA during onset of reperfusion attenuated the

300

100
80

@
#

60
40

*

20
0
Sham

B

25
20

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

15
10
5
0

Sham

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

Figure 3: (A) Effect of HSYA on percentage alteration b
­ ehavior.
Values are expressed as mean±SEM; n = 8. *p < 0.001 vs. sham
control group, @p < 0.001 vs. I/R group, #p < 0.01 vs. HSYA.
(B) No significant differences were found in number of entries. I/R,
ischemia-reperfusion group; HSYA, hydroxy safflor yellow A; CAT,
carboxyatractyloside.

rise in MDA (p < 0.001, Figure 4A) and prevented the fall of
antioxidant enzymes when compared to I/R-treated rats.
However, administration of CAT, abolished the antioxidative effects of HSYA as evident by increased MDA level and
decreased GSH (Figure 4B) and catalase (Figure 4C) levels.

Effect of I/R injury and HSYA on TNF-α levels
@

225
Latency to fall, s

A

Total number of arm entries

Effect of I/R injury and HSYA on motor
coordination

% Alteration behavior/300 s

4      Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury

#

150

*

75

Compared to sham control, TNF-α levels were significantly high in I/R injury group. Pharmacological intervention of HSYA resulted in significant (p < 0.001) attenuation
of TNF-α levels as compared to I/R group (Figure  5). In
contrast, administration of CAT, significantly (p < 0.001)
raised the levels of inflammatory marker (TNF-α) compared to HSYA-treated rats.

0
Sham

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

Figure 2: Effect of HSYA on motor coordination.
Values are expressed as mean±SEM; n = 8. *p < 0.001 vs. sham
control group, @p < 0.001 vs. I/R group, #p < 0.001 vs. HSYA. I/R,
ischemia-reperfusion group; HSYA, hydroxy safflor yellow A; CAT,
carboxyatractyloside.

Effect of I/R injury and HSYA on infarct volume
An increased infarction volume was significantly
(p < 0.001) visible after induction of I/R injury as compared
to sham control. HSYA treatment significantly (p < 0.001)
Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

A

375

(MDA) nmol/mg of protein

Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury      5

300

75
*

*

#

#
TNF-α, pg/mg

225
@

150
75

50
@
25

0
Sham

µmol of GSH/mg of protein

B

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

0
Sham

1.5

@

1

#
0.5

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

Figure 5: Effect of HSYA on TNF-α levels against cerebral I/R injury
model.
Values are expressed as mean±SEM; n = 8. *p < 0.001 vs. sham
control group, @p < 0.001 vs. I/R group, #p < 0.001 vs. HSYA. I/R,
ischemia-reperfusion group; HSYA, hydroxy safflor yellow A; CAT,
carboxyatractyloside.

*
240

0
Sham

Catalase (U/mg of protein)

C

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

2

1.5

@

1

Infarct volume, mm3

*
#

180

120

@

60

$
0
Sham

*

0.5

0
Sham

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

Figure 4: (A) Effect of HSYA on MDA levels, (B) GSH levels and (C)
catalase levels.
Values are expressed as mean±SEM; n = 8. *p < 0.001 vs. sham
control group, @p < 0.001 vs. I/R group, #p < 0.001 vs. HSYA, $p < 0.01
vs. HSYA. No significant differences in number of entries. I/R,
ischemia-reperfusion group; HSYA, hydroxy safflor yellow A; CAT,
carboxyatractyloside.

reduced the volume of infarction when compared to I/Rinjured rats, whereas CAT treatment increased the infarction rate significantly (p < 0.01) than HSYA-treated rats
(Figure 6).

Discussion
According to recent research, HSYA has shown promising neuroprotective effect against brain I/R injury as a

I/R

HSYA

CAT+HSYA

Figure 6: Effect of HSYA on infarct volume against cerebral I/R injury
model.
Values are expressed as mean±SEM; n = 8. *p < 0.001 vs. sham
control group, @p < 0.001 vs. I/R group, #p < 0.01 vs. HSYA. I/R,
ischemia-reperfusion group; HSYA, hydroxy safflor yellow A; CAT,
carboxyatractyloside.

newly identified chemical [26, 27]. Moreover, it has been
demonstrated that HSYA showed cardioprotective and
cerebroprotective actions through its antioxidant property
[7, 8]. However, the molecular mechanism underlying this
protection was not fully elucidated. In the present study,
HSYA-treated rats showed less neurological deficits,
reduced oxidative damage, and less infarction, conversely
CAT, an mPTP opener, abolished the protective effects
of HSYA. Thus, we demonstrated for the 1st time, a connecting link between neuroprotective effects of HSYA and
mitochondrial pathways.
MCAO is a well-documented experimental stroke
model to induce I/R injury and to study its pathophysiology, as it produces persistent neurological and cognitive
Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

6      Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
deficits [28]. Moreover, recent reports suggest that MCAO
mimics the human stroke and produces selective neuronal
damage [29]. Therefore, in the present study, cerebral I/R
injury was induced by MCAO model.
Cerebral I/R injury in the present study resulted in
severe behavioral and cognitive abnormalities, in accordance with previous studies [30, 31]. Several studies also
supported the protective role of HSYA to stabilize the
behavioral abnormalities induced by I/R injury [7, 8].
Neurological scoring is a valuable indicator of I/R
injury in rodents. NSS was rated for equilibrium, righting
reflex, motility, and circling behavior [16]. In our study,
data showed loss of sensorimotor abilities in I/R-injured
rats as evidenced by high neurological scoring. Moreover,
HSYA treatment significantly improved the neurological outcome, whereas CAT administration abolished the
protective effects of HSYA (Figure 1). Similar pattern of
behavioral deficits in motor function were observed in I/R
injured rats as evidenced by rotarod task. HSYA treatment
markedly suppressed I/R-induced motor abnormalities,
by contrast CAT abolished the HSYA protection (Figure 2).
According to previous reports, induction of I/R injury
in the present study also resulted in hippocampal damage
leading to cognitive dysfunction [32]. Moreover, Y-maze is
well established to explore the spatial working memory in
rodents. According to recent reports, HSYA improved the
cognitive parameters in Aβ1–42-induced mice with Alzheimer disease (AD) [33]. In the present study, HSYA showed
neuroprotective effect based on improved short-term
memory, which might be because of its powerful antioxidant property. However, CAT administration abolished
the protective effect of HSYA by loss of spatial working
memory (Figure 3A and B).
Accumulating evidence suggests that oxidative
stress appears to be a critical factor in the pathogenesis
of cerebral I/R injury. It is a well-known fact that cerebral
ischemia significantly increases ROS concentration and
causes damage to various cellular components including
lipids, proteins, and DNA. Moreover, oxidative stress due
to I/R injury also results in opening of mPTP through a
cascade of pathway involving mitochondrial calcium, pH
neutralization, and inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation [13, 34, 35]. In the present study, the concentration of
oxidative stress markers, such as MDA, which are proportional to oxidative stress and lipid peroxidation were high,
whereas antioxidants, such as GSH and catalase, were
low in brain homogenates of I/R injury rats. In accordance with previous studies, HSYA prevented the ascent of
MDA (Figure 4A) and diminution of GSH (Figure 4B) and
catalase (Figure 4C) level indicating antioxidative effect.
However, a significant rise of oxidative stress was observed

in CAT+HSYA-treated rat brains, indicating the loss of
protective role of HSYA. It seems that I/R injury resulted
due to severe oxidative stress that prime the opening of
mPTP during reperfusion which was attenuated by HSYA
treatment. This indicates that the neuroprotection offered
by HSYA may be due to inhibition of mPTP opening. Our
results were in agreement with earlier reports where HSYA
attenuated the oxidative stress and protected the spinal
cord against I/R injury in rabbits [36].
A growing body of evidences suggests inflammatory reaction as a major pathophysiological mechanism
associated with I/R injury. Among the factors, TNF-α is
considered to be strong immunological factor in the pathogenesis of cerebral I/R injury. It has been reported that few
hours after MCAO, TNF-α triggers the macrophage, microglia, and astrocyte proliferation leading to demyelination
and reactive gliosis [37, 38]. Moreover, increased TNF-α
levels after I/R injury reflected the neurological severity and functional abnormality in stroke patients [39]. In
the present study, a significant elevation of TNF-α level
was observed in I/R-treated rats. Neuroinflammation was
significantly controlled by HSYA treatment indicated by
reduced cytokine levels, according to previous reports
[36]. Attenuation of inflammatory marker, TNF-α levels,
was prevented in CAT+HSYA group which might be due to
opening of mPTP (Figure 5).
The results were further supported by histochemical
estimation of infarction volume using TTC stain. In our
study, the brain damage was significantly higher after
induction of I/R injury as indicated by large infarct volume,
whereas HSYA treatment resulted in significant reduction
in infarct volume. This report was in agreement with previous reports indicating that HSYA reduced the infarction rate after cerebral I/R injury in vivo [40]. Compared
to HSYA-treated rats, administration of CAT significantly
attenuated the protective effect of HSYA by increasing the
infarct volume, indicating the neuroprotective role of HSYA
possibly through inhibition of mPTP opening (Figure 6).
Taken together the above-mentioned data, the symptomatic improvement in behavior and cognitive deficits are
related to HSYA neuroprotective action. Noteworthy, HSYA
prevents I/R injury during reperfusion phase through
inhibition of mPTP opening as evidenced by biochemical
and oxidative stress parameters. Thus, the present study
strongly supported HSYA as a possible therapeutic strategy against reperfusion injury and its development as a
promising candidate for cerebral I/R injury.
Acknowledgments: The authors are thankful to DST, New
Delhi, India and BITS, Pilani, Rajasthan, India for their
financial support for this study.
Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury      7

Author contributions: All the authors have accepted
responsibility for the entire content of this submitted
manuscript and approved submission.
Research funding: None declared.
Employment or leadership: None declared.
Honorarium: None declared.
Competing interests: The funding organization(s) played
no role in the study design; in the collection, analysis, and
interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the
decision to submit the report for publication.

References
1.	 Nour M, Scalzo F, Liebeskind DS. Ischemia-reperfusion injury in
stroke. Interv Neur 2013;1:185–99.
2.	 Kroemer G, Dallaporta B, Resche-Rigon M. The mitochondrial
death/life regulator in apoptosis and necrosis. Annu Rev
Physiol 1998;60:619–42.
3.	 Haworth RA, Hunter DR. The Ca2+-induced membrane transition
in mitochondria: II. Nature of the Ca2+ trigger site. Arch Biochem
Biophy 1979;195:460–7.
4.	 Griffiths EJ, Halestrap AP. Protection by cyclosporin a of
ischemia/reperfusion-induced damage in isolated rat hearts.
J Mol Cell Cardiol 1993;25:1461–9.
5.	 Sun J, Luan Q, Dong H, Song W, Xie K, Hou L, et al. Inhibition of
mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening contributes
to the neuroprotective effects of ischemic postconditioning in
rats. Brain Res 2012;1436:101–10.
6.	Argaud L, Gomez L, Gateau-Roesch O, Couture-Lepetit E,
­Loufouat J, Robert D, et al. Trimetazidine inhibits
­mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening and
­prevents lethal ischemia–reperfusion injury. J Mol Cell
Cardiol 2005;39:893–9.
7.	 Wang C, Zhang D, Li G, Liu J, Tian J, Fu F, et al. Neuroprotective
effects of safflor yellow B on brain ischemic injury. Exp Brain
Res 2007;177:533–9.
8.	Han B, Zhao H. Effects of hydroxysafflor yellow a in the
attenuation of MPTP neurotoxicity in mice. Neurochem Res
2010;35:107–13.
9.	 Liu YN, Zhou ZM, Chen P. Evidence that hydroxysafflor yellow
A protects the heart against ischaemia-reperfusion injury by
inhibiting mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening.
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 2008;35:211–6.
10.	Wei X, Liu H, Sun X, Fu F, Zhang X, Wang J, et al.
­Hydroxysafflor yellow A protects rat brains against
­ischemia-reperfusion injury by antioxidant action.
Neurosci Lett 2005;386:58–62.
11.	 Tian J, Li G, Liu Z, Fu F. Hydroxysafflor yellow A inhibits rat
brain mitochondrial permeability transition pores by a free
­radical scavenging action. Pharmacology 2007;82:121–6.
12.	 Wahl F, Allix M, Plotkine M, Boulu R. Neurological and
­behavioral outcomes of focal cerebral ischemia in rats.
Stroke 1992;23:267–72.
13.	 He Y, Wan H, Du Y, Bie X, Zhao T, Fu W, et al. Protective effect of
Danhong injection on cerebral ischemia–reperfusion injury in
rats. J Ethnopharmacol 2012;144:387–94.

14.	 Woodruff TM, Thundyil J, Tang SC, Sobey CG, Taylor SM,
­Arumugam TV. Pathophysiology, treatment, and animal and
cellular models of human ischemic stroke. Mol Neurodegener
2011;6:11.
15.	 Engel O, Kolodziej S, Dirnagl U, Prinz V. Modeling stroke in
mice-middle cerebral artery occlusion with the filament model.
J Vis Exp 2011;47:2423.
16.	 Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura M, Davis R,
­Bartkowski H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation
of the model and development of a neurologic examination.
Stroke 1986;17:472–6.
17.	 Schaar KL, Brenneman MM, Savitz SI. Functional assessments
in the rodent stroke model. Exp Transl Stroke Med 2010;2:13.
18.	 Pateliya BB, Singh N, Jaggi AS. Possible role of opioids and KATP
channels in neuroprotective effect of postconditioning in mice.
Biol Pharm Bull 2008;31:1755–60.
19.	 Sarti C, Pantoni L, Bartolini L, Inzitari D. Cognitive impairment
and chronic cerebral hypoperfusion: what can be learned from
experimental models. J Neurol Sci 2002;203:263–6.
20.	Spain JW, Newsom GC. Chronic opioids impair acquisition
of both radial maze and Y-maze choice escape. Psychopharmacology 1991;105:101–6.
21.	 Wills E. Mechanisms of lipid peroxide formation in animal
­tissues. Biochem J 1966;99:667–76.
22.	Ellman GL. Tissue sulfhydryl groups. Arch Biochem Biophys
1959;82:70–7.
23.	Sinha AK. Colorimetric assay of catalase. Anal Biochem
1972;47:389–94.
24.	Kumar P, Kaundal RK, More S, Sharma SS. Beneficial effects
of pioglitazone on cognitive impairment in MPTP model of
­Parkinson’s disease. Behav Brain Res 2009;197:398–403.
25.	 Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Germano S, Nishimura M, Davis R,
­Bartkowski H. Evaluation of 2, 3, 5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride
as a stain for detection and quantification of experimental
cerebral infarction in rats. Stroke 1986;17:1304–8.
26.	Zhu HB, Zhang L, Wang ZH, Tian JW, Fu FH, Liu K, et al.
­Therapeutic effects of hydroxysafflor yellow A on focal cerebral
ischemic injury in rats and its primary mechanisms. J Asian Nat
Prod Res 2005;7:607–13.
27.	 Ye SY, Gao WY. Hydroxysafflor yellow A protects neuron against
hypoxia injury and suppresses inflammatory responses
­following focal ischemia reperfusion in rats. Arch Pharm Res
2008;31:1010–5.
28.	Ferrara A, El Bejaoui S, Seyen S, Tirelli E, Plumier J. The
­usefulness of operant conditioning procedures to assess longlasting deficits following transient focal ischemia in mice. Behav
Brain Res 2009;205:525–34.
29.	 Borlongan CV, Hida H, Nishino H. Early assessment of motor
dysfunctions aids in successful occlusion of the middle cerebral
artery. Neuroreport 1998;9:3615–21.
30.	Reglodi D, Tamas A, Lengvari I. Examination of sensorimotor
performance following middle cerebral artery occlusion in rats.
Brain Res Bull 2003;59:459–66.
31.	 Spandou E, Papadopoulou Z, Soubasi V, Karkavelas G,
­Simeonidou C, Pazaiti A, et al. Erythropoietin prevents longterm sensorimotor deficits and brain injury following neonatal
hypoxia–ischemia in rats. Brain Res 2005;1045:22–30.
32.	Block F, Schwarz M. Correlation between hippocampal neuronal
damage and spatial learning deficit due to global ischemia.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav 1997;56:755–61.

Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

8      Ramagiri and Taliyan: Cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury
33.	 Zhang ZH, Yu LJ, Hui XC, Wu ZZ, Yin KL, Yang H, et al. Hydroxysafflor yellow A attenuates Aβ 1-42-induced inflammation
by modulating the JAK2/STAT3/NF-κB pathway. Brain Res
2014;1563:72–80.
34.	Maher P. The effects of stress and aging on glutathione
­metabolism. Ageing Res Rev 2005;4:288–314.
35.	 Saleem S, Ahmad M, Ahmad AS, Yousuf S, Ansari MA, Khan MB,
et al. Behavioral and histologic neuroprotection of aqueous
garlic extract after reversible focal cerebral ischemia. J Med food
2006;9:537–44.
36.	Shan LQ, Ma S, Qiu XC, Zhou Y, Zhang Y, Zheng LH, et al.
­Hydroxysafflor Yellow A protects spinal cords from ischemia/
reperfusion injury in rabbits. BMC Neurosci 2010;11:98.

37.	 Ma M, Uekawa K, Hasegawa Y, Nakagawa T, Katayama T,
Sueta D, et al. Pretreatment with rosuvastatin protects against
focal cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury in rats through
attenuation of oxidative stress and inflammation. Brain Res
2013;1519:87–94.
38.	Lakhan SE, Kirchgessner A, Hofer M. Inflammatory m
­ echanisms in
ischemic stroke: therapeutic approaches. J Transl Med 2009;7:97.
39.	 Zaremba J, Losy J. Early TNF-alpha levels correlate with
­ischaemic stroke severity. Acta Neurol Scand 2001;104:288–95.
40.	Qi Z, Yan F, Shi W, Zhang C, Dong W, Zhao Y, et al. AKT-related
autophagy contributes to the neuroprotective efficacy of
­hydroxysafflor yellow A against ischemic stroke in rats. Transl
Stroke Res 2014;5:501–9.

Brought to you by | University of Edinburgh
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/4/16 10:26 PM

