[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005919/-/DC1
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005919/-/DC1
[Link]
mailto:Jonathon_fanning@me.com
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
3461
Silent brain infarction (SBI) is an increasingly recognized, 
and yet still poorly understood, clinical disorder characterized
by the often incidental finding of cerebral infarction 
on imaging in the absence of clinically apparent neurological
deficit. Although first described ≈50 years ago by Fisher1
through autopsy studies, it was not until the development of 
more sensitive imaging modalities that their characterization 
has been possible.
Of the epidemiological literature available on SBI, the 
most credible and generalizable data come from representative
community samples, from which the general population 
prevalence of SBI has been estimated as 10% to 20%, with 
longitudinal studies suggesting a yearly incidence of 3% to 
4%.2 However, this climbs as high as 55% in clinical-based 
studies of otherwise healthy patients3 and is higher than 90% 
in certain disease-specific populations.4
Despite such a high prevalence, mounting evidence suggests
that SBI is not a silent event at all but is associated 
with subtle neurological deficits, neurocognitive dysfunction
, psychiatric disorders, an increased incidence of overt 
stroke, and early mortality. In light of these associations, it 
has been proposed that the designation silent be replaced 
with the term covert.5
The principle objective of this article is to review the current
body of published medical research critically to (1) 
define SBI and highlight problems inherent in that definition; 
(2) examine the risk factors, incidence and prevalence of SBI; 
(3) assess theories on the underlying pathogenesis of SBI; 
and (4) discuss the clinical consequences of these lesions.
Defining SBI
What Constitutes a SBI?
There is no universally accepted definition of SBI, which 
hampers attempts to characterize and investigate these lesions 
fully. In general, SBI has been described as cerebral infarcts 
that are observed on either computed tomographic or MRI 
scans in the absence of any corresponding, clinically apparent 
cerebrovascular ischemic event.6
Problems in the Detection and Diagnosis of SBIs
The rigor with which corresponding clinical events are identified
dramatically affects the reported incidence of SBI, and 
investigators have deviated widely in their means of clinical 
detection. In many studies, such events have been determined 
by self-report only or through retrospective medical record 
review. These methodologies are clearly subject to bias, given 
variability in the recall, presentation, and investigation of possible
cerebrovascular events.
Similarly, variations in diagnostic imaging strategies have 
important implications for estimates of SBI incidence and 
prevalence. MRI is now regarded as the imaging modality of 
choice for diagnosing SBI; however, significant interstudy 
differences exist in the application of this technology. Major 
sources of heterogeneity in the literature include varying 
MRI acquisition protocols, the imaging definition of infarcts 
applied, and the strategies for excluding entities with overlapping
imaging appearances.6
MRI Acquisition Protocols
Lower strength magnets, thicker slices, and larger gap intervals
all reduce MRI sensitivity for SBI detection. In the past, 
slice thickness and slice gap intervals were greater than the 
size of the SBI structures now being observed, with subsequent
inaccuracies in reporting. Until 2009, magnet strengths 
were ranged from 0.2 Tesla (T) to 1.5T,6 but interim technological
advances have led to widespread use of superconducting
magnets with 1.5T now the minimum for brain imaging. 
Furthermore, improved receiver coils and signal processing 
allow for faster acquisitions with higher resolution. Thus, an 
advanced MRI system is no longer required to perform imaging
at a sufficient resolution to delineate SBI structures properly.
Therefore, practical standardization is attainable with the 
recently suggested neuroimaging research standards by the 
Emerging Spectra of Silent Brain Infarction
Jonathon P. Fanning, BSc, MBBS; Allan J. Wesley, MB ChB; Andrew A. Wong, MBBS, PhD; 
John F. Fraser, MB ChB, PhD, DA, MRCP
Received April 24, 2014; final revision received August 13, 2014; accepted August 29, 2014.
From the School of Medicine (J.P.F., A.J.W., A.A.W., J.F.F.) and Critical Care Research Group (CCRG), The Prince Charles Hospital (J.P.F., J.F.F.), The 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Department of Medical Imaging (A.J.W.) and Adult Intensive Care Services (J.F.F.), The Prince 
Charles Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Department of Medical Imaging, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia (A.J.W.); and 
Department of Neurology, The Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia (A.A.W.).
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.
114.005919/-/DC1.
Correspondence to Jonathon P. Fanning, BSc, MBBS, Critical Care Research Group (CCRG), University of Queensland, Level 2 Emergency Bldg, The 
Prince Charles Hospital, Rode Rd, Chermside, Brisbane, Queensland 4032, Australia. E-mail Jonathon_fanning@me.com
(Stroke. 2014;45:3461-3471.)
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005919
Topical Review
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
3462 Stroke November 2014
STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging 
working group.7
Imaging Definitions of Infarction and Differential 
Diagnoses
Although the greatest heterogeneity in the SBI literature exists 
in defining the imaging characteristics of infarcts, the majority
of studies have concentrated on chronic subcortical cavitatory
infarcts. These lesions are relatively distinctive and with 
cavitatory neuronal and glial loss specific for the pathophysiological
end point of chronic infarction. However, SBI is not 
restricted to chronic lesions. Imaging may capture an infarct 
in an earlier phase, before it has cavitated and indeed not all 
SBI cavitate. Furthermore, SBI is not restricted to subcortical 
regions and can occur in noneloquent areas of the cerebral 
cortex, the cerebellum, and brain stem.
Below we delineate the SBI imaging spectrum and describe 
imaging progression from an acute to chronic and cavitated 
infarct. It is important to recognize that there is no current evidence
to show that all chronic SBI lesions necessarily begin 
as infarcts with acute imaging features. In fact, multiple variances
from the continuum exist. Therefore, distinction is made 
between acute and nonacute infarcts on imaging, recognizing 
that while a subset of lesions will follow the continuum, these 
may also represent different pathophysiological entities of SBI.
Acute Infarction
In recent years, diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI) has been 
increasingly used for determining the incidence of SBI after 
various high-risk procedures. Indeed, the main clinical application
of this technology has been for the diagnosis of acute 
stroke because it is more sensitive and specific to the associated
early changes than traditional MRI measures and thus 
allows more accurate diagnoses.
Infarction of intracranial neuronal or glial tissue, independent
of the region involved, when imaged acutely, demonstrates
transient restricted diffusion: high signal on DWI and a 
corresponding low value on the apparent diffusion coefficient 
map (Figure 1A). These specific signal changes reliably appear 
within 4 hours of acute infarction, however, only persist for 
≤14 days,8 limiting the application of DWI for determining 
prevalence. The infarction will simultaneously demonstrate 
high signal on T2-weighted fast spin echo or T2 fluid attenuated 
inversion recovery sequences and low signal on T1-weighted 
spin echo sequences after 6 hours. These changes may persist 
indefinitely or progress.8 After the acute phase and once the 
apparent diffusion coefficient value has normalized, the high 
DWI signal remains for an average duration of 57 days.9
Intracranial pathologies that mimic acute infarction and 
also display restricted diffusion include active plaques of multiple
sclerosis, herpes encephalitis, Creutzfeld Jacob disease, 
pyogenic intracranial abscesses, and certain highly cellular 
central nervous system tumors such as lymphoma. Although 
these mimicking entities may have overlapping imaging characteristics
with SBI, accompanying imaging findings are often 
distinguishable. Furthermore, these entities are generally not 
neurologically silent and thus can also be discriminated on 
clinical grounds.
Nonacute Infarction
The majority of acute infarcts undergo coagulative necrosis 
with intermediate T2 hyper-/T1 hypointense subacute appearances
, eventually resulting in chronic lesions with volume 
loss and the cavitation of encephalomalacia. A recent longitudinal
study of symptomatic lacunar infarcts demonstrated 
97% cavitation at 90 days.10 When occurring in white matter, 
these chronic lesions are described by the classic Poirier and 
Derouesse type I lacune or more recently and with a restricted 
size definition, as lacunes of suspected vascular origin by the 
STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging 
working group. These lesions have signal characteristics that 
follow cerebrospinal fluid on all sequences (Figure 1B). This 
includes high T2-weighted fast spin echo intensity, nulled 
(low) signal on fluid attenuated inversion recovery with or 
without a hyperintense fluid attenuated inversion recovery rim 
of gliosis, and low T1-weighted spin echo sequence signal, 
with the latter demonstrating the highest sensitivity for cavitation.10 Further discriminators include a wedge or slit shape 
and irregular margins. When such an infarct involves cortex, 
the characteristics are similar except that the infarct is not 
entirely surrounded by uninvolved tissue. The infarcted tissue
displays similar volume loss, cerebrospinal fluid signal of 
Figure 1. Typical lesion appearances on MRI of the brain. A, High diffusion-weighted imaging signal in the left periventricular deep white 
matter (left) has reciprocal low apparent diffusion coefficient value (right) consistent with restricted diffusion in an infarct. B, Wedge 
shaped, irregular margined lesions >3 mm in size in the deep white matter demonstrate nulled central fluid attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) signal and thick hyperintense rims consistent with a cavitatory infarct. C, Multiple, bilateral symmetrically distributed foci (arrows) 
with signal after cerebrospinal fluid vary in size from 2 to 4 mm. These dilated perivascular spaces do not have thick FLAIR rim, unlike 
the cavitating infarct (closed arrow head). D, The typical appearances of leukoaraiosis include confluent periventricular T2 hyperintensity 
(left, open arrows) and multifocal white matter hyperintensities (left, arrow heads). Without evidence of small-vessel disease/leukoaraiosis 
(right), T2 hyperintensities (arrow heads) likely represents silent brain infarction (SBI). The T2 hyperintensity of noncavitating infarcts (left 
long arrow) are indistinguishable from the hyperintensities of background leukoaraiosis (arrow heads) and thus indeterminate for SBI (N.B. 
the majority of infarcts will cavitate).
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3463
encephalomalacia in all sequences with or without a gliotic 
margin of fluid attenuated inversion recovery hyperintensity.
The most common mimic of cavitated infarcts are dilated 
perivascular spaces, also known as Virchow–Robin spaces, 
which are a normal finding on high-resolution MRI, increasing
in frequency with age. They appear as smooth margined, 
ovoid, or linear in a perivascular orientation, and when multiple 
have a bilateral symmetrical distribution, most commonly at 
the base of the brain related to the basal ganglia near the anterior
commissures or present in the supratentorial white matter 
(Figure 1C).11 Typically, these tend to be smaller than cavitating
lacunar infarcts, however, enlarged (measuring >3 mm), 
are common, occurring in up to 30% of elderly subjects12 and 
are a common source of misdiagnosis. Indeed, comparisons 
between imaging and autopsy findings have concluded that 
dilated perivascular spaces are misdiagnosed as SBI in 10% 
to 20% of cases.13
Cavitation is not a universal occurrence with the evolution 
of SBI with longitudinal studies of silent and low-disability 
infarction, demonstrating that 30% to 80% of infarcts did not 
cavitate and remained as T2 hyper/T1 hypointense lesions.14,15
These noncavitated infarcts possess imaging characteristics 
that are the least specific for SBI, with several pathological 
entities demonstrating similar appearances.
Of the T2 hyper/T1 hypointense lesions that are similar 
to SBI, the most significant—because of their increasing 
prevalence with age—are the deep white matter lesion of 
leukoaraiosis (Figure 1D). Originally a neutral imaging term 
leukoaraiosis refers to foci or geographic regions of T2 intensity
typically in the periventricular white matter or the subcortical
deep white matter and pons.16 The neuronal and glial 
histopathologic appearance of these lesions are varied and 
include vascular changes of lipohyalinosis, small-vessel arteriosclerosis
, and venous collagenosis.17 Pathophysiological 
mechanisms are poorly understood and suspected to be multifactorial
, including chronic ischemia/hypoxia, hypoperfusion 
because of altered cerebral autoregulation and inflammation.17
In advanced cases of leukoaraiosis, the T2 intense changes 
are characteristically present in a confluent periventricular 
distribution without focal lateral ventricular dilation and are 
greater than the thin periventricular bands or caps of signal in 
the normal ageing brain. In a milder form, the T2 intensities are 
small and focal and are dispersed through the deep white matter.
These coalesce with the progressive periventricular changes 
as the disease progresses. Whereas the confluent periventricular
changes can be distinguished as leukoaraiosis, the discontinuous
focal deep white matter lesion is indistinguishable from 
noncavitating infarcts. A transient DWI signal, which may persist
for ≤2 months after the acute event, may help to discriminate
the noncavitating infarct from background leukoaraiosis.
Another pathological entity whose appearance overlaps 
with that of SBI is the white matter lesion of migraine. 
Although occurring in more than half of migraineurs, lesions 
are predominantly within the frontal and parietal lobes 
with increased numbers related to the presence of aura and 
increasing migraine frequency.18 The white matter plaques 
of multiple sclerosis also have overlapping features, particularly
in milder cases by imaging standards. Such clinically 
silent cases would include previous, now remitted multiple 
sclerosis, as well as the comparatively rare radiologically 
isolated syndrome.19 These have characteristic patterns 
that are well defined in the literature20 that allow for discrimination.
Rare hereditary leukoencephalopathies, toxic/
metabolic causes, and postinfectious causes (such as acute 
demyelinating encephalomyelopathy, subacute sclerosing 
postinfectious encephalitis, and traumatic contusion/diffuse
axonal injury) are also potential differential diagnoses. 
However, with the exception of dilated perivascular spaces 
and leukoaraiosis, those pathological entities that have overlapping
appearances and may cause misdiagnosis have clinically
distinguishing features.
Table. Proposed Imaging Criteria for Silent Brain Infarction
DWI positive lesions
Inclusion  criteria Any clinically silent focus of restricted 
diffusion (high DWI signal and low 
ADC value) occurring in either white or 
gray matter, located in the cerebrum, 
cerebellum, or brain stem
Exclusion  criteria Associated lesions that satisfy the 
diagnostic criteria for MS. DWI positive 
MS lesions imply active lesions and are 
likely to be symptomatic
Cavitatory lesions
Inclusion  criteria Lesions ≥3 mm in size that follow CSF 
on all sequences (highly T2W intense, 
low/null FLAIR, and low T1W signal) 
that are slit or wedge shaped with 
an irregular margin. A gliotic FLAIR 
hyperintense rim is highly suggestive 
of an infarct with greater diagnostic 
certainty
Exclusion  criteria Less than 3 mm in size or ≥3 mm and 
smooth and longitudinally aligned with 
perforating vessels; when multiple, 
bilateral symmetrical distribution is 
strongly suggestive of dPVS
T2W hyperintense/T1W hypointense lesions
Inclusion  criteria A focal lesion with high T2W signal and 
low T1W signal that has
Prior evidence of restricted diffusion; or
Is present within cortical gray matter or 
deep gray matter nuclei; or
A lesion that is new, compared with an 
MRI performed within 3 mo
Indeterminate T2W hyper/T1W hypointense lesions 
in the white matter, which are 
discontinuous but associated with the 
classic confluent periventricular T2 
intense change of leukoaraiosis
Exclusion  criteria Associated lesions that satisfy the 
diagnostic criteria for MS
Significant history of severe trauma, 
radiation, drug toxicity, or carbon 
monoxide poisoning
ADC indicates apparent diffusion coefficient; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; dPVS, 
dilated perivascular spaces; DWI, diffusion-weighted imaging; FLAIR, fluid 
attenuated inversion recovery; MS, multiple sclerosis; T1W, T1-weighted spin 
echo sequences; and T2W, T2-weighted (fast) spin echo.
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1976141827)
[Link]
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctors/NIH_stroke_scale.pdf
[Link]
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctors/NIH_stroke_scale.pdf
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
3464 Stroke November 2014
Proposed Criteria for SBI Diagnosis
Imaging Evidence of Infarction
On the basis of above discussion, it is apparent that SBI, 
independent of anatomic site or suspected underlying pathogenesis
, manifest as any of 3 lesions on MRI: (1) a focus demonstrating
restricted diffusion (DWI positive); (2) a cavitatory 
lesion or; (3) a less specific focus of T2 hyperintensity/T1 
hypointensity. To minimize SBI misdiagnoses, we propose the 
imaging criteria and approach summarized in the Table and 
Figure 2, recognizing that imaging cannot reliably discriminate
between leukoaraiosis and noncavitating infarcts.
For reasons previously discussed, we think that a 3-mm 
minimum size threshold for an infarct is appropriate for differentiating
dilated perivascular spaces in that it conforms 
with discriminatory histological data13 and has better interobserver
agreement.21,22 An upper limit in size, such as 15 mm as 
proposed by some experts,1,7 may be too restrictive considering
silent infarcts greater than this have constituted 20% of 
infarcts in some series.21
Where there is suspicion that an imaging finding represents 
an undifferentiated SBI lesion, we recommend that a time period 
of 3 months between MRI scans is appropriate, being sufficiently
short to maintain specificity but of sufficient duration to 
allow cavitation.10 This is particularly relevant to circumstances 
with increased pretest probability, such as certain interventions/
surgeries, where persistent DWI signal in a nonspecific T2 
hyperintensity is suspicious for an infarct, or in research settings
where maximal sensitivity for SBI is desirable.
With reference to the STandards for ReportIng Vascular 
changes on nEuroimaging working group definition of 
imaging entities termed white matter hyperintensities of presumed
vascular origin,7 these would include noninfarct-related 
leukoaraiosis and noncavitated infarcts. The rationale for 
grouping these entities is justified by shared pathophysiological
features, risk factors, and clinical correlates. Conversely, 
these may be sufficiently distinct entities to warrant separate 
investigation, and our definitions aim to distinguish these 
where possible.
Clinical Silence
To overcome variability in clinical definition of acute SBI, 
a standardized method for assessing and excluding strokerelated
symptomatology is required. The National Institutes 
of Health Stroke Score or (http://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctors
/NIH_stroke_scale.pdf) is the most widely accepted and 
understood tool for such a purpose and has the advantage of 
a training/certification process for standardization of its application.
Using this tool, a score of zero on initial assessment 
or no change in score on serial assessment is necessary for 
the diagnosis of SBI. It is important to acknowledge that the 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Score may offer poor sensitivity
for right-sided23 and posterior circulation24 stroke and 
subtle signs of stroke, such as distal hand weakness, may go 
unrecognized. However, we consider these acceptable compromises
for standardizing clinical assessment both within 
and across prospective studies.
It is much harder to establish clinical silence when differentiating
nonacute SBI from clinically apparent stroke. The 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Score demonstrates timedependent
validity, with decreasing sensitivity as the period 
from symptom onset to clinical evaluation extends, making 
DWI Positive
High DWI signal
Low ADC
High T2W/FLAIR
Low T1W
Cavitatory
Very high T2W
Very low T1W
Low (null) FLAIR
(i.e. follows CSF Signal)
T2W/FLAIR
Intensity
(Focal )
Silent Brain Infarction ≥ 3mm size
< 3mm size
dPVS
Smooth margin
Ovoid/linear in perivascular orientation
when multiple, bilateral 
symmetrical distributrion
Slit/wedge shaped
irregular margin
hyperintense FLAIR rim
Previous evidence of restricted
diffusion within lesion
New focal lesion < 3 months
Present in cortical or deep grey matter
 nuclei
No clinical evidence of previous / 
current conditions that may cause 
asymptomatic T2 lesions:
Multiple sclerosis
Diffuse axonal injury
Radiotherapy
Drug toxicity
Associated small vessel 
disease changes such as
confluent periventricular 
T2 intense change
Indistinguishable from
leukoaraiosis
Possible SBI
(consider repeat MRI 3 months) Indeterminate YES
NO
Figure 2. Decision tree for MRI diagnosis of brain infarction in the asymptomatic patient. ADC indicates apparent diffusion coefficient; 
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; dPVS, dilated perivascular spaces; DWI, diffusion-weighted MRI; FLAIR, fluid attenuated inversion recovery; 
SBI, silent brain infarction; T1W, T1-weighted spin echo sequences; and T2W, T2-weighted (fast) spin echo.
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3465
it an unreliable tool for diagnosing nonacute SBI.25 Clinical 
examination at the time of imaging will help to identify a persistent
focal neurological deficit consistent with past clinically 
apparent stroke. Because stroke symptoms may resolve and 
not be present at the time of imaging, self-report and examination
of medical records are also crucial, despite their wellestablished
drawbacks.
Prevalence and Incidence of SBI
The prevalence of MRI-detected SBI among population-based 
cohorts (representative community samples and routine health 
evaluations) has varied from 5.5%26 to 55.2%,3 where imaging
detection has relied on cavitatory lesions. However, as 
illustrated in the Figure I in the online-only Data Supplement, 
the reliability of studies reporting overall prevalence rates of 
>30% is undermined by small sample sizes. Indeed, the vast 
majority of large studies (>1000 subjects) have reported prevalence
estimates of ≤20%.2
Comparatively, incidence data are sparse, likely because 
of the longitudinal nature and, hence, increased costs of such 
studies. The 2 landmark studies in this regard suggest an 
annual incidence of 3% to 4% among elderly patients (aged 
>60 years) and as high as 6.5% in those >80 years.5,27
Because of evolving interest surrounding SBI as a marker 
of neurological injury, a growing body of research is characterizing
incidence data in specific interventional and surgical 
settings. Although it is beyond the scope of this article to 
examine each of these situations in detail, reports to date have 
identified transcatheter aortic valve replacement as the highest 
risk for SBI, with an average incidence of 75%28 and as high 
as 93%.4
Risk Factors for SBI
The search for SBI risk factors has focused on those known 
to be associated with clinically apparent stroke. Although distinct
cerebrovascular events share many of the same risk factors
and often coexist, there are differences between them and 
any attempts to understand SBI must take these into account.
Subject age and elevated blood pressure are the 2 risk 
factors for which the strongest, supportive evidence exists.2
Other apparent factors are summarized in Figure 3 and include 
carotid disease, coronary artery disease, chronic renal disease
, and metabolic syndromes. Heart failure, coronary artery 
disease, hyperhomocysteinemia, obstructive sleep apnoea, 
migraines, and certain immunologic/hematologic disorders, 
especially those associated with hypercoagulable states, are 
also likely of significance. Despite their established risk for 
clinically apparent stroke, any association among SBI and sex, 
ethnicity, tobacco and alcohol consumption, obesity, dyslipidemia
, atrial fibrillation, and diabetes mellitus remains unclear.
To date, because studies have taken place in settings where 
multiple possible risk factors coincide, multivariate analysis 
Age
Obesity Cigarette
Smoke
Gender
Demographic / Lifestyle
Ethnicity
Carotid
Artery
Stenosis
AF
Impaired
Cardiac
function
Other disease states
Hypertension
Stroke
Coronary
Artery
Disease
Metabolic
syndrome
Diabetes
OSA
Migraine
CKD
Genetics
MTHFR
eNOS
PRKCH
VEGF
TAVI
CTS
CEA /
CAS
Other
major 
surgeries
GA
Plasma
Hct
Uric
acid
Fibrinogen
D-dimer
hs-CRP
ICAM-1
vWF
Dyslipidaemia
CI
Cardiovascular Disease Laboratory Parameters
Medical Procedures
Figure 3. Risk factors for silent brain infarction. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; CEA/CAS, carotid endarterectomy/carotid stenting; CI, 
cardiovascular interventions; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CTS, cardiothoracic surgery; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthetase; GA, 
general anesthetic; Hct, homocysteine; hs-CRP, high-sensitivity-C-reactive protein; ICAM-1, intracellular adhesion molecule-1; MTHFR, 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; OSA, obstructive sleep apnoea; PRKCH, protein kinase Cη (human); TAVI, transcatheter aortic 
valve implantation; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; and vWF, von Willebrand Factor.
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.331847160)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
3466 Stroke November 2014
techniques have been emphasized to allow the relative importance
of various factors to be determined. However, the extent 
to which these risk factors are independent is questionable, 
and an understanding of interactions and covariance between 
factors has not yet developed. Further confounding the assessment
of various risk factors, it is not always clear whether an 
identified association is a cause or an effect of SBI.
Potential Pathogenic Mechanisms for SBI
Although there must be similarities, it is overly simplistic to 
assume that the same mechanisms underlie all types of cerebrovascular
events. For SBI, however, it is difficult to determine
these mechanisms because the vast majority of lesions 
are detected incidentally and the time of their occurrence is 
unknown. Furthermore, as discussed, SBI is not a homogenous
entity resulting from both large- and small-vessel disease
and presenting in varying anatomic locations, potentially 
reflecting differences in the underlying pathophysiology. 
Explanations on causative mechanisms are, therefore, largely 
speculative and rely on an assessment of the correlations 
and differences between risk factors, disease states (including
overt stroke), biochemical markers, and imaging findings. 
Moreover, the paucity of methods for the assessment of the 
cerebral microvasculature, which is likely of greater significance
to the pathogenesis of SBI than other cerebrovascular 
events, poses significant challenges to hypothesis testing. As 
such, SBI has received considerably less attention from vascular
biology researchers than overt stroke.
Factors That Increase Vulnerability to SBI
Oxidative Stress
A variety of noxious stimuli that result in vascular oxidative 
stress have been implicated in the pathogenesis of a variety of 
disease states, including stroke.29 Indeed, most of the identified
risk factors for SBI facilitate the generation and accumulation
of reactive oxygen species and acrolein (a product of 
polyamine degradation during ischemia) or result in chronic 
inflammation.
The altered properties of the blood brain barrier during 
ischemia have been used by many investigators to define 
associations between various molecules that pass into the 
systemic circulation and SBI. Yoshida et al30 reported that 
when combined with acrolein, high levels of vascular inflammatory
markers were predictive of SBI with a high sensitivity
and specificity. Another study of neurologically normal 
clinic patients detected significantly elevated levels of highsensitivity
C-reactive protein  and interleukin-6 in those with 
SBI versus those without.31 Elevated levels of the soluble adhesion
molecules intracellular adhesion molecule-1,32, 33 vascular 
cell adhesion molecule 1,33 and E-selectin32 have been identified
in patients with SBI compared with those without, and 
intracellular adhesion molecule-1 has also been closely associated
with SBI progression.32 However, in all these instances, 
whether this inflammatory response is causative of, or secondary
to, ischemia is unclear.
Interestingly, large population-based studies, from which 
the most credible and generalizable data are derived, have 
failed to identify a link between any of these biochemical 
markers and SBI.34,35 Postulated explanations for this include 
the smaller size of the vessels implicated and the less clear 
role of atherosclerosis in the majority of SBI, relative to the 
larger, typically atherosclerosed vessels classically involved 
in clinically apparent stroke.32,36 Alternatively, this finding 
may reflect ethnic differences because many of the relevant 
studies have been conducted in Japan, a population in which 
discussed biomarkers, such as high sensitivity-C-reactive protein
, are typically lower than in the West.32,36
Endothelial Dysfunction and the Glycocalyx
It has been hypothesized that SBI pathogenesis involves cerebral
small-vessel endothelial dysfunction (Figure 4), with 
extravasation of plasma components into vessel walls and 
surrounding brain tissue causing perivascular damage, inflammation
, and intravascular hemostasis.37 An intact vascular 
endothelium is also required for effective autoregulation of 
cerebral blood flow. In a study monitoring circulating blood 
markers in lacunar stroke, Knottnerus et al38 concluded that 
endothelial dysfunction is a significant mechanism confined to 
the asymptomatic but not to the symptomatic subtype.
In recent years, theories about the role of the endothelium 
in vascular pathology have shifted focus to the glycocalyx 
(Figure 4). This is a thin (50–100 nm) layer of enzymes and 
proteins contained within a polysaccharide matrix that is 
secreted by the endothelium. It provides a barrier between the 
apical surface of the endothelium and the lumen and its disruption
impairs the protection of the endothelium. However, 
to date, the role of the glycocalyx in SBI has not been 
investigated.
Homocysteine
As mentioned above, elevated plasma homocysteine has been 
identified as a significant risk factor for SBI.39–41 Several mechanisms
have been proposed, including oxidative injury to the 
vascular endothelium with a resultant decline in nitrous oxide 
production, increased platelet adhesion to endothelial cells, 
and augmented levels of prothrombotic factors. Interestingly, 
the association between elevated plasma homocysteine may 
be more robust for cerebral small-vessel compared with largevessel
disease.42
Genetics
Genetic factors are an established risk for overt stroke and 
are also likely to be significant in the development of SBI. 
Although associations between specific genetic factors and 
SBI have only been sparsely investigated, genetic susceptibility
is suggested by the identification of a family history 
of stroke as an independent risk factor for SBI at a younger 
age43 and among the offspring of parents with a history of 
stroke.44 Consistent with the previously discussed importance 
of homocysteine and small-vessel endothelium, specific polymorphisms
of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase45,46 and the 
endothelial nitric oxide synthetase47 genes have been identified 
as independent risk factors for SBI. Certain single nucleotide 
polymorphisms of the protein kinase Cη gene,48 the MACRO 
domain-containing 2 gene, and the fibronectin leucine-rich 
transmembrane protein 3 gene49 have also been demonstrated. 
Finally, mutations of the Notch3 gene on Chr19q12 result in 
excessive accumulation of Notch3 protein in smooth muscle 
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.212359552)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3467
4
Cerebral small vessel endothelial dysfunction
Tunica intima
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Inflammation, loss of 
blood brain barrier
integrity and oedema 
Platelet activation
and thrombus formation 
Smooth muscle
cell proliferation
Atherosclerosis
Vasoconstriction
3
3
4
2 1
ROS
NO
Polyamine (spermine/
spermidine)
Lipid peroxidation
Metalloprotein activation
Protein oxidation
Enzyme nitration
↑ Expression of
adhesion molecules
SOD
eNOS
Uncouples
eNOS
H2O2
SBI risk factors
NADPH oxidase Xanthine oxidase Acrolein
L–arginine
O2
–
NO BH4
ONOO
–
ICAM-1
P-selection
Healthy glycocalyx 
Perturbed glycocalyx
Polyamine
oxidase
VWF
TFPI Antithrombin
Figure 4. Pathogenesis of silent brain infarction (SBI). Identified risk factors for SBI increase oxidative stress resulting in cerebral smallvessel
endothelial dysfunction and perturbed glycocalyx. Consequently, blood flow is reduced by (1) inflammation, loss of blood brain 
barrier integrity, and edema; (2) platelet activation and thrombus formation; (3) arteriosclerosis including smooth muscle cell proliferation 
and atherosclerosis; and (4) vasoconstriction. NO indicates nitric oxide; and ROS, reactive oxygen species.
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.92871944)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
3468 Stroke November 2014
cells, resulting in small-vessel arteriopathy.50 This is the cause 
of the most common form of hereditary stroke disorder and 
the archetype of small-vessel disease, cerebral autosomal 
dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
with presentations ranging from recurrent, 
clinically apparent stroke to cognitive decline and subcortical 
dementia in the setting of recurrent silent strokes.
Factors That Trigger Ischemic Events
It seems that, as for stroke, multiple causative mechanisms 
exist and interact resulting in SBI, including micorangiopathy
, emboli, and sources of hypoperfusion including systemic 
hypotension, as might occur during any significant surgical 
procedure.
Small-Vessel Disease
In 1991, Fisher51 proposed that the difference between symptomatic
and asymptomatic infarction was related to vessel 
size, based on postmortem studies where brain infarction 
mainly involved arteries ≈40 to 200 μm in diameter versus 
200 to 800 μm for symptomatic lesions. This theory is also 
supported by the finding that the majority (>90%) of SBI is 
deep lacunar infarction, where vessels tend to be small.52 A 
potential underlying pathology associated with lacunar infarction
is small-vessel vasculopathy. This is an attractive theory, 
considering that small-vessel vasculopathy is also a proposed 
mechanism underlying leukoaraoisis, which has been closely 
associated with the occurrence of SBI.53
The exact nature of the small-vessel vasculopathy remains 
unclear. Lipohyalinosis, which is a diffuse thickening of the 
small-vessel wall resulting in luminal narrowing, has been 
identified as a major pathological finding associated with 
lacunar infarction.1 Similarly, microatheromatosis has been 
proposed, but these are typically associated with larger perforating
arteries and often result in single, larger symptomatic 
infarcts. Although an attractive explanation for the development
of asymptomatic SBI associated with age, small-vessel 
pathologies do not explain the high incidence of SBI in several 
other situations.
Blood Brain Barrier Dysfunction
Altered permeability of the small vessels, or blood brain 
barrier dysfunction, has also been identified as a potential 
cause of the small-vessel vasculopathy. This is supported by 
the recognition of a subgroup of lacunar infarcts with remarkable
similarities to edema-related lesions.54 However, the 
lesion causing BBB dysfunction is likely widespread and does 
not explain the focal nature of a SBI.
Embolism
As previously discussed, the highest incidence of SBI has 
been demonstrated in settings of high embolic load, such as 
occurs during surgery/intervention involving the aortic valve 
or the ascending aorta and arch. In this setting, gaseous, calcific
, atheromatous, and endothelial tissue disrupted during 
the procedure, acute and chronic thrombotic material and iatrogenic
nonbiological material have been identified in studies 
examining debris captured by embolic protection devices.55
Similarly, in healthy populations, paradoxical embolism may 
be one of the main mechanisms for SBI and has been shown 
to have particular relevance to the development of SBI outside 
the perforating artery territory. In fact, the prevalence of rightto-left
shunt among those with SBI outside the perforating 
artery territory has been reported as equivalent of that among 
those diagnosed with cryptogenic embolic stroke.56
Hypoperfusion
Several findings suggest that vasospasm and the resultant hypoperfusion
, or hypoperfusion related to causes other than vessel 
occlusion, could explain many, if not most, incidences of SBI. 
Consistent with the hypoperfusion theory are the results of a 
controlled, postmortem study of 6 cerebral autosomal dominant
arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
patients, which identified impaired autoregulation of 
cerebral arterial flow, rather than small-vessel occlusion, as 
the cause of lacunar infarcts within the lenticular nucleus.57
Changes in cerebral hemodynamics also alter the clearance 
and destination of embolic particles. Furthermore, hypoperfusion
may magnify the effects of partial occlusions, precipitating
ischemia and infarction.58
Factors That Explain the Absence of Clinical 
Neurological Dysfunction
Several theories have been postulated to explain the absence 
of overt neurological dysfunction with SBI based on differential
infarct characteristics resulting in symptomatic versus 
silent infarction.
Size and Location
The 2 inherently appealing and most widely accepted explanations
for the silence of SBI relate to the size and location 
of damaged brain tissue. As discussed above, SBIs predominantly
involve small vessels and, consequently, are typically 
of limited size. It has been hypothesized that, because these 
infarcts are small, any associated neurological deficits remain 
covert.51,59 Similarly, the location of infarction is almost certainly
of significance because large amounts of nonstrategic 
tissue can be lost without deficit, whereas small infarcts in 
vital areas (for example, in the brain stem and internal capsule) 
often have profound neurological sequelae. This speculation 
is supported by the predisposition for SBI to occur in certain 
locations. For instance, with lacunar infarcts, asymptomatic 
lesions typically occur in the vascular territory of the lenticulostriate
penetrator arteries, whereas symptomatic lesions are 
predominantly located in the territory of the anterior choroidal 
artery.59 Interestingly, a higher proportion of posterior circulation
and cerebellar SBI has been noted in younger patient 
cohorts and those having migraines. However, this pattern is 
also evident when examining the locations of overt strokes in 
younger cohorts.60,61
Ischemic Preconditioning
Ischemic preconditioning is an innate adaptive and neuroprotective
response to a previous sublethal insult that induces 
an ischemia-tolerant phenotype and increases resistance 
to a second, potentially lethal insult. This occurs through 
genomic reprogramming, resulting in an increase in de 
novo protein synthesis, cellular memory and neuronal plasticity
and, consequently, a blunted injurious response and 
improved recovery. Intracellular survival signals are likely 
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3469
to be important for this response, especially the transcriptional
activator hypoxia-inducible factor, which upregulates 
genes involved in the synthesis of erythropoietin, angiogenesis
, vasomotor control, cell survival, pH regulation, and 
energy metabolism.62 For this reason, it has been postulated 
that chronic ischemic preconditioning and tolerance may 
enhance the clinical outcomes associated with brain tissue 
ischemia and infarction. Indeed, this is supported by the 
coexistence of SBI and leukoaraiosis, where the latter has 
been hypothesized to result from incomplete ischemia secondary
to small-vessel disease.63
Consequences of SBIs
Numerous studies have been published comparing the health 
outcomes in individuals with SBI versus those without. Evidence 
is considerable that SBI adversely affects the risk and outcomes 
of subsequent stroke, as well as overall neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric
function, and risk of mortality (Figure 5).
Stroke
Recent controlled studies have documented an increased risk of 
first stroke among those with SBI that is as high as 10% per year 
and 5-fold that of those without SBI.64 In the largest communitybased
prospective study addressing this issue, Bokura et al65 followed
up 2684 neurologically healthy subjects with no history 
of stroke (mean age, 58±7 years at entry) who underwent health 
screening, including MRI, to document the presence or absence 
of lesions such as SBI and were then followed up for a mean 
of 6.3 years. The incidence rates for clinical stroke were significantly
higher in those with baseline SBI than those without 
(odds ratio, 3.66; 95% confidence interval, 2.28–5.89).
SBI has also been associated with the occurrence of 
recurrent stroke among patients experiencing a first stroke. 
Putaala et al61 performed Cox regression analysis on 655 
young (15–49 years old) stroke victims followed up for a 
mean of 8.7±3.8 years and discovered that multiple SBI 
independently raised the risk of recurrent ischemic stroke 
(odds ratio, 2.48; 95% confidence interval, 1.24–4.94), even 
when adjusted for age, sex, other risk factors, stroke pathogenesis, and leukoaraiosis.
Neurocognitive Dysfunction
A variety of neurocognitive associations has been noted in individuals
with SBI, ranging from global deterioration in cognitive 
function to diminished capacities relating to more specific brain 
processes, such as memory, procedural speed, and language.66
The presence of SBI on imaging is associated with a 2- to 3-fold 
increased frequency of dementia, postulated to result from 
ongoing brain infarction.67,68 Furthermore, among populations 
with dementia, those with SBI were more impaired than those 
without in several cognitive domains, including language function
, delayed recall, and semantic fluency.69 Other associations 
with SBI include cerebral atrophy visual field defects, slowed 
rapid repetitive fine movements, gait disturbance, altered heeltoe
walking, falls, and impaired mobility.22,70,71 Not surprisingly, 
the effect of SBI on neurocognitive function seems to vary with 
location; for instance, in the Northern Manhattan Study, SBI 
in frontal regions affects cognitive flexibility, whereas deep 
infarcts were associated with psychomotor slowing.66
Psychiatric Disorders
In addition, SBI has been identified with increased frequency 
in patients with a variety of psychiatric disorders. The prevalence
of SBI in older adults (mean age, >60 years) with 
depression has been found to be as high as 40% to 50%.70,72,73
In addition, SBI has been identified in 65% of bipolar patients 
whose psychosis started after the age of 50 years versus just 
25% in those whose symptoms started earlier (P<0.05), possibly
suggesting a different mechanism of disease causation 
in the 2 age groups.74 There are several limitations of these 
results, including failure to control for other comorbid conditions
, the small clinical-based (rather than community-based) 
and nonrandomly selected populations, and cross-sectional 
data collection that does not allow for inferences about causation.
Nonetheless, these results certainly warrant further 
investigation.
Other Adverse Health Outcomes
Numerous other adverse health outcomes have been associated 
with an increased rate of SBI. The odds of pneumonia among 
seniors with SBI (mean age, 79 years) are almost 5-fold that of 
controls (odds ratio, 4.67; 95% confidence interval, 1.9–11.7).75
In addition, Willey et al76 looked at overall level of health and 
activity among 1238 clinically stroke-free adults recruited as 
part of the Northern Manhattan Study (mean age, 70±9 years) 
and discovered that the level of activity was poorer among those 
with SBI than those without, however, whether reduced activity 
arose secondary to SBI, or vice versa cannot be inferred.
Mortality
Finally, increased mortality has been documented in all studies
on SBI that have addressed this issue. Of particular note 
are 2 large longitudinal community studies,5,27 in which the 
odds of death were increased 3- to 4-fold among those with 
SBI versus those without.
Conclusions
To date, studies have been plagued by inconsistencies in definitions
and methodologies, limiting our current understanding 
Consequences of
Silent Brain Infarction
Stroke Risk
Neurocognitive
Dysfunction
Psychiatric
Disorders
Mortality
Other Adverse
Health Outcomes
Pneumonia Physical Activity Bipolar-disorder Depression
Dementia
Mild Cognitive Impairment Mobility/gait disturbance
Figure 5. Consequences of silent brain infarction.
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1275464976)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
3470 Stroke November 2014
of the phenomenon known as SBI. It is clear, however, that 
SBI is not rare and can no longer be considered as an incidental
and clinically benign artifact on imaging scans. In fact, 
evidence strongly suggests that these lesions are frequently 
associated with neurocognitive, functional, and gait/mobility 
deficits that may be missed or attributed to other conditions, 
and that they predict the increased risk of more serious adverse 
neurological and cardiovascular events, including stroke and 
premature mortality. Much more is known about the risk factors
for SBI than the underlying pathogenic mechanisms. 
Thus, understanding the former provides a useful platform 
for directed investigation of the latter. Although SBI share 
many associations with clinically overt strokes and transient 
ischemic attacks, differences clearly exist. As such, it may be 
overly simplistic to assume that entirely the same mechanisms 
give rise to all forms of cerebrovascular event. Here, we propose
uniform criteria to standardize SBI definitions, which is 
necessary to facilitate homogeneity for future investigation.
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs White, Simpson, and Fanning for their assistance in 
preparation of the final article for submission.
Sources of Funding
Dr Fanning is funded by The Cardiac Society of Australia and New 
Zealand, The University of Queensland, The Prince Charles Hospital 
Foundation. Dr Fraser is funded by Office of Health and Medical 
Research Fellowship.
Disclosures
None.
References
1. Fisher CM. Lacunes: small, deep cerebral infarcts. Neurology. 
1965;15:774–784.
2. Fanning JP, Wong AA, Fraser JF. The epidemiology of silent brain 
infarction: a systematic review of population-based cohorts. BMC Med. 
2014;2014:119.
3. Waldstein SR, Siegel EL, Lefkowitz D, Maier KJ, Brown JR, Obuchowski 
AM, et al. Stress-induced blood pressure reactivity and silent cerebrovascular
disease. Stroke. 2004;35:1294–1298.
4. Astarci P, Glineur D, Kefer J, D’Hoore W, Renkin J, Vanoverschelde J-L, 
et al. Magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of cerebral embolization 
during percutaneous aortic valve implantation: comparison of transfemoral
and trans-apical approaches using edwards sapiens valve. Eur J 
Cardio Thoracic Surgery. 2011;40:475–479.
5. Longstreth WT Jr, Dulberg C, Manolio TA, Lewis MR, Beauchamp NJ 
Jr, O’Leary D, et al. Incidence, manifestations, and predictors of brain 
infarcts defined by serial cranial magnetic resonance imaging in the 
elderly: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 2002;33:2376–2382.
6. Zhu YC, Dufouil C, Tzourio C, Chabriat H. Silent brain infarcts: a review 
of MRI diagnostic criteria. Stroke. 2011;42:1140–1145.
7. Wardlaw JM, Smith EE, Biessels GJ, Cordonnier C, Fazekas F, Frayne 
R, et al; STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging 
(STRIVE v1). Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel 
disease and its contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet 
Neurol. 2013;12:822–838.
8. Allen LM, Hasso AN, Handwerker J, Farid H. Sequence-specific mr 
imaging findings that are useful in dating ischemic stroke. Radiographics. 
2012;32:1285–1297.
9. Eastwood JD, Engelter ST, MacFall JF, Delong DM, Provenzale JM. 
Quantitative assessment of the time course of infarct signal intensity on 
diffusion-weighted images. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2003;24:680–687.
10. Moreau F, Patel S, Lauzon ML, McCreary CR, Goyal M, Frayne R, 
et al. Cavitation after acute symptomatic lacunar stroke depends on time, 
location, and MRI sequence. Stroke. 2012;43:1837–1842.
11. Groeschel S, Chong WK, Surtees R, Hanefeld F. Virchow-Robin spaces 
on magnetic resonance images: normative data, their dilatation, and a 
review of the literature. Neuroradiology. 2006;48:745–754.
12. Zhu YC, Dufouil C, Mazoyer B, Soumaré A, RicolfiF, Tzourio C, et al. 
Frequency and location of dilated Virchow-Robin spaces in elderly people
: a population-based 3D MR imaging study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2011;32:709–713.
13. Bokura H, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi S. Distinguishing silent lacunar 
infarction from enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces: a magnetic resonance 
imaging and pathological study. J Neurol. 1998;245:116–122.
14. Koch S, McClendon MS, Bhatia R. Imaging evolution of acute lacunar 
infarction: leukoariosis or lacune? Neurology. 2011;77:1091–1095.
15. Potter GM, Doubal FN, Jackson CA, Chappell FM, Sudlow CL, Dennis 
MS, et al. Counting cavitating lacunes underestimates the burden of lacunar
infarction. Stroke. 2010;41:267–272.
16. Hachinski VC, Potter P, Merskey H. Leuko-araiosis. Arch Neurol. 
1987;44:21–23.
17. Gouw AA, Seewann A, van der Flier WM, Barkhof F, Rozemuller AM, 
Scheltens P, et al. Heterogeneity of small vessel disease: a systematic 
review of MRI and histopathology correlations. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2011;82:126–135.
18. Dinia L, Bonzano L, Albano B, Finocchi C, Del Sette M, Saitta L, et al. 
White matter lesions progression in migraine with aura: a clinical and 
MRI longitudinal study. J Neuroimaging. 2013;23:47–52.
19. Okuda DT, Mowry EM, Beheshtian A, Waubant E, Baranzini SE, Goodin 
DS, et al. Incidental MRI anomalies suggestive of multiple sclerosis: the 
radiologically isolated syndrome. Neurology. 2009;72:800–805.
20. Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, Clanet M, Cohen JA, Filippi M, 
et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the 
McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:292–302.
21. Bryan RN, Cai J, Burke G, Hutchinson RG, Liao D, Toole JF, et al. 
Prevalence and anatomic characteristics of infarct-like lesions on MR 
images of middle-aged adults: the atherosclerosis risk in communities 
study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 1999;20:1273–1280.
22. Price TR, Manolio TA, Kronmal RA, Kittner SJ, Yue NC, Robbins J, 
et al. Silent brain infarction on magnetic resonance imaging and neurological
abnormalities in community-dwelling older adults. The 
Cardiovascular Health Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group. 
Stroke. 1997;28:1158–1164.
23. Fink JN, Selim MH, Kumar S, Silver B, Linfante I, Caplan LR, et al. Is 
the association of National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale scores and 
acute magnetic resonance imaging stroke volume equal for patients with 
right- and left-hemisphere ischemic stroke? Stroke. 2002;33:954–958.
24. Heldner MR, Zubler C, Mattle HP, Schroth G, Weck A, Mono ML, et al. 
National Institutes of Health stroke scale score and vessel occlusion in 
2152 patients with acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2013;44:1153–1157.
25. Olavarría VV, Delgado I, Hoppe A, Brunser A, Cárcamo D, Díaz-Tapia 
V, et al. Validity of the NIHSS in predicting arterial occlusion in cerebral 
infarction is time-dependent. Neurology. 2011;76:62–68.
26. Lee SC, Park SJ, Ki HK, Gwon HC, Chung CS, Byun HS, et al. 
Prevalence and risk factors of silent cerebral infarction in apparently 
normal adults. Hypertension. 2000;36:73–77.
27. Vermeer SE, Den Heijer T, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, 
Breteler MM; Rotterdam Scan Study. Incidence and risk factors of silent 
brain infarcts in the population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke. 
2003;34:392–396.
28. Fanning JP, Walters DL, Platts DG, Eeles E, Bellapart J, Fraser JF. 
Characterization of neurological injury in transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation: how clear is the picture? Circulation. 2014;129:504–515.
29. Olmez I, Ozyurt H. Reactive oxygen species and ischemic cerebrovascular
disease. Neurochem Int. 2012;60:208–212.
30. Yoshida M, Tomitori H, Machi Y, Katagiri D, Ueda S, Horiguchi K, 
et al. Acrolein, IL-6 and CRP as markers of silent brain infarction. 
Atherosclerosis. 2009;203:557–562.
31. Hoshi T, Kitagawa K, Yamagami H, Furukado S, Hougaku H, Hori M. 
Relations of serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 
levels with silent brain infarction. Stroke. 2005;36:768–772.
32. Kawamura T, Umemura T, Kanai A, Nagashima M, Nakamura N, Uno T, 
et al. Soluble adhesion molecules and C-reactive protein in the progression
of silent cerebral infarction in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Metabolism. 2006;55:461–466.
33. Kawamura T, Umemura T, Kanai A, Uno T, Matsumae H, Sano T, et al. 
The incidence and characteristics of silent cerebral infarction in elderly 
diabetic patients: association with serum-soluble adhesion molecules. 
Diabetologia. 1998;41:911–917.
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3471
34. Satizabal CL, Zhu YC, Mazoyer B, Dufouil C, Tzourio C. Circulating 
IL-6 and CRP are associated with MRI findings in the elderly: the 
3C-Dijon Study. Neurology. 2012;78:720–727.
35. Schmidt R, Schmidt H, Pichler M, Enzinger C, Petrovic K, Niederkorn 
K, et al. C-reactive protein, carotid atherosclerosis, and cerebral smallvessel
disease: results of the Austrian Stroke Prevention Study. Stroke. 
2006;37:2910–2916.
36. Ishikawa J, Tamura Y, Hoshide S, Eguchi K, Ishikawa S, Shimada K, 
et al. Low-grade inflammation is a risk factor for clinical stroke events 
in addition to silent cerebral infarcts in Japanese older hypertensives: the 
Jichi Medical School ABPM Study, wave 1. Stroke. 2007;38:911–917.
37. Wardlaw JM, Sandercock PA, Dennis MS, Starr J. Is breakdown of the 
blood-brain barrier responsible for lacunar stroke, leukoaraiosis, and 
dementia? Stroke. 2003;34:806–812.
38. Knottnerus IL, Govers-Riemslag JW, Hamulyak K, Rouhl RP, Staals 
J, Spronk HM, et al. Endothelial activation in lacunar stroke subtypes. 
Stroke. 2010;41:1617–1622.
39. Das RR, Seshadri S, Beiser AS, Kelly-Hayes M, Au R, Himali JJ, et al. 
Prevalence and correlates of silent cerebral infarcts in the Framingham 
offspring study. Stroke. 2008;39:2929–2935.
40. Longstreth WT Jr, Katz R, Olson J, Bernick C, Carr JJ, Malinow MR, 
et al. Plasma total homocysteine levels and cranial magnetic resonance 
imaging findings in elderly persons: the Cardiovascular Health Study. 
Arch Neurol. 2004;61:67–72.
41. Vermeer SE, van Dijk EJ, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Clarke 
R, et al. Homocysteine, silent brain infarcts, and white matter lesions: 
The Rotterdam Scan Study. Ann Neurol. 2002;51:285–289.
42. Oh SH, Park SY, Kim NK, An SA, Lee HB, Kim OJ. Relationships 
between plasma homocysteine level and cervicocerebral atherosclerosis 
and microangiopathy in non-stroke individuals. Neurology. 2012;78(1 
Meeting Abstract):P05.234.
43. Knottnerus IL, Gielen M, Lodder J, Rouhl RP, Staals J, Vlietinck R, et al. 
Family history of stroke is an independent risk factor for lacunar stroke 
subtype with asymptomatic lacunar infarcts at younger ages. Stroke. 
2011;42:1196–1200.
44. Morrison AC, Fornage M, Liao D, Boerwinkle E. Parental history of 
stroke predicts subclinical but not clinical stroke: the Atherosclerosis 
Risk in Communities Study. Stroke. 2000;31:2098–2102.
45. Han IB, Kim OJ, Ahn JY, Oh D, Hong SP, Huh R, et al. Association of 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR 677C>T and 1298A>C) 
polymorphisms and haplotypes with silent brain infarction and homocysteine
levels in a Korean population. Yonsei Med J. 2010;51:253–260.
46. Kohara K, Fujisawa M, Ando F, Tabara Y, Niino N, Miki T, et al; NILSLSA
Study. MTHFR gene polymorphism as a risk factor for silent brain 
infarcts and white matter lesions in the Japanese general population: The 
NILS-LSA Study. Stroke. 2003;34:1130–1135.
47. Song J, Kim OJ, Kim HS, Bae SJ, Hong SP, Oh D, et al. Endothelial 
nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms and the risk of silent brain 
infarction. Int J Mol Med. 2010;25:819–823.
48. Kubo M, Hata J, Ninomiya T, Matsuda K, Yonemoto K, Nakano T, et al. 
A nonsynonymous SNP in PRKCH (protein kinase C eta) increases the 
risk of cerebral infarction. Nat Genet. 2007;39:212–217.
49. Debette S, Bis JC, Fornage M, Schmidt H, Ikram MA, Sigurdsson S, et al. 
Genome-wide association studies of MRI-defined brain infarcts: metaanalysis
from the CHARGE Consortium. Stroke. 2010;41:210–217.
50. Joutel A, Corpechot C, Ducros A, Vahedi K, Chabriat H, Mouton P, et 
al. Notch3 mutations in CADASIL, a hereditary adult-onset condition 
causing stroke and dementia. Nature. 1996;383:707–710.
51. Fisher CM. Lacunar infarcts—a review. Cerebrovasc Dis. 
1991;1:311–320.
52. Vermeer SE, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Breteler MM. 
Prevalence and risk factors of silent brain infarcts in the populationbased
Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke. 2002;33:21–25.
53. van Swieten JC, van den Hout JH, van Ketel BA, Hijdra A, Wokke JH, van 
Gijn J. Periventricular lesions in the white matter on magnetic resonance 
imaging in the elderly. A morphometric correlation with arteriolosclerosis 
and dilated perivascular spaces. Brain. 1991;114(pt 2):761–774.
54. Lammie GA, Brannan F, Wardlaw JM. Incomplete lacunar infarction 
(Type Ib lacunes). Acta Neuropathol. 1998;96:163–171.
55. Van Mieghem NM, Schipper ME, Ladich E, Faqiri E, van der 
Boon R, Randjgari A, et al. Histopathology of embolic debris 
captured during transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Circulation. 
2013;127:2194–2201.
56. Kim SJ, Shin HY, Ha YS, Kim JW, Kang KW, Na DL, et al. Paradoxical 
embolism as a cause of silent brain infarctions in healthy subjects: the 
ICONS study (Identification of the Cause of Silent Cerebral Infarction in 
Healthy Subjects). Eur J Neurol. 2013;20:353–360.
57. Miao Q, Paloneva T, Tuisku S, Roine S, Poyhonen M, Viitanen 
M, et al. Arterioles of the lenticular nucleus in CADASIL. Stroke. 
2006;37:2242–2247.
58. Caplan LR, Hennerici M. Impaired clearance of emboli (washout) is an 
important link between hypoperfusion, embolism, and ischemic stroke. 
Arch Neurol. 1998;55:1475–1482.
59. de Jong G, Kessels F, Lodder J. Two types of lacunar infarcts: further 
arguments from a study on prognosis. Stroke. 2002;33:2072–2076.
60. Kruit MC, Launer LJ, Ferrari MD, van Buchem MA. Infarcts in the 
posterior circulation territory in migraine. The population-based MRI 
CAMERA study. Brain. 2005;128(pt 9):2068–2077.
61. Putaala J, Haapaniemi E, Kurkinen M, Salonen O, Kaste M, Tatlisumak 
T. Silent brain infarcts, leukoaraiosis, and long-term prognosis in young 
ischemic stroke patients. Neurology. 2011;76:1742–1749.
62. Liu XQ, Sheng R, Qin ZH. The neuroprotective mechanism of brain 
ischemic preconditioning. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2009;30:1071–1080.
63. Chen X, Wen W, Anstey KJ, Sachdev PS. Prevalence, incidence, and 
risk factors of lacunar infarcts in a community sample. Neurology. 
2009;73:266–272.
64. Kobayashi S, Okada K, Koide H, Bokura H, Yamaguchi S. Subcortical 
silent brain infarction as a risk factor for clinical stroke. Stroke. 
1997;28:1932–1939.
65. Bokura H, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi S, Iijima K, Nagai A, Toyoda G, 
et al. Silent brain infarction and subcortical white matter lesions increase 
the risk of stroke and mortality: a prospective cohort study. J Stroke 
Cerebrovasc Dis. 2006;15:57–63.
66. Wright CB, Festa JR, Paik MC, Schmiedigen A, Brown TR, Yoshita 
M, et al. White matter hyperintensities and subclinical infarction: 
associations with psychomotor speed and cognitive flexibility. Stroke. 
2008;39:800–805.
67. Vermeer SE, Prins ND, den Heijer T, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler 
MM. Silent brain infarcts and the risk of dementia and cognitive decline. 
N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1215–1222.
68. Liebetrau M, Steen B, Hamann GF, Skoog I. Silent and symptomatic 
infarcts on cranial computerized tomography in relation to dementia 
and mortality: a population-based study in 85-year-old subjects. Stroke. 
2004;35:1816–1820.
69. Song IU, Kim JS, Kim YI, Eah KY, Lee KS. Clinical significance of 
silent cerebral infarctions in patients with Alzheimer disease. Cogn 
Behav Neurol. 2007;20:93–98.
70. Avdibegovic E, Becirovic E, Salimbasic Z, Hasanovic M, Sinanovic O. 
Cerebral cortical atrophy and silent brain infarcts in psychiatric patients. 
Psychiatr Danub. 2007;19:49–55.
71. Choi P, Ren M, Phan TG, Callisaya M, Ly JV, Beare R, et al. Silent 
infarcts and cerebral microbleeds modify the associations of white 
matter lesions with gait and postural stability: population-based study. 
Stroke. 2012;43:1505–1510.
72. Yamashita H, Fujikawa T, Yanai I, Morinobu S, Yamawaki S. Cognitive 
dysfunction in recovered depressive patients with silent cerebral infarction. Neuropsychobiology. 2002;45:12–18.
73. Hamada T, Murata T, Omori M, Takahashi T, Kosaka H, Wada Y, 
et al. Abnormal nocturnal blood pressure fall in senile-onset depression
with subcortical silent cerebral infarction. Neuropsychobiology. 
2003;47:187–191.
74. Fujikawa T, Yamawaki S, Touhouda Y. Silent cerebral infarctions in 
patients with late-onset mania. Stroke. 1995;26:946–949.
75. Nakagawa T, Sekizawa K, Nakajoh K, Tanji H, Arai H, Sasaki H. Silent 
cerebral infarction: a potential risk for pneumonia in the elderly. J Intern 
Med. 2000;247:255–259.
76. Willey JZ, Moon YP, Paik MC, Yoshita M, Decarli C, Sacco RL, et al. 
Lower prevalence of silent brain infarcts in the physically active: the 
Northern Manhattan Study. Neurology. 2011;76:2112–2118. 
KEY WORDS: brain infarction ◼ magnetic resonance imaging ◼ stroke 
◼ stroke, lacunar 
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1994289442)
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/45/11/3461
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2014/10/07/STROKEAHA.114.005919.DC1.html
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2016/04/06/STROKEAHA.114.005919.DC2.html
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2016/04/10/STROKEAHA.114.005919.DC3.html
[Link]
http://www.ahajournals.org/site/rights/
[Link]
http://www.lww.com/reprints
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
[Link]
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/
Jonathon P. Fanning, Allan J. Wesley, Andrew A. Wong and John F. Fraser
Emerging Spectra of Silent Brain Infarction
Print ISSN: 0039-2499. Online ISSN: 1524-4628 
Copyright © 2014 American Heart Association, Inc. All rights reserved.
is published by the American Heart Association, 7272 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231 Stroke 
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005919
2014;45:3461-3471; originally published online October 7, 2014; Stroke. 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/45/11/3461
World Wide Web at: 
The online version of this article, along with updated information and services, is located on the
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2016/04/10/STROKEAHA.114.005919.DC3.html
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2016/04/06/STROKEAHA.114.005919.DC2.html
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/suppl/2014/10/07/STROKEAHA.114.005919.DC1.html
Data Supplement (unedited) at:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org//subscriptions/
is online at: Stroke  Information about subscribing to Subscriptions:
http://www.lww.com/reprints
 Information about reprints can be found online at: Reprints:
document. Permissions and Rights Question and Answer process is available in the
Request Permissions in the middle column of the Web page under Services. Further information about this
Once the online version of the published article for which permission is being requested is located, click 
 can be obtained via RightsLink, a service of the Copyright Clearance Center, not the Editorial Office. Stroke in
 Requests for permissions to reproduce figures, tables, or portions of articles originally published Permissions:
 by guest on January 10, 2017 http://stroke.ahajournals.org/ Downloaded from 
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Supplemental Figure I: Mean Silent Brain Infarction Prevalence by Study Sample Size in population-based cohorts
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
7
Full Article
무증상 뇌경색(silent brain infarction, SBI)은 임상적으로 
명확한 신경학적 결손이 없이 영상에서 우연히 뇌경색 소
견이 있는 임상적인 질환으로 점차 인지하는 경우가 늘어나고 있
지만 잘 알려진 바가 없다. 약 50년 전 Fisher 1가 부검 연구를 통해
서 기술하긴 했으나 그 특성을 잘 알게 된 것은 좀 더 민감한 영상 
방법이 개발된 이후의 일이다.   
SBI에 대한 역학문헌 중에서 가장 신뢰성 있고 일반화가 가능한 
자료는 대표성이 있는 지역공동체 표본에서 나왔으며 이를 이용해
서 일반 인구에서 SBI의 유병률은 10%에서 20%로 짐작하고 있으
며, 추적연구에서 연간 발병률은 3%에서 4%로 제시하고 있다. 2 그
러나 병원기반 연구에서 다른 면에서는 건강한 환자를 대상으로 
하였을 때 이는 55%로 증가하며3 특정 질환이 있는 환자군에서는 
90%보다도 높아진다.4
높은 유병률에도 불구하고 SBI는 무증상이 아니며 경미한 신경
학적 결손, 신경인지기능장애, 정신과질환, 증상성 뇌졸중의 발병
률 증가, 조기 사망과 관련이 있다. 이런 관련성을 고려할 때 무증
상(silent)이라는 단어 대신 covert라는 단어를 써야 한다는 주장도 
있다.5
이 논문의 중요한 목적은 현재까지 발표된 의학연구 결과들을 
비판적으로 분석하여 (1) SBI를 정의하고 이 정의에 내재한 문제점
들을 조명하고 (2) SBI의 위험인자 및 발병률, 유병률을 알아보고 
(3) SBI의 병인에 대한 여러 이론들을 점검하고 (4) 이런 병변들의 
임상적 중요성에 대해서 논하는 것이다. 
SBI의 정의
SBI에는무엇이있는가? 
SBI에 대해 통일된 정의는 없기에 이런 병변들에 대해 조사하고 
특성을 기술하는 것이 쉽지 않다. 일반적으로 컴퓨터단층촬영이나 
MRI에서 뇌경색이 보이나 이와 관련한 임상적으로 명백한 뇌혈관
허혈사건이 없는 경우를 SBI라고 한다.6
SBI의발견과진단에대한문제점
관련된 임상적 사건을 얼마나 엄격하게 알아내느냐가 SBI의 발
병률 보고에 지대한 영향을 미치며, 연구자들은 임상적인 발견 방
법에 있어서 상당히 이질적인 방법들을 사용해 왔다. 많은 연구가 
환자 자신의 보고나 후향적인 의무기록을 통해서 그런 사건을 결
정했다. 뇌혈관사건일 가능성이 있는 사건에 대한 기억, 증상, 조
사방법 등이 다양하기에 이런 방법론은 편견에 좌우되기 쉽다.
마찬가지로 진단적 영상전략의 다양성도 SBI의 발병률과 유병
률을 추정하는데 있어서 중요한 의미를 갖는다. 이제 SBI를 진단
하는데 있어서 MRI를 일차적인 영상방법으로 간주하고 있다. 그
러나 이 기법을 적용하는데 있어서 연구마다 상당한 차이가 있다. 
문헌마다 MRI 획득규약, 경색의 영상학적 정의, 비슷한 양상을 나
타내는 병변에 대한 감별전략 등이 다양했다.6
MRI 획득규약
낮은 강도의 자석, 두꺼운 슬라이스, 큰 gap interval은 SBI를 
발견하는 MRI의 민감도를 감소시킨다. 과거에는 슬라이스 두께와 
gap interval이 요즘 관찰하는 SBI 구조물보다 컸고 따라서 보고
가 부정확했다. 2009년까지는 자석의 강도가 0.2 테슬라(tesla, T)
부터 1.5 T까지 다양했지만,6 그간의 기술적인 진보로 초전도 자석
을 널리 쓰게 되었고 이제는 1.5 T가 뇌영상의 최소한의 기준이 되
었다. 또한 진보한 receiver coil과 신호처리는 더 높은 해상도의 
영상을 더 빠르게 얻을 수 있게 해 주었다. 따라서 SBI 구조물을 
From the School of Medicine (J.P.F., A.J.W., A.A.W., J.F.F.) and Critical Care Research Group (CCRG), The Prince Charles Hospital (J.P.F., J.F.F.), The 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Department of Medical Imaging (A.J.W.) and Adult Intensive Care Services (J.F.F.), The Prince 
Charles Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Department of Medical Imaging, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia (A.J.W.); and 
Department of Neurology, The Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia (A.A.W.).
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA. 
114.005919/-/DC1.
Correspondence to Jonathon P. Fanning, BSc, MBBS, Critical Care Research Group (CCRG), University of Queensland, Level 2 Emergency Bldg, 
The Prince Charles Hospital, Rode Rd, Chermside, Brisbane, Queensland 4032, Australia. E-mail Jonathon_fanning@me.com
© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.
Topical Review
무증상 뇌경색의 새로운 범주
Emerging Spectra of Silent Brain Infarction
Jonathon P. Fanning, BSc, MBBS; Allan J. Wesley, MB ChB; Andrew A. Wong, MBBS, PhD; 
John F. Fraser, MB ChB, PhD, DA, MRCP 
(Stroke. 2014;45:3461-3471.)
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.497846115)
8    Stroke 한국어판  Vol. 8, No. 1
올바로 표현하기에 충분한 해상도로 영상을 얻기 위해 고차원의 
MRI 시스템이 더 이상 필요하지 않다. 그래서 STandards for 
ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging working group
이 최근에 제안한 신경영상연구표준을 사용해서 실제적인 표준화
가 가능하다.7
경색의영상학적정의와감별진단
SBI 문헌마다 경색의 영상학적 특성에 대한 정의가 상당히 다른
데 대다수의 연구가 만성피질하공동성경색에 집중하고 있다. 이러
한 병변들은 비교적 독특하며 만성경색의 병태생리학적 종착점인 
공동성의 신경세포 및 교세포 소실을 가진다. 그러나 SBI는 만성
병변에 국한되지 않는다. 영상은 아직 공동화하지 않은 초기단계
의 경색을 발견할 수 있고 사실 모든 SBI가 공동화하지는 않는다. 
또한 SBI는 피질 밑에만 생기는 것이 아니며 대뇌피질, 소뇌, 뇌줄
기의 기능적이지 않은(noneloquent) 영역에 생길 수 있다. 
아래에서 우리는 SBI가 영상학적으로 얼마나 다양한지와 급성
기에서 만성기의 공동화된 경색으로 진행하는 영상적 소견을 기술
할 것이다. 만성의 SBI 병변이 항상 급성영상소견을 나타내는 경
색에서 시작한다는 증거는 아직 없다는 것을 아는 것이 중요하다. 
사실 연속에서 벗어나는 다양한 변이가 있을 수 있다. 따라서 급성
경색과 비급성경색을 영상에서 구분할 수 있고 병변 중 일부는 연
속을 따르더라도 이들은 SBI의 다른 병태생리적인 개체를 대표할 
것이다. 
급성경색
최근 몇 년간 여러 가지 고위험 시술 이후에 발생하는 SBI의 발
병률을 조사하기 위해 확산강조 MRI (diffusion-weighted MRI, 
DWI)를 많이 사용하고 있다. 사실 이 기술은 전통적인 MRI 척도
보다 초기의 변화에 더 민감하고 특이적이어서 더 정확한 진단을 
용이하게 하기에 이 기술을 급성뇌졸중의 진단에 임상적으로 활용
해 왔다. 
침범한 부위에 관계 없이 급성기에 촬영하면 두개내신경세포조
직이나 교세포조직의 경색은 일시적으로 제한된 확산을 나타내며 
DWI에서 고신호를, 상응하는 겉보기확산지수지도(apparent 
diffusion coefficient map)에서 저신호를 나타낸다(Figure 1A). 
일관되게 이런 신호 변화는 급성경색이 발생한지 4시간이 되기 전
에 나타나지만 14일 이내로만 지속되어서,8 유병률을 판단하는데 
있어서 DWI를 적용하기에는 제한점이 많다. 경색은 6시간 후에는 
T2 강조고속스핀에코(T2-weighted fast spin echo)나 T2 액체감
쇠역전회복연쇄(T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery sequences
)에서는 고신호를 T1 강조고속스핀에코연쇄에서는 저신호를 
동시에 나타낸다. 이런 변화는 영구적으로 나타나거나 진행할 수 
있다.8 급성기 이후에 겉보기확산지수 값이 정상화해도 DWI의 고
신호는 평균 57일 동안 지속한다.9
급성경색과 비슷하게 제한된 확산을 나타내는 두개내병리에는 
다발성 경화증의 활동성 플라크, 헤르페스 뇌염, Creutzfeld 
Jacob병, 화농성두개내고름집, 림프종 등의 중추신경계 종양이 있
다. 이런 비슷한 병변들은 SBI와 중복되는 영상학적 특징들을 가
질 수 있지만, 동반하는 다른 영상학적 소견들이 종종 구분에 도움
이 된다. 또한 이런 병변들은 일반적으로 신경학적 증상이 있기에 
임상적으로 구분이 가능하다. 
비급성경색
대부분의 급성경색은 응고괴사를 거쳐서 T2 고신호/T1 저신호
의 아급성기 소견을 나타내다가 결국은 부피가 감소하고 뇌연화증
의 공동화 현상이 나타나는 만성병변으로 진행한다. 증상성 열공
경색에 대한 최근의 추적연구에서 90일째에 97%의 공동화를 나타
냈다.10 백질에 발생하면 이런 만성병변은 고전적인 Poirier and 
Derouesse type I 열공이나 STandards for ReportIng Vascular 
changes on nEuroimaging 작업 그룹이 최근 제한한 크기 정의를 
사용한 혈관성 원인의 열공(lacunes of suspected vascular 
origin)으로 기술한다. 이런 병변은 모든 연쇄에서 뇌척수액의 신
호 특성을 나타낸다(Figure 1B). 이는 T2 강조고속스핀에코에서 
고신호, 액체감쇠역전회복에서 저신호(교증을 나타내는 액체감쇠
3462 Stroke November 2014
STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging 
working group.7
Imaging Definitions of Infarction and Differential 
Diagnoses
Although the greatest heterogeneity in the SBI literature exists 
in defining the imaging characteristics of infarcts, the majority
of studies have concentrated on chronic subcortical cavitatory
infarcts. These lesions are relatively distinctive and with 
cavitatory neuronal and glial loss specific for the pathophysiological
end point of chronic infarction. However, SBI is not 
restricted to chronic lesions. Imaging may capture an infarct 
in an earlier phase, before it has cavitated and indeed not all 
SBI cavitate. Furthermore, SBI is not restricted to subcortical 
regions and can occur in noneloquent areas of the cerebral 
cortex, the cerebellum, and brain stem.
Below we delineate the SBI imaging spectrum and describe 
imaging progression from an acute to chronic and cavitated 
infarct. It is important to recognize that there is no current evidence
to show that all chronic SBI lesions necessarily begin 
as infarcts with acute imaging features. In fact, multiple variances
from the continuum exist. Therefore, distinction is made 
between acute and nonacute infarcts on imaging, recognizing 
that while a subset of lesions will follow the continuum, these 
may also represent different pathophysiological entities of SBI.
Acute Infarction
In recent years, diffusion-weighted MRI (DWI) has been 
increasingly used for determining the incidence of SBI after 
various high-risk procedures. Indeed, the main clinical application
of this technology has been for the diagnosis of acute 
stroke because it is more sensitive and specific to the associated
early changes than traditional MRI measures and thus 
allows more accurate diagnoses.
Infarction of intracranial neuronal or glial tissue, independent
of the region involved, when imaged acutely, demonstrates
transient restricted diffusion: high signal on DWI and a 
corresponding low value on the apparent diffusion coefficient 
map (Figure 1A). These specific signal changes reliably appear 
within 4 hours of acute infarction, however, only persist for 
≤14 days,8 limiting the application of DWI for determining 
prevalence. The infarction will simultaneously demonstrate 
high signal on T2-weighted fast spin echo or T2 fluid attenuated 
inversion recovery sequences and low signal on T1-weighted 
spin echo sequences after 6 hours. These changes may persist 
indefinitely or progress.8 After the acute phase and once the 
apparent diffusion coefficient value has normalized, the high 
DWI signal remains for an average duration of 57 days.9
Intracranial pathologies that mimic acute infarction and 
also display restricted diffusion include active plaques of multiple
sclerosis, herpes encephalitis, Creutzfeld Jacob disease, 
pyogenic intracranial abscesses, and certain highly cellular 
central nervous system tumors such as lymphoma. Although 
these mimicking entities may have overlapping imaging characteristics
with SBI, accompanying imaging findings are often 
distinguishable. Furthermore, these entities are generally not 
neurologically silent and thus can also be discriminated on 
clinical grounds.
Nonacute Infarction
The majority of acute infarcts undergo coagulative necrosis 
with intermediate T2 hyper-/T1 hypointense subacute appearances
, eventually resulting in chronic lesions with volume 
loss and the cavitation of encephalomalacia. A recent longitudinal
study of symptomatic lacunar infarcts demonstrated 
97% cavitation at 90 days.10 When occurring in white matter, 
these chronic lesions are described by the classic Poirier and 
Derouesse type I lacune or more recently and with a restricted 
size definition, as lacunes of suspected vascular origin by the 
STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging 
working group. These lesions have signal characteristics that 
follow cerebrospinal fluid on all sequences (Figure 1B). This 
includes high T2-weighted fast spin echo intensity, nulled 
(low) signal on fluid attenuated inversion recovery with or 
without a hyperintense fluid attenuated inversion recovery rim 
of gliosis, and low T1-weighted spin echo sequence signal, 
with the latter demonstrating the highest sensitivity for cavitation.10 Further discriminators include a wedge or slit shape 
and irregular margins. When such an infarct involves cortex, 
the characteristics are similar except that the infarct is not 
entirely surrounded by uninvolved tissue. The infarcted tissue
displays similar volume loss, cerebrospinal fluid signal of 
Figure 1. Typical lesion appearances on MRI of the brain. A, High diffusion-weighted imaging signal in the left periventricular deep white 
matter (left) has reciprocal low apparent diffusion coefficient value (right) consistent with restricted diffusion in an infarct. B, Wedge 
shaped, irregular margined lesions >3 mm in size in the deep white matter demonstrate nulled central fluid attenuated inversion recovery 
(FLAIR) signal and thick hyperintense rims consistent with a cavitatory infarct. C, Multiple, bilateral symmetrically distributed foci (arrows) 
with signal after cerebrospinal fluid vary in size from 2 to 4 mm. These dilated perivascular spaces do not have thick FLAIR rim, unlike 
the cavitating infarct (closed arrow head). D, The typical appearances of leukoaraiosis include confluent periventricular T2 hyperintensity 
(left, open arrows) and multifocal white matter hyperintensities (left, arrow heads). Without evidence of small-vessel disease/leukoaraiosis 
(right), T2 hyperintensities (arrow heads) likely represents silent brain infarction (SBI). The T2 hyperintensity of noncavitating infarcts (left 
long arrow) are indistinguishable from the hyperintensities of background leukoaraiosis (arrow heads) and thus indeterminate for SBI (N.B. 
the majority of infarcts will cavitate).
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-310574361)
9
역전회복의 고신호 유무에 무관), T1-강조스핀에코연쇄에서 낮은 
신호 등을 의미하는데 이 중에서 마지막 소견이 공동화의 발견에 
있어서 가장 민감도가 높다.10 쐐기나 틈새 모양 및 고르지 않은 경
계가 감별에 추가적으로 도움이 된다. 이런 경색이 피질을 침범하
면 경색이 정상 조식에 의해 완전히 둘러싸이지 않는다는 점 이외
에는 비슷한 특징을 나타낸다. 경색 조직은 비슷하게 부피가 감소
하고 모든 연쇄에서 뇌연화증에서 보이는 뇌척수액의 신호를 나타
내는데 액체감쇠역전회복연쇄에서 교증의 테두리를 나타내는 것
은 있을 수도 있고 없을 수도 있다. 
공동경색의 가장 흔한 감별진단은 Virchow-Robin 공간이라고
도 알려진 확장된 혈관주위공간으로 고해상도 MRI에서 정상적으
로 나타날 수 있으며 나이가 들수록 빈도가 증가한다. 경계가 매끄
럽고 혈관주위공간의 방향에 따라 타원형이나 선형으로 보일 수 
있고 다발성일 경우 양측에 대칭적으로 위치하는데 흔히 앞맞교차
(anterior commissure) 근처의 바닥핵이나 천막위백질에 존재한
다(Figure 1C).11 이들은 특징적으로 공동열공경색보다 작은 경향
이 있지만 노인의 30% 이하에서 커진(＞3 mm) 소견을 보일 수 있
고,12 오진의 흔한 원인이 된다. 사실 영상과 부검 소견을 비교한 
연구는 10%~20%의 증례에서 확장된 혈관주위공간을 SBI로 오진
한다고 결론 내렸다.13
SBI가 시간이 지난다고 항상 공동화하는 것은 아니며 무증상경
색과 장애가 적은 경색을 추적한 연구는 30%에서 80%의 경색은 
공동화하지 않으며 T2 고신호/T1 저신호 병변으로 남는다고 밝혔
다.14,15 이런 비공동화경색은 SBI에서 가장 비특이적인 영상 특징
이며 몇몇 병리가 비슷한 모양을 나타낸다. 
SBI와 유사한 T2 고신호 /T1 저신호병변 중에서 나이가 들면서 
유병률이 증가하기에 가장 중요한 것은 심부의 백질에 발생하는 
백질변성이다(Figure 1D). 원래 중립적인 영상학 용어였던 백질변
성은 뇌실주위백질(periventricular white matter)이나 피질밑심
부백질, 다리뇌에 특징적으로 존재하는 T2 고신호의 부위를 의미
한다.16 이런 병변의 신경세포 및 교세포의 조직병리학적 소견은 
다양하며 지방유리질증(lipohyalinosis), 소혈관동맥경화(smallvessel
arteriosclerosis), 정맥교원질증(venous collagenosis) 등
의 혈관 변화를 포함한다.17 병태생리학적 기전은 잘 모르며 만성
허혈/저산소증, 대뇌자동조절의 변화와 염증에 의한 저관류 등 여
러 요인이 관여할 것으로 추측된다.17
백질변성이 진행하면 T2 고신호가 국소적인 외측 뇌실 확장 없
이 합류뇌실주위분포(confluent periventricular distribution)에 
존재하며 정상적으로 노화한 뇌에서 나타나는 얇은 뇌실주위 띠
(band)나 모자(cap)보다 크다. 더 경미한 형태에서는 T2 고신호가 
작고 국소적이며 심부백질에 산재되어 있다. 질병이 진행하면 이
는 진행하는 뇌실주위 변화와 합쳐진다. 합류뇌실주위 변화는 백
질변성으로 구분이 가능하지만 비연속적인 국소적인 심부백질병
변은 비공동경색과 구분하기가 어렵다. 급성사건 이후 두 달 이하
로 지속되는 일시적인 DWI 신호는 비공동경색을 배경의 백질변성
과 구분하는데 도움이 될 것이다.
SBI과 모습이 중복되는 다른 병리는 편두통의 백질병변이다. 편
두통환자의 과반수에서 나타나기는 하지만 병변은 주로 이마엽과 
마루엽에 위치하며 조짐이 있거나 빈도가 증가하면 수가 증가한
다.18 다발성경화증의 백질플라크도 중복되는 소견이 있으며 영상
학적으로 경미한 경우 특히 그러하다. 임상적으로 무증상인 그러
한 증례는 과거에 발생하였고 현재는 완화된 다발성경화증 및 비
교적 드문 radiologically isolated syndrome을 포함한다.19 이들
은 문헌에서 잘 정의한 특징적인 양상을 나타내며20 이를 통해 구
분할 수 있다. 희귀한 유전성 백질뇌병(hereditary leukoencephalopathies), 독성/대사성 원인, 감염후원인(급성 탈수초성뇌척수
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3463
encephalomalacia in all sequences with or without a gliotic 
margin of fluid attenuated inversion recovery hyperintensity.
The most common mimic of cavitated infarcts are dilated 
perivascular spaces, also known as Virchow–Robin spaces, 
which are a normal finding on high-resolution MRI, increasing
in frequency with age. They appear as smooth margined, 
ovoid, or linear in a perivascular orientation, and when multiple 
have a bilateral symmetrical distribution, most commonly at 
the base of the brain related to the basal ganglia near the anterior
commissures or present in the supratentorial white matter 
(Figure 1C).11 Typically, these tend to be smaller than cavitating
lacunar infarcts, however, enlarged (measuring >3 mm), 
are common, occurring in up to 30% of elderly subjects12 and 
are a common source of misdiagnosis. Indeed, comparisons 
between imaging and autopsy findings have concluded that 
dilated perivascular spaces are misdiagnosed as SBI in 10% 
to 20% of cases.13
Cavitation is not a universal occurrence with the evolution 
of SBI with longitudinal studies of silent and low-disability 
infarction, demonstrating that 30% to 80% of infarcts did not 
cavitate and remained as T2 hyper/T1 hypointense lesions.14,15
These noncavitated infarcts possess imaging characteristics 
that are the least specific for SBI, with several pathological 
entities demonstrating similar appearances.
Of the T2 hyper/T1 hypointense lesions that are similar 
to SBI, the most significant—because of their increasing 
prevalence with age—are the deep white matter lesion of 
leukoaraiosis (Figure 1D). Originally a neutral imaging term 
leukoaraiosis refers to foci or geographic regions of T2 intensity
typically in the periventricular white matter or the subcortical
deep white matter and pons.16 The neuronal and glial 
histopathologic appearance of these lesions are varied and 
include vascular changes of lipohyalinosis, small-vessel arteriosclerosis
, and venous collagenosis.17 Pathophysiological 
mechanisms are poorly understood and suspected to be multifactorial
, including chronic ischemia/hypoxia, hypoperfusion 
because of altered cerebral autoregulation and inflammation.17
In advanced cases of leukoaraiosis, the T2 intense changes 
are characteristically present in a confluent periventricular 
distribution without focal lateral ventricular dilation and are 
greater than the thin periventricular bands or caps of signal in 
the normal ageing brain. In a milder form, the T2 intensities are 
small and focal and are dispersed through the deep white matter.
These coalesce with the progressive periventricular changes 
as the disease progresses. Whereas the confluent periventricular
changes can be distinguished as leukoaraiosis, the discontinuous
focal deep white matter lesion is indistinguishable from 
noncavitating infarcts. A transient DWI signal, which may persist
for ≤2 months after the acute event, may help to discriminate
the noncavitating infarct from background leukoaraiosis.
Another pathological entity whose appearance overlaps 
with that of SBI is the white matter lesion of migraine. 
Although occurring in more than half of migraineurs, lesions 
are predominantly within the frontal and parietal lobes 
with increased numbers related to the presence of aura and 
increasing migraine frequency.18 The white matter plaques 
of multiple sclerosis also have overlapping features, particularly
in milder cases by imaging standards. Such clinically 
silent cases would include previous, now remitted multiple 
sclerosis, as well as the comparatively rare radiologically 
isolated syndrome.19 These have characteristic patterns 
that are well defined in the literature20 that allow for discrimination.
Rare hereditary leukoencephalopathies, toxic/
metabolic causes, and postinfectious causes (such as acute 
demyelinating encephalomyelopathy, subacute sclerosing 
postinfectious encephalitis, and traumatic contusion/diffuse
axonal injury) are also potential differential diagnoses. 
However, with the exception of dilated perivascular spaces 
and leukoaraiosis, those pathological entities that have overlapping
appearances and may cause misdiagnosis have clinically
distinguishing features.
Table. Proposed Imaging Criteria for Silent Brain Infarction
DWI positive lesions
Inclusion criteria Any clinically silent focus of restricted 
diffusion (high DWI signal and low 
ADC value) occurring in either white or 
gray matter, located in the cerebrum, 
cerebellum, or brain stem
Exclusion criteria Associated lesions that satisfy the 
diagnostic criteria for MS. DWI positive 
MS lesions imply active lesions and are 
likely to be symptomatic
Cavitatory lesions
Inclusion criteria Lesions ≥3 mm in size that follow CSF 
on all sequences (highly T2W intense, 
low/null FLAIR, and low T1W signal) 
that are slit or wedge shaped with 
an irregular margin. A gliotic FLAIR 
hyperintense rim is highly suggestive 
of an infarct with greater diagnostic 
certainty
Exclusion criteria Less than 3 mm in size or ≥3 mm and 
smooth and longitudinally aligned with 
perforating vessels; when multiple, 
bilateral symmetrical distribution is 
strongly suggestive of dPVS
T2W hyperintense/T1W hypointense lesions
Inclusion criteria A focal lesion with high T2W signal and 
low T1W signal that has
Prior evidence of restricted diffusion; or
Is present within cortical gray matter or 
deep gray matter nuclei; or
A lesion that is new, compared with an 
MRI performed within 3 mo
Indeterminate T2W hyper/T1W hypointense lesions 
in the white matter, which are 
discontinuous but associated with the 
classic confluent periventricular T2 
intense change of leukoaraiosis
Exclusion criteria Associated lesions that satisfy the 
diagnostic criteria for MS
Significant history of severe trauma, 
radiation, drug toxicity, or carbon 
monoxide poisoning
ADC indicates apparent diffusion coefficient; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; dPVS, 
dilated perivascular spaces; DWI, diffusion-weighted imaging; FLAIR, fluid 
attenuated inversion recovery; MS, multiple sclerosis; T1W, T1-weighted spin 
echo sequences; and T2W, T2-weighted (fast) spin echo.
(8.0.0.2542,1568042472 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
10    Stroke 한국어판  Vol. 8, No. 1
병[acute demyelinating encephalomyelopathy], 아급성경화범
뇌염[subacute sclerosing postinfectious encephalitis], 외상성 
타박상/광범위축상손상[diffuse axonal injury])도 잠재적인 감별
진단이다. 그러나 확장된 혈관주위공간과 백질변성을 제외하고 그
런 병리는 중복되는 양상이 있고 오진을 초래할 수도 있으나 임상
적으로는 특징적인 소견이 있다.
SBI 진단기준제안
경색의영상학적증거
앞에서 논한 바에 의하면 SBI는 해부학적인 위치나 기저 병인과 
상관없이, MRI상의 3가지 병변으로 나타난다: (1) 제한된 확산을 
나타내는 부위(DWI 양성) (2) 공동화병변 또는 (3) 특이도가 낮은 
T2 고신호/T1 저신호 부위. 우리는 영상이 백질변성과 비공동화경
색을 신뢰성 있게 구분할 수 없다는 것을 알기에 SBI 오진을 최소
화하기 위해 Table과 Figure 2에 요약한 영상기준과 접근법을 제
안한다. 앞에서 논한 이유로 3 mm를 경색의 최소한의 크기로 정
하는 것은 확장된 혈관주위공간과 구분하는데 있어서 적당하며 이
는 조직학적 자료와 일치하고13 판독자간의 일치도도 더 좋다.21,22
어떤 환자 군의 20%에서 이보다 큰 무증상경색이 발견되었다는 
것을 고려할 때 어떤 전문가가 주장하듯 15 mm를 크기의 상한선
으로 하는 것은1,7 너무 제한적이다.21 
영상소견으로는 SBI 병변이 감별되지 않을 경우 3개월 후에 다
시 MRI 스캔을 하는 것을 권고하는데 이 기간은 특이도를 유지하
기에 충분히 짧으면서 공동화가 발생하기에 충분한 기간이다.10 비
특이적인 T2 고신호 안에서 지속적인 DWI 신호가 경색을 의심하
게 하는 특정 중재/수술처럼 검사 전에 가능성이 높아 보이는 상황
이나 SBI에 대한 민감도를 최대로 해야 하는 연구 등에서 특히 그
러하다. 
혈관성 원인이라고 추정하는 백질 고신호강도(white matter 
hyperintensities of presumed vascular origin)라고 명명한 영상
병변의 STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on 
nEuroimaging 작업 그룹 정의는7 경색이 아닌 백질변성과 비공동
경색을 포함한다. 이런 병변들을 분류하는 근본적 이유는 병태생
리적 소견, 위험인자, 임상적 소견을 같이 한다는 면에서 정당함을 
증명할 수 있다. 반대로 이들은 각각의 검사를 정당화할 만큼 충분
히 별개의 병변이며 우리의 정의는 가능하다면 이런 병변들을 구
분하려는 것이다. 
임상적인무증상
급성 SBI의 정의의 다양성을 극복하기 위해서, 뇌졸중과 관련 
있는 증상에 대한 표준화한 평가 및 배제 방법이 필요하다. NIH 
뇌졸중척도점수(National Institutes of Health Stroke Score, 
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctors/NIH_stroke_scale.pdf)는 
이런 목적으로서는 가장 널리 받아들여지고 알려진 도구이며 표준
화된 적용을 위한 수련/인증 과정이 잘 되어 있는 장점이 있다. 이 
도구를 이용하면 첫 평가에서 0점이거나 연속적인 평가에서 점수 
차이가 없을 경우 SBI라고 진단할 수 있다. NIH 뇌졸중척도점수
는 우측 뇌졸중23과 후순환(posterior circulation) 뇌졸중24에 대해
서는 민감도가 낮을 수 있으며 원위부 손위약처럼 경미한 뇌졸중 
징후는 고려하지 못할 수 있다. 그러나 우리는 전향적 연구 내부 
및 여러 연구들간에서 임상적 평가를 표준화하는 것에 대해서 이
런 타협은 허용 가능하다고 생각한다.  
임상적으로 명백한 뇌졸중에서 비급성기의 SBI를 감별할 때 임
상적으로 무증상임을 확인하기는 더 어렵다. NIH 뇌졸중척도점수
는 시간의존적인 유효성을 가지고 있어서 발병 시각과 임상적 평
가 사이의 기간이 길수록 민감도가 감소하며 비급성 SBI를 진단하
3464 Stroke November 2014
Proposed Criteria for SBI Diagnosis
Imaging Evidence of Infarction
On the basis of above discussion, it is apparent that SBI, 
independent of anatomic site or suspected underlying pathogenesis
, manifest as any of 3 lesions on MRI: (1) a focus demonstrating
restricted diffusion (DWI positive); (2) a cavitatory 
lesion or; (3) a less specific focus of T2 hyperintensity/T1 
hypointensity. To minimize SBI misdiagnoses, we propose the 
imaging criteria and approach summarized in the Table and 
Figure 2, recognizing that imaging cannot reliably discriminate
between leukoaraiosis and noncavitating infarcts.
For reasons previously discussed, we think that a 3-mm 
minimum size threshold for an infarct is appropriate for differentiating
dilated perivascular spaces in that it conforms 
with discriminatory histological data13 and has better interobserver
agreement.21,22 An upper limit in size, such as 15 mm as 
proposed by some experts,1,7 may be too restrictive considering
silent infarcts greater than this have constituted 20% of 
infarcts in some series.21
Where there is suspicion that an imaging finding represents 
an undifferentiated SBI lesion, we recommend that a time period 
of 3 months between MRI scans is appropriate, being sufficiently
short to maintain specificity but of sufficient duration to 
allow cavitation.10 This is particularly relevant to circumstances 
with increased pretest probability, such as certain interventions/
surgeries, where persistent DWI signal in a nonspecific T2 
hyperintensity is suspicious for an infarct, or in research settings
where maximal sensitivity for SBI is desirable.
With reference to the STandards for ReportIng Vascular 
changes on nEuroimaging working group definition of 
imaging entities termed white matter hyperintensities of presumed
vascular origin,7 these would include noninfarct-related 
leukoaraiosis and noncavitated infarcts. The rationale for 
grouping these entities is justified by shared pathophysiological
features, risk factors, and clinical correlates. Conversely, 
these may be sufficiently distinct entities to warrant separate 
investigation, and our definitions aim to distinguish these 
where possible.
Clinical Silence
To overcome variability in clinical definition of acute SBI, 
a standardized method for assessing and excluding strokerelated
symptomatology is required. The National Institutes 
of Health Stroke Score or (http://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctors
/NIH_stroke_scale.pdf) is the most widely accepted and 
understood tool for such a purpose and has the advantage of 
a training/certification process for standardization of its application.
Using this tool, a score of zero on initial assessment 
or no change in score on serial assessment is necessary for 
the diagnosis of SBI. It is important to acknowledge that the 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Score may offer poor sensitivity
for right-sided23 and posterior circulation24 stroke and 
subtle signs of stroke, such as distal hand weakness, may go 
unrecognized. However, we consider these acceptable compromises
for standardizing clinical assessment both within 
and across prospective studies.
It is much harder to establish clinical silence when differentiating
nonacute SBI from clinically apparent stroke. The 
National Institutes of Health Stroke Score demonstrates timedependent
validity, with decreasing sensitivity as the period 
from symptom onset to clinical evaluation extends, making 
DWI Positive
High DWI signal
Low ADC
High T2W/FLAIR
Low T1W
Cavitatory
Very high T2W
Very low T1W
Low (null) FLAIR
(i.e. follows CSF Signal)
T2W/FLAIR
Intensity
(Focal )
Silent Brain Infarction
≥ 3mm size
< 3mm size
dPVS
Smooth margin
Ovoid/linear in perivascular orientation
when multiple, bilateral 
symmetrical distributrion
Slit/wedge shaped
irregular margin
hyperintense FLAIR rim
Previous evidence of restricted
diffusion within lesion
New focal lesion < 3 months
Present in cortical or deep grey matter
 nuclei
No clinical evidence of previous / 
current conditions that may cause 
asymptomatic T2 lesions:
Multiple sclerosis
Diffuse axonal injury
Radiotherapy
Drug toxicity
Associated small vessel 
disease changes such as
confluent periventricular 
T2 intense change
Indistinguishable from
leukoaraiosis
Possible SBI
(consider repeat MRI 3 months) Indeterminate YES
NO
Figure 2. Decision tree for MRI diagnosis of brain infarction in the asymptomatic patient. ADC indicates apparent diffusion coefficient; 
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; dPVS, dilated perivascular spaces; DWI, diffusion-weighted MRI; FLAIR, fluid attenuated inversion recovery; 
SBI, silent brain infarction; T1W, T1-weighted spin echo sequences; and T2W, T2-weighted (fast) spin echo.
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
11
는데 있어서 신뢰성이 떨어지는 도구이다.25 영상을 할 때에 임상
적 검진을 하면 과거의 임상적으로 명맥한 뇌졸중에 합당한 지속
적인 국소적 신경학적 결손을 찾아내는데 도움이 될 것이다. 뇌졸
중의 증상은 호전할 수 있고 영상 당시에는 존재하지 않을 수 있어
서 잘 알려진 단점이 있긴 하지만 자가보고와 의무기록의 확인도 
중요하다. 
SBI의유병률과발병률
인구집단기반코호트(대표성 있는 지역사회 표본과 정기건강검
진)에서 MRI로 발견한 SBI의 유병률은 5.5%에서26 55.2%에3 달했
는데 MRI로 공동성 병변을 발견하였다. 그러나 online-only 
Data Supplement의 Figure I에 나와 있듯이 표본수가 적다는 점
이 30%가 넘는 유병률을 나타내는 연구의 신뢰도를 떨어뜨린다. 
사실 대규모 연구(＞1000명)의 대부분은 20% 이하의 추정 유병률
을 보고하였다.2 
추적조사를 해야 하고 연구비가 증가하므로 발병률 자료는 비교
적 드물다. 이 분야에서 두 개의 획기적 연구는 60세가 넘는 고령 
환자에서 3~4% 정도의 연간 발병률을 보여주었고 80세가 넘는 
환자에서는 6.5%까지 올라갔다.5,27 
SBI를 신경학적 손상의 지표로 보는 관심이 증가하면서 점점 더 
많은 연구들이 특정한 중재 및 수술시의 유병률 자료를 기술하고 
있다. 비록 이런 상황들을 각각 자세히 고찰하는 것은 이 논문의 
목적에 맞지 않지만 지금까지의 보고들에서는 카테터경유대동맥
판막치환술이 SBI의 위험을 가장 높이며 평균 75%라고28 보고하고 
있고 심한 경우 93%에 달한다.4
SBI의위험인자
위험인자에 대한 연구는 임상적으로 명맥한 뇌졸중과 연관이 있
는 위험인자에 집중되어 있다. 다양한 뇌혈관사건들이 같은 위험
인자를 공유하고 종종 혼재하지만 다양한 뇌혈관사건들 사이에 차
이가 존재하며 SBI를 이해하고자 하는 노력을 할 경우에는 이를 
고려해야 한다. 
나이와 고혈압은 가장 강력한 증거가 존재하는 두 개의 위험인
자이다.2 다른 명백한 인자들은 Figure 3에 요약되어 있고 목동맥
질환, 심장동맥질환, 만성콩팥질환, 대사증후군 등을 포함한다. 심
부전, 심장동맥질환, 고호모시스테인혈증, 폐쇄수면무호흡, 편두
통, 특정 면역/혈액질환 특히 과응고상태와 관련된 질환 등도 중요
할 가능성이 있다. 성별, 인종, 흡연, 음주, 비만, 고지혈증, 심방
세동, 당뇨 등은 임상적으로 명백한 뇌졸중의 위험인자인 것으로 
알려져 있기는 하지만 SBI의 관련성은 불확실하다. 
지금까지 가능성이 있는 위험인자가 복수로 혼재하는 상황에서 
연구를 진행하여 왔기 때문에 다양한 인자의 상대적 중요성을 결
정하기 위한 다변량분석기법을 강조하고 있다. 그러나 이 위험인
자들이 얼마나 상호독립적인지 의문스럽고 인자들간의 상호작용
과 공분산에 대한 이해는 아직 충분하지 않다. 다양한 위험인자들
에 대한 평가를 더욱 교란시키는 점은 확인된 관련성이 SBI의 원
인인지 결과인지는 확실하지 않다는 것이다
SBI의잠재적병리기전
유사점이 있을 것이 확실하기는 하나 동일한 기전이 모든 종류
의 뇌혈관사건을 일으킬 것이라고 가정하는 것은 너무 단순한 생
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3465
it an unreliable tool for diagnosing nonacute SBI.25 Clinical 
examination at the time of imaging will help to identify a persistent
focal neurological deficit consistent with past clinically 
apparent stroke. Because stroke symptoms may resolve and 
not be present at the time of imaging, self-report and examination
of medical records are also crucial, despite their wellestablished
drawbacks.
Prevalence and Incidence of SBI
The prevalence of MRI-detected SBI among population-based 
cohorts (representative community samples and routine health 
evaluations) has varied from 5.5%26 to 55.2%,3 where imaging
detection has relied on cavitatory lesions. However, as 
illustrated in the Figure I in the online-only Data Supplement, 
the reliability of studies reporting overall prevalence rates of 
>30% is undermined by small sample sizes. Indeed, the vast 
majority of large studies (>1000 subjects) have reported prevalence
estimates of ≤20%.2
Comparatively, incidence data are sparse, likely because 
of the longitudinal nature and, hence, increased costs of such 
studies. The 2 landmark studies in this regard suggest an 
annual incidence of 3% to 4% among elderly patients (aged 
>60 years) and as high as 6.5% in those >80 years.5,27
Because of evolving interest surrounding SBI as a marker 
of neurological injury, a growing body of research is characterizing
incidence data in specific interventional and surgical 
settings. Although it is beyond the scope of this article to 
examine each of these situations in detail, reports to date have 
identified transcatheter aortic valve replacement as the highest 
risk for SBI, with an average incidence of 75%28 and as high 
as 93%.4
Risk Factors for SBI
The search for SBI risk factors has focused on those known 
to be associated with clinically apparent stroke. Although distinct
cerebrovascular events share many of the same risk factors
and often coexist, there are differences between them and 
any attempts to understand SBI must take these into account.
Subject age and elevated blood pressure are the 2 risk 
factors for which the strongest, supportive evidence exists.2
Other apparent factors are summarized in Figure 3 and include 
carotid disease, coronary artery disease, chronic renal disease
, and metabolic syndromes. Heart failure, coronary artery 
disease, hyperhomocysteinemia, obstructive sleep apnoea, 
migraines, and certain immunologic/hematologic disorders, 
especially those associated with hypercoagulable states, are 
also likely of significance. Despite their established risk for 
clinically apparent stroke, any association among SBI and sex, 
ethnicity, tobacco and alcohol consumption, obesity, dyslipidemia
, atrial fibrillation, and diabetes mellitus remains unclear.
To date, because studies have taken place in settings where 
multiple possible risk factors coincide, multivariate analysis 
Age
Obesity Cigarette
Smoke
Gender
Demographic / Lifestyle
Ethnicity
Carotid
Artery
Stenosis
AF
Impaired
Cardiac
function
Othe
r 
disease state
s
Hypertension
Stroke
Coronary
Artery
Disease
Metabolic
syndrome
Diabetes
OSA
Migraine
CKD
Genetics
MTHFR
eNOS
PRKCH
VEGF
TAVI
CTS
CEA /
CAS
Other
major 
surgeries
GA
Plasma
Hct
Uric
acid
Fibrinogen
D-dimer
hs-CRP
ICAM-1
vWF
Dyslipidaemia
CI
Cardiovascula
r 
Diseas
e Laboratory Parameters
Medical Pr
ocedur
es
Figure 3. Risk factors for silent brain infarction. AF indicates atrial fibrillation; CEA/CAS, carotid endarterectomy/carotid stenting; CI, 
cardiovascular interventions; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CTS, cardiothoracic surgery; eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthetase; GA, 
general anesthetic; Hct, homocysteine; hs-CRP, high-sensitivity-C-reactive protein; ICAM-1, intracellular adhesion molecule-1; MTHFR, 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase; OSA, obstructive sleep apnoea; PRKCH, protein kinase Cη (human); TAVI, transcatheter aortic 
valve implantation; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor; and vWF, von Willebrand Factor.
( 8.0.0.2542.2064140519 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
12    Stroke 한국어판  Vol. 8, No. 1
각이다. SBI의 기전을 조사하는 것은 어려운 일인데 이런 병변들
의 대부분이 우연히 발견되고 언제 발생했는지를 알 수가 없기 때
문이다. 또한 앞서 논했듯이 SBI는 균질의 질환이 아니며 대혈관 
및 소혈관질환 모두에 의해 발생할 수 있고 다양한 해부학적 위치
에 나타날 수 있는데 이는 병태생리의 차이를 반영한다. 따라서 원
인 기전에 대한 설명은 주로 추정에 의한 것이며 위험인자, 질병 
상태(명백한 뇌졸중 포함), 생화학 지표, 영상학적 소견들간의 상
관관계와 차이에 대한 평가에 기대고 있다. 게다가 SBI의 병인에 
중요할 가능성이 큰 대뇌소혈관에 대한 평가방법이 별로 없다는 
사실은 가설 검증에 심각한 장애가 된다. 그래서 혈관생물학 연구
자들은 명백한 뇌졸중보다 SBI에 관심을 덜 주고 있다. 
SBI에대한취약성을증가시키는인자
산화스트레스
뇌졸중을 포함하여 다양한 질환의 병인에 혈관산화스트레스를 
일으키는 다양한 해로운 자극들이 관여하고 있다.29 사실 SBI에 대
한 알려진 위험인자들의 대부분이 활성산소와 acrolein(허헐 중 발
생하는 폴리아민[polyamine] 분해의 산물)의 발생과 축적을 촉진
시키거나 만성염증을 일으킨다. 
많은 연구자들은 체순환으로 들어가는 다양한 분자들과 SBI와
의 관련성을 연구하기 위해서 허혈에 의해 변화하는 혈관뇌장벽의 
성질을 이용하고 있다. Yoshida 등30은 고농도의 혈관염증지표들
을 acrolein과 같이 사용하면 높은 민감도와 특이도로 SBI를 예측
한다는 것을 보고했다. 신경학적으로 정상인 외래환자를 대상으로 
한 다른 연구에서 고민감도 C-반응단백질과 인터루킨6가 SBI가 
있는 환자에서 그렇지 않은 환자보다 의미 있게 증가되어 있음을 
발견했다.31 가용성 부착분자인 세포내부착분자-1 (intracellular 
adhesion molecule-1),32,33 혈관세포부착분자 1 (vascular cell 
adhesion molecule 1),33 E-셀렉틴(E-selectin)32 등이 SBI가 있
는 환자에서 그렇지 않은 환자보다 증가되어 있었고 세포내부착분
자-1은 SBI 진행과도 밀접한 관련이 있다.32 그러나 이런 모든 경
우에도 이 염증반응이 허혈의 원인인지 결과인지는 불확실하다.
흥미롭게도 가장 신뢰성 있고 대표성 있는 자료가 나온 대규모
인구집단 연구들은 이런 생화학지표들과 SBI 사이에 어떠한 관련
성도 발견하지 못했다.34,35 이에 대한 설명은 고전적으로 임상적으
로 명백한 뇌졸중에서 관여하는 특징적으로 죽상경화가 온 큰 혈
관에 비해서 SBI에서는 침범한 혈관의 크기가 작고 죽상경화의 역
할이 불분명하다는 것이다. 고민감도 C-반응단백질 같이 앞서 언
급한 생체지표들이 특징적으로 서양보다 일본에서 낮은데 관련연
구들이 일본에서 많이 진행되었기에 이런 소견은 인종적인 차이를 
반영하는 것일 수도 있다.32,36
내피기능이상과당질층
SBI 병인은 대뇌소혈관내피기능 이상이 관여한다고 가정하고 
있는데(Figure 4), 혈장성분들이 혈관벽과 주위 뇌조직에 유출되
어 혈관주위손상, 염증, 혈관내지혈(intravascular hemostasis)을 
일으킨다고 여겨지고 있다.37 정상적인 혈관내피도 뇌혈류의 효과
적인 자동조절에 필요하다. Knottnerus 등38은 순환하는 혈액지표
를 조사하는 열공경색연구에서 내피기능이상이 증상성아형이 아
닌 무증상성아형에서 중요한 기전이라고 결론 내렸다.
혈관병리에서 내피의 역할에 대한 이론은 최근 당질층으로 초점
이 이동하였다(Figure 4). 이는 내피가 분비하는 다당류 기질 내에 
있는 효소와 단백질의 얇은(50~100 nm) 층이다. 내피의 꼭대기 
쪽과 내강 사이에 울타리 역할을 하며 망가지면 내피의 보호에 문
제가 생긴다. 그러나 지금까지 SBI에서 당질층의 역할은 연구한 
바가 없다
호모시스테인
앞서 언급한 바와 같이 혈장 호모시스테인 증가는 SBI의 중요한 
위험인자로 밝혀졌다.39-41 몇 가지 기전을 제안하였는데 이산화질
소생성을 감소시키는 혈관내피의 산화손상, 내피세포의 혈소판부
착 증가, 부혈전인자(prothrombotic factor)의 농도 증가 등이다. 
흥미롭게도 혈장호모시스테인증가와의 관련성은 큰혈관질환보다
는 소혈관질환에서 더 밀접하다.42
유전
유전적 요인은 증상성 뇌졸중의 확실한 위험인자이며 SBI의 발
생에 있어서도 중요할 가능성이 있다. 특정 유전인자와 SBI와의 
관계는 별로 연구가 안 되어 있으나 젊은 연령 43에서 그리고 뇌졸
중의 병력이 있는 부모의 자식44에서 뇌졸중의 가족력이 SBI의 독
립적인 위험인자라는 사실이 유전적 감수성을 시사한다. 앞서 호
모시스테인과 소혈관내피가 중요하다고 논했듯이 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase45,46와 내피일산화질소합성
효소(endothelial nitric oxide synthetase)47 유전자의 다형태는 
SBI의 독립적 위험인자로 알려졌다. protein kinase Cη 유전자, 48
MACRO domain-containing 2 유전자, fibronectin leucine-rich 
transmembrane protein 3 유전자49 등의 단일염기다형태도 알려
져 있다.
 마지막으로 Chr19q12의 Notch3 유전자 돌연변이는 Notch3 
단백질이 평활근세포에 과도하게 축적되게 만들어서 소혈관병증
을 일으킨다.50 이것이 유전성 뇌졸중의 가장 흔한 형태이며 소혈
관병증의 원형인 카다실(cerebral autosomal dominantarteriopathy
with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy)의 
원인이며 재발하는 임상적으로 명백한 뇌졸중이나 재발하는 무증
상 뇌졸중과 동반하는 인지기능저하, 피질하치매로 나타난다. 
허혈성사건을유발하는인자
뇌졸중과 마찬가지로 여러 가지 원인 기전이 존재하며 상호작용
하여 SBI를 발생시키는데 미세혈관병, 색전, 전신저혈압 등 저관
류를 일으키는 병들이 있다.
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1106340837)
13
소혈관질환
무증상 뇌경색이 지름이 약 40~200 μm인 동맥과 관련이 있는 
반면 증상성 병변의 경우 200~800 μm였던 사후연구에 근거하여 
Fisher51는 1991년에 증상성 및 무증상성 경색 사이의 차이가 혈관 
크기와 관련이 있다고 주장하였다. 이 이론은 대부분(＞90%)의 
SBI가 혈관이 작은 경향이 있는 심부열공경색이라는 소견에 근거
하고 있다.52 열공경색과 연관이 있는 기저병리는 소혈관병증이다. 
SBI의 발생과 연관되어 있는 백질변성의 기전이 소혈관병증임을 
고려하면 이것은 매력적인 이론이다.53
소혈관병증의 정확한 특징은 알려져 있지 않다. 미만성으로 소
혈관벽이 두꺼워져 있어서 내강이 좁아지는 지방유리질증은 열공
경색과 연관되어 있는 주요한 병리소견이다. 1 비슷하게 
microatheromatosis도 제시하였는데 이는 특징적으로 더 큰 관통
동맥과 연관되어 있고 종종 더 큰 하나의 증상성 경색을 일으킨다. 
나이와 관련 있는 무증상 SBI의 발달에는 매력적인 설명이지만 소
혈관병리는 다른 몇 가지 상황에서는 SBI의 높은 발병을 설명하지 
못한다. 
혈관뇌장벽 기능이상
소혈관의 투과성 이상인 혈관뇌장벽 기능이상은 소혈관병증의 
가능성 있는 원인으로 지목하고 있다. 부종이 동반하는 병변과 상
당히 비슷한 열공경색아형이 존재한다는 것이 이를 뒷받침한다.54
그러나 혈관뇌장벽 기능이상을 초래하는 병변은 아마 미만성일 것
이고 SBI의 국소적인 성질을 설명하지는 못한다. 
색전
이전에 논한 바와 같이 대동맥판막이나 상행성대동맥과 대동맥
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3467
4
Cerebral small vessel endothelial dysfunction
Tunica intima
Tunica media
Tunica externa
Inflammation, loss of 
blood brain barrier
integrity and oedema 
Platelet activation
and thrombus formation 
Smooth muscle
cell proliferation
Atherosclerosis
Vasoconstriction
3
3
4
2 1
ROS
NO
Polyamine (spermine/
spermidine)
Lipid peroxidation
Metalloprotein activation
Protein oxidation
Enzyme nitration
↑ Expression of
adhesion molecules
SOD
eNOS
Uncouples
eNOS
H2O2
SBI risk factors
NADPH oxidase Xanthine oxidase Acrolein
L–arginine
O2
–
NO BH4
ONOO
–
ICAM-1
P-selection
Healthy glycocalyx 
Perturbed glycocalyx
Polyamine
oxidase
VWF
TFPI Antithrombin
Figure 4. Pathogenesis of silent brain infarction (SBI). Identified risk factors for SBI increase oxidative stress resulting in cerebral smallvessel
endothelial dysfunction and perturbed glycocalyx. Consequently, blood flow is reduced by (1) inflammation, loss of blood brain 
barrier integrity, and edema; (2) platelet activation and thrombus formation; (3) arteriosclerosis including smooth muscle cell proliferation 
and atherosclerosis; and (4) vasoconstriction. NO indicates nitric oxide; and ROS, reactive oxygen species.
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
14    Stroke 한국어판  Vol. 8, No. 1
활을 침범하는 수술/중재 중에 발생하는 높은 색전 부담의 배경에
서 SBI가 유병률이 높다. 이런 배경에서 색전보호기구(embolic 
protection device)에서 걸린 부스러기를 본 연구에서 시술 중 부
서진 가스성조직, 석회성조직, 죽상성조직, 내피조직, 급성 및 만
성의 혈전성 물질, 의인성의 비유기성 물질을 발견할 수 있었다. 55
마찬가지로 건강한 인구집단에서 모순색전증은 SBI의 주요한 기
전 중 하나일 수 있으며 관통동맥 영역 바깥에서 SBI가 발생하는 
것과 특히 연관되어 있다. 사실 우좌션트의 유병률은 관통동맥 영
역 바깥에 SBI가 있는 사람과 원인불명 색전뇌졸중으로 진단된 환
자에서 비슷하다.56
저관류
몇 연구 결과들은 전부는 아니더라도 혈관연축과 그로 인한 저
관류나 혈관폐색 이외의 다른 원인에 의한 저관류가 많은 SBI의 
발병을 설명할 수 있음을 시사한다. 6명의 카다실 환자를 대상으
로 한 대조군 사후연구는 소혈관폐색보다는 대뇌동맥혈류의 자동
조절의 이상이 렌즈핵 안의 열공경색의 원인임을 밝혔는데 이는 
저관류이론과 일맥상통한다.57
대뇌혈류역학의 변화도 색전입자의 청소와 목적지에 영향을 준
다. 또한 저관류는 부분적 폐색의 영향을 극대화시켜서 허혈과 경
색을 유발할 수 있다.58
임상적신경학적기능이상이없는이유를설명하는인자
증상성 경색과 무증상 경색을 구분하여 차이를 나타내는 경색 
특성에 근거하여 SBI에서 명백한 신경학적 기능이상이 없는 이유
를 설명하려는 몇 이론이 제시되었다.
크기와 위치
SBI의 증상이 없는 이유에 대하여 가장 널리 인정받고 호소력 
있는 두 가지 설명은 손상된 뇌조직의 크기와 위치에 대한 것이다. 
앞서 논했듯이 SBI는 주로 소혈관을 침범하며 따라서 특징적으로 
작은 크기를 나타낸다. 이런 경색들은 작기 때문에 연관된 신경학
적인 결손은 나타나지 않는다고 추측하고 있다.51,59 마찬가지로 중
요한 부위(예를 들면, 뇌줄기나 내측피막[internal capsule])의 작
은 경색은 종종 심한 신경학적 후유증을 남길 수 있으나 주요부가 
아닌 위치의 조직은 결손 없이도 상당량이 소실될 수 있으므로 경
색의 위치는 중요할 것이 거의 확실하다. 이런 추측은 SBI가 특정 
위치에 잘 생긴다는 사실을 입증한다. 예를 들면 열공경색의 경우 
증상성 병변은 주로 앞맥락막동맥의 영역에 발생하나 무증상 병변
은 특징적으로 렌즈핵줄무늬체관통동맥 영역에서 생긴다.59 흥미
롭게도 젊은 환자 코호트나 편두통환자에서 후순환 및 소뇌에 SBI
가 많이 존재한다. 그러나 이런 양상은 젊은 환자의 코호트에서 명
백한 뇌졸중의 위치를 조사할 때에도 나타난다.60,61
허혈 전처치(Ischemic Preconditioning)
허혈 전처치는 허혈내성 표현형(ischemia-tolerant 
phenotype)을 유발하고 두 번째의 치사적 손상에 대한 저항성을 
증가시켜주는 과거의 준치사성 손상에 대한 선천적인 적응적 신경
보호반응이다. 이것은 유전적 정보 재구성을 통해 일어나며 신단
백질합성(de novo protein synthesis), 세포기억, 신경세포가소성
을 증가시키고 결국 해로운 반응은 무디어지고 회복은 촉진된다. 
세포내 생존신호, 특히 transcriptional activator hypoxiainducible
factor는 이런 반응에 있어서 중요한데 적혈구형성인자, 
혈관형성, 혈관운동조절, 세포생존, pH 조절, 에너지 대사 등에 관
여하는 유전자들을 촉진시킨다.62 이런 이유로 만성 허혈 전처치와 
내성은 뇌조직허혈 및 경색과 관련 있는 임상적 예후를 좋게 할 것
이라고 가정한다. 사실 SBI와 백질변성이 공존한다는 것이 이것을 
입증해 주는데 백질변성은 소혈관질환에 의한 불완전허혈에 의한 
것이라고 가정하고 있다.63
SBI의결과
SBI가 있는 사람과 없는 사람 간 예후가 어떻게 다른지를 비교
하는 수많은 연구가 발표되었다. SBI가 전반적인 신경인지기능과 
신경심리기능, 사망률뿐만 아니라 추후의 뇌졸중의 위험과 예후에
도 나쁘게 작용한다는 증거가 많이 있다(Figure 5). 
뇌졸중
최근의 대조군 연구는 SBI가 있는 사람에서 첫 뇌졸중이 발생할 
위험이 연간 10%에 달하며 SBI가 없는 사람의 5배에 달한다는 것
을 밝혔다.64 Bokura 등65은 이 문제를 다루는 가장 큰 규모의 전향
적 지역사회 기반 연구에서 SBI 같은 병변의 유무를 보기 위해 
MRI를 비롯한 건강검진을 한 2,684명의 뇌졸중의 과거력이 없는 
신경학적으로 건강한 사람들(연구 등록시 평균 나이, 58±7세)을 
평균 6.3년 동안 추적조사하였다. 임상적 뇌졸중의 발병률은 SBI
가 없는 사람에 비해 있는 사람에서 의미 있게 더 높았다(OR, 
3.66; 95% CI, 2.28~5.89). 
SBI는 뇌경색을 처음으로 경험한 환자의 재발과도 연관이 있다. 
Putaalaet 등61은 평균 8.7±3.8년 동안 추적조사한 655명의 젊은
(15~49세) 뇌졸중 환자들을 대상으로 Cox 회귀분석을 시행하여 
다발성의 SBI가 나이, 성별, 다른 위험인자, 뇌졸중 병인, 백질변
성 등에 대해서 보정하였을 때에도 재발성 허혈뇌졸중의 위험을 
독립적으로 높인다는 것을 발견하였다(OR, 2.48; 95% CI, 
1.24~4.94). 
신경인지기능이상
인지기능의 전반적인 악화에서 기억, 절차 처리 속도
(procedural speed), 언어 등 좀더 구체적인 뇌의 작용에 이르기까
지 다양한 신경인지와의 관련성을 SBI 환자에서 관찰하였다.66 영
상에서 SBI가 있을 때 치매의 위험이 2~3배 증가하는데 이는 진
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-380425438)
15
행하는 뇌경색에 의한 것으로 가정하고 있다.67,68 또한 치매환자 
집단에서 SBI가 있는 환자는 없는 환자에 비해서 언어기능, 지연
회상, 의미론적 유창성(semantic fluency) 등의 몇 가지 인지영역
에서 더 장애가 있다.69 SBI와 연관이 있는 것에는 뇌위축, 시야결
손, 빠르고 미세한 반복운동(rapid repetitive fine movement)의 
장애, 보행 장애, 힐앤토워킹(heel-toe walking)의 장애, 넘어짐, 
이동의 장애 등이 있다.22,70,71 당연하게도 SBI가 신경인지기능에 
미치는 영향은 위치에 따라 다르다. 예를 들면 Northern 
Manhattan Study에서 이마엽 부위의 SBI는 인지적인 융통성에 
영향을 끼치나, 심부의 경색은 정신운동 저하와 관련이 있었다. 66
정신병
또한 SBI는 다양한 정신병이 있는 환자에서 높은 빈도로 발견된
다. 우울증이 있는 고령 환자(평균 나이 ＞60세)에서 SBI의 유병률
은 40%에서 50%에 달한다.70,72,73 또한 SBI는 정신병이 50세 이후
에 시작된 양극성장애 환자의 65%에서 나타나나 증상이 더 일찍 
나타나는 경우에는 25%에 불과하여(P＜0.05), 두 연령집단에서 병
인의 기전이 다를 수 있음을 시사한다.74 이런 연구 결과에는 몇 가
지 단점들이 있는데 다른 동반이환에 대한 조정이 없고 규모가 작
은 병원 기반이며(지역사회기반이 아니며) 무작위추출된 집단이 아
니고 인과관계를 유추할 수 없는 단면연구라는 점 등이다. 그럼에도 
불구하고 이런 결과들은 추가적인 연구의 필요성을 정당화한다. 
다른유해건강결과
SBI의 유병률이 높아지면 다른 유해 건강 결과가 많아진다. SBI
가 있는 노인(평균 나이 79세)에서 폐렴이 발생할 확률은 대조군의 
거의 5배이다(OR, 4.67; 95% CI, 1.9~11.7).75 또한 Willey 등76은 
Northern Manhattan Study(평균 나이 70±9세)의 일부로서 임
상적으로 뇌졸중 병력이 없는 1,238명의 성인에서 전반적인 건강
과 활동 수준을 보았고 SBI가 있는 성인이 그렇지 않은 성인보다 
활동 수준이 더 떨어졌다. 그러나 활동이 감소하는 것이 SBI에 의
한 것인지 그 반대인지는 유추할 수 없다. 
사망률
이 문제를 다룬 SBI 연구가 모두 사망률이 증가함을 보여주었다. 
특히 주목할 것은 2개의 대규모의 추적지역 사회연구 5,27로서 SBI가 
있는 사람이 없는 사람보다 사망률이 3~4배 증가되어 있었다.
결론
지금까지의 연구들은 정의와 방법론에 문제가 있어서 SBI라고 
하는 현상에 대한 우리의 이해를 제한하고 있다. 그러나 SBI는 드
물지 않으며 더 이상 영상에서 우연하고 임상적으로 양성인 인공
음영으로 간주해서는 안 된다는 것은 확실하다. 사실 이런 병변들
은 놓치거나 다른 질환에 의한 것으로 간주할 수 있는 신경인지, 
기능, 보행/이동 등에서의 결손과 흔하게 연관되어 있다는 증거가 
있으며 뇌졸중과 조기 사망을 포함하여 더 심각한 유해 신경학적 
사건 및 유해 심혈관사건의 위험을 예측한다는 증거가 있다. SBI
의 위험인자가 기저 병인기전보다는 더 잘 알려져 있다. 따라서 위
험인자에 대한 이해는 병인기전에 대한 연구의 유용한 바탕이 된
다. SBI가 임상적으로 명확한 뇌졸중 및 일과성허혈발작과 많이 
연관되어 있으나 차이도 존재한다. 그것만으로 같은 기전이 모든 
종류의 뇌혈관사건을 일으킨다고 간주하는 것은 극단적인 단순화
이다. 여기서 우리는 SBI 정의를 표준화하는 단일 기준을 제안하
는데 이는 미래의 연구에서 동질성을 확보하기 위해서 필요하다. 
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs White, Simpson, and Fanning for their assistance in 
preparation of the final article for submission.
Sources of Funding
Dr Fanning is funded by The Cardiac Society of Australia and New 
Zealand, The University of Queensland, The Prince Charles Hospital 
Foundation. Dr Fraser is funded by Office of Health and Medical 
Research Fellowship.
Disclosures
None.
References
1. Fisher CM. Lacunes: small, deep cerebral infarcts. Neurology. 
1965;15:774–784.
2. Fanning JP, Wong AA, Fraser JF. The epidemiology of silent brain 
infarction: a systematic review of population-based cohorts. BMC 
Med. 2014;2014:119.
3. Waldstein SR, Siegel EL, Lefkowitz D, Maier KJ, Brown JR, 
Obuchowski AM, et al. Stress-induced blood pressure reactivity and 
silent cerebrovascular disease. Stroke. 2004;35:1294–1298.
4. Astarci P, Glineur D, Kefer J, D’Hoore W, Renkin J, Vanoverschelde
J-L, et al. Magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of 
cerebral embolization during percutaneous aortic valve implan-
Fanning et al Silent Brain Infarction 3469
to be important for this response, especially the transcriptional
activator hypoxia-inducible factor, which upregulates 
genes involved in the synthesis of erythropoietin, angiogenesis
, vasomotor control, cell survival, pH regulation, and 
energy metabolism.62 For this reason, it has been postulated 
that chronic ischemic preconditioning and tolerance may 
enhance the clinical outcomes associated with brain tissue 
ischemia and infarction. Indeed, this is supported by the 
coexistence of SBI and leukoaraiosis, where the latter has 
been hypothesized to result from incomplete ischemia secondary
to small-vessel disease.63
Consequences of SBIs
Numerous studies have been published comparing the health 
outcomes in individuals with SBI versus those without. Evidence 
is considerable that SBI adversely affects the risk and outcomes 
of subsequent stroke, as well as overall neurocognitive and neuropsychiatric
function, and risk of mortality (Figure 5).
Stroke
Recent controlled studies have documented an increased risk of 
first stroke among those with SBI that is as high as 10% per year 
and 5-fold that of those without SBI.64 In the largest communitybased
prospective study addressing this issue, Bokura et al65 followed
up 2684 neurologically healthy subjects with no history 
of stroke (mean age, 58±7 years at entry) who underwent health 
screening, including MRI, to document the presence or absence 
of lesions such as SBI and were then followed up for a mean 
of 6.3 years. The incidence rates for clinical stroke were significantly
higher in those with baseline SBI than those without 
(odds ratio, 3.66; 95% confidence interval, 2.28–5.89).
SBI has also been associated with the occurrence of 
recurrent stroke among patients experiencing a first stroke. 
Putaala et al61 performed Cox regression analysis on 655 
young (15–49 years old) stroke victims followed up for a 
mean of 8.7±3.8 years and discovered that multiple SBI 
independently raised the risk of recurrent ischemic stroke 
(odds ratio, 2.48; 95% confidence interval, 1.24–4.94), even 
when adjusted for age, sex, other risk factors, stroke pathogenesis, and leukoaraiosis.
Neurocognitive Dysfunction
A variety of neurocognitive associations has been noted in individuals
with SBI, ranging from global deterioration in cognitive 
function to diminished capacities relating to more specific brain 
processes, such as memory, procedural speed, and language.66
The presence of SBI on imaging is associated with a 2- to 3-fold 
increased frequency of dementia, postulated to result from 
ongoing brain infarction.67,68 Furthermore, among populations 
with dementia, those with SBI were more impaired than those 
without in several cognitive domains, including language function
, delayed recall, and semantic fluency.69 Other associations 
with SBI include cerebral atrophy visual field defects, slowed 
rapid repetitive fine movements, gait disturbance, altered heeltoe
walking, falls, and impaired mobility.22,70,71 Not surprisingly, 
the effect of SBI on neurocognitive function seems to vary with 
location; for instance, in the Northern Manhattan Study, SBI 
in frontal regions affects cognitive flexibility, whereas deep 
infarcts were associated with psychomotor slowing.66
Psychiatric Disorders
In addition, SBI has been identified with increased frequency 
in patients with a variety of psychiatric disorders. The prevalence
of SBI in older adults (mean age, >60 years) with 
depression has been found to be as high as 40% to 50%.70,72,73
In addition, SBI has been identified in 65% of bipolar patients 
whose psychosis started after the age of 50 years versus just 
25% in those whose symptoms started earlier (P<0.05), possibly
suggesting a different mechanism of disease causation 
in the 2 age groups.74 There are several limitations of these 
results, including failure to control for other comorbid conditions
, the small clinical-based (rather than community-based) 
and nonrandomly selected populations, and cross-sectional 
data collection that does not allow for inferences about causation.
Nonetheless, these results certainly warrant further 
investigation.
Other Adverse Health Outcomes
Numerous other adverse health outcomes have been associated 
with an increased rate of SBI. The odds of pneumonia among 
seniors with SBI (mean age, 79 years) are almost 5-fold that of 
controls (odds ratio, 4.67; 95% confidence interval, 1.9–11.7).75
In addition, Willey et al76 looked at overall level of health and 
activity among 1238 clinically stroke-free adults recruited as 
part of the Northern Manhattan Study (mean age, 70±9 years) 
and discovered that the level of activity was poorer among those 
with SBI than those without, however, whether reduced activity 
arose secondary to SBI, or vice versa cannot be inferred.
Mortality
Finally, increased mortality has been documented in all studies
on SBI that have addressed this issue. Of particular note 
are 2 large longitudinal community studies,5,27 in which the 
odds of death were increased 3- to 4-fold among those with 
SBI versus those without.
Conclusions
To date, studies have been plagued by inconsistencies in definitions
and methodologies, limiting our current understanding 
Consequences of
Silent Brain Infarction
Stroke Risk
Neurocognitive
Dysfunction
Psychiatric
Disorders
Mortality
Other Adverse
Health Outcomes
Pneumonia Physical Activity Bipolar-disorder Depression
Dementia
Mild Cognitive Impairment Mobility/gait disturbance
Figure 5. Consequences of silent brain infarction.
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.253846897)
16    Stroke 한국어판  Vol. 8, No. 1
tation: comparison of transfemoral and trans-apical approaches 
using edwards sapiens valve. Eur J Cardio Thoracic Surgery. 2011;
40:475–479.
5. Longstreth WT Jr, Dulberg C, Manolio TA, Lewis MR, Beauchamp 
NJ Jr, O’Leary D, et al. Incidence, manifestations, and predictors of 
brain infarcts defined by serial cranial magnetic resonance imaging 
in the elderly: the Cardiovascular Health Study. Stroke. 2002;33: 
2376–2382.
6. Zhu YC, Dufouil C, Tzourio C, Chabriat H. Silent brain infarcts: a 
review of MRI diagnostic criteria. Stroke. 2011;42:1140–1145.
7. Wardlaw JM, Smith EE, Biessels GJ, Cordonnier C, Fazekas F, 
Frayne R, et al; STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on 
nEuroimaging (STRIVE v1). Neuroimaging standards for research 
into small vessel disease and its contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:822–838.
8. Allen LM, Hasso AN, Handwerker J, Farid H. Sequence-specific mr 
imaging findings that are useful in dating ischemic stroke. Radiographics. 2012;32:1285–1297.
9. Eastwood JD, Engelter ST, MacFall JF, Delong DM, Provenzale 
JM. Quantitative assessment of the time course of infarct signal 
intensity on diffusion-weighted images. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 
2003;24:680–687.
10. Moreau F, Patel S, Lauzon ML, McCreary CR, Goyal M, Frayne R, 
et al. Cavitation after acute symptomatic lacunar stroke depends on 
time, location, and MRI sequence. Stroke. 2012;43:1837–1842.
11. Groeschel S, Chong WK, Surtees R, Hanefeld F. Virchow-Robin 
spaces on magnetic resonance images: normative data, their dilatation, 
and a review of the literature. Neuroradiology. 2006;48: 745–754.
12. Zhu YC, Dufouil C, Mazoyer B, Soumare A, Ricolfi F, Tzourio C, 
et al. Frequency and location of dilated Virchow-Robin spaces in 
elderly people: a population-based 3D MR imaging study. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol. 2011;32:709–713.
13. Bokura H, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi S. Distinguishing silent lacunar 
infarction from enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces: a magnetic resonance 
imaging and pathological study. J Neurol. 1998;245:116–122.
14. Koch S, McClendon MS, Bhatia R. Imaging evolution of acute lacunar 
infarction: leukoariosis or lacune? Neurology. 2011;77: 1091–1095.
15. Potter GM, Doubal FN, Jackson CA, Chappell FM, Sudlow CL, 
Dennis MS, et al. Counting cavitating lacunes underestimates the 
burden of lacunar infarction. Stroke. 2010;41:267–272.
16. Hachinski VC, Potter P, Merskey H. Leuko-araiosis. Arch Neurol. 
1987;44:21–23.
17. Gouw AA, Seewann A, van der Flier WM, Barkhof F, Rozemuller 
AM, Scheltens P, et al. Heterogeneity of small vessel disease: a 
systematic review of MRI and histopathology correlations. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011;82:126–135.
18. Dinia L, Bonzano L, Albano B, Finocchi C, Del Sette M, Saitta L, et 
al. White matter lesions progression in migraine with aura: a clinical 
and MRI longitudinal study. J Neuroimaging. 2013;23:47–52.
19. Okuda DT, Mowry EM, Beheshtian A, Waubant E, Baranzini SE, Goodin 
DS, et al. Incidental MRI anomalies suggestive of multiple sclerosis: the 
radiologically isolated syndrome. Neurology. 2009;72: 800–805.
20. Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, Clanet M, Cohen JA, Filippi 
M, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to 
the McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:292–302.
21. Bryan RN, Cai J, Burke G, Hutchinson RG, Liao D, Toole JF, et al. 
Prevalence and anatomic characteristics of infarct-like lesions on 
MR images of middle-aged adults: the atherosclerosis risk in 
communities study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 1999;20:1273–1280.
22. Price TR, Manolio TA, Kronmal RA, Kittner SJ, Yue NC, Robbins 
J, et al. Silent brain infarction on magnetic resonance imaging and 
neurological abnormalities in community-dwelling older adults. The 
Cardiovascular Health Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group. 
Stroke. 1997;28:1158–1164.
23. Fink JN, Selim MH, Kumar S, Silver B, Linfante I, Caplan LR, et 
al. Is the association of National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale 
scores and acute magnetic resonance imaging stroke volume equal 
for patients with right- and left-hemisphere ischemic stroke? Stroke. 
2002;33:954–958.
24. Heldner MR, Zubler C, Mattle HP, Schroth G, Weck A, Mono ML, et al. 
National Institutes of Health stroke scale score and vessel occlusion in 
2152 patients with acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 2013;44:1153–1157.
25. Olavarria VV, Delgado I, Hoppe A, Brunser A, Carcamo D, Diaz-
Tapia V, et al. Validity of the NIHSS in predicting arterial occlusion 
in cerebral infarction is time-dependent. Neurology. 2011;76:62–68.
26. Lee SC, Park SJ, Ki HK, Gwon HC, Chung CS, Byun HS, et al. 
Prevalence and risk factors of silent cerebral infarction in apparently 
normal adults. Hypertension. 2000;36:73–77.
27. Vermeer SE, Den Heijer T, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, 
Breteler MM; Rotterdam Scan Study. Incidence and risk factors of 
silent brain infarcts in the population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. 
Stroke. 2003;34:392–396.
28. Fanning JP, Walters DL, Platts DG, Eeles E, Bellapart J, Fraser JF. 
Characterization of neurological injury in transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation: how clear is the picture? Circulation. 2014;129:504–515.
29. Olmez I, Ozyurt H. Reactive oxygen species and ischemic 
cerebrovascular disease. Neurochem Int. 2012;60:208–212.
30. Yoshida M, Tomitori H, Machi Y, Katagiri D, Ueda S, Horiguchi K, 
et al. Acrolein, IL-6 and CRP as markers of silent brain infarction. 
Atherosclerosis. 2009;203:557–562.
31. Hoshi T, Kitagawa K, Yamagami H, Furukado S, Hougaku H, Hori M. 
Relations of serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 
levels with silent brain infarction. Stroke. 2005;36: 768–772.
32. Kawamura T, Umemura T, Kanai A, Nagashima M, Nakamura N, 
Uno T, et al. Soluble adhesion molecules and C-reactive protein in 
the progression of silent cerebral infarction in patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Metabolism. 2006;55:461–466.
33. Kawamura T, Umemura T, Kanai A, Uno T, Matsumae H, Sano T, et 
al. The incidence and characteristics of silent cerebral infarction in 
elderly diabetic patients: association with serum-soluble adhesion 
molecules. Diabetologia. 1998;41:911–917.
34. Satizabal CL, Zhu YC, Mazoyer B, Dufouil C, Tzourio C. 
Circulating IL-6 and CRP are associated with MRI findings in the 
elderly: the 3C-Dijon Study. Neurology. 2012;78:720–727.
35. Schmidt R, Schmidt H, Pichler M, Enzinger C, Petrovic K, 
Niederkorn K, et al. C-reactive protein, carotid atherosclerosis, and 
cerebral smallvessel disease: results of the Austrian Stroke 
Prevention Study. Stroke. 2006;37:2910–2916.
36. Ishikawa J, Tamura Y, Hoshide S, Eguchi K, Ishikawa S, Shimada 
K, et al. Low-grade inflammation is a risk factor for clinical stroke 
events in addition to silent cerebral infarcts in Japanese older 
hypertensives: the Jichi Medical School ABPM Study, wave 1. 
Stroke. 2007;38:911–917.
37. Wardlaw JM, Sandercock PA, Dennis MS, Starr J. Is breakdown of 
the blood-brain barrier responsible for lacunar stroke, leukoaraiosis, 
and dementia? Stroke. 2003;34:806–812.
38. Knottnerus IL, Govers-Riemslag JW, Hamulyak K, Rouhl RP, 
Staals J, Spronk HM, et al. Endothelial activation in lacunar stroke 
subtypes. Stroke. 2010;41:1617–1622.
39. Das RR, Seshadri S, Beiser AS, Kelly-Hayes M, Au R, Himali JJ, et 
al. Prevalence and correlates of silent cerebral infarcts in the 
Framingham offspring study. Stroke. 2008;39:2929–2935.
40. Longstreth WT Jr, Katz R, Olson J, Bernick C, Carr JJ, Malinow 
MR, et al. Plasma total homocysteine levels and cranial magnetic 
( 8.0.0.2542.1443530862 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
17
resonance imaging findings in elderly persons: the Cardiovascular 
Health Study. Arch Neurol. 2004;61:67–72.
41. Vermeer SE, van Dijk EJ, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, 
Clarke R, et al. Homocysteine, silent brain infarcts, and white matter 
lesions: The Rotterdam Scan Study. Ann Neurol. 2002;51:285–289.
42. Oh SH, Park SY, Kim NK, An SA, Lee HB, Kim OJ. Relationships 
between plasma homocysteine level and cervicocerebral atherosclerosis
and microangiopathy in non-stroke individuals. Neurology. 
2012;78(1 Meeting Abstract):P05.234.
43. Knottnerus IL, Gielen M, Lodder J, Rouhl RP, Staals J, Vlietinck R, 
et al. Family history of stroke is an independent risk factor for 
lacunar stroke subtype with asymptomatic lacunar infarcts at 
younger ages. Stroke. 2011;42:1196–1200.
44. Morrison AC, Fornage M, Liao D, Boerwinkle E. Parental history of 
stroke predicts subclinical but not clinical stroke: the Atherosclerosis
Risk in Communities Study. Stroke. 2000;31:2098–2102.
45. Han IB, Kim OJ, Ahn JY, Oh D, Hong SP, Huh R, et al. Association 
of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR 677C>T and 
1298A>C) polymorphisms and haplotypes with silent brain 
infarction and homocysteine levels in a Korean population. Yonsei 
Med J. 2010;51:253–260.
46. Kohara K, Fujisawa M, Ando F, Tabara Y, Niino N, Miki T, et al; 
NILSLSA Study. MTHFR gene polymorphism as a risk factor for 
silent brain infarcts and white matter lesions in the Japanese general 
population: The NILS-LSA Study. Stroke. 2003;34:1130–1135.
47. Song J, Kim OJ, Kim HS, Bae SJ, Hong SP, Oh D, et al. Endothelial 
nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms and the risk of silent 
brain infarction. Int J Mol Med. 2010;25:819–823.
48. Kubo M, Hata J, Ninomiya T, Matsuda K, Yonemoto K, Nakano T, et 
al. A nonsynonymous SNP in PRKCH (protein kinase C eta) 
increases the risk of cerebral infarction. Nat Genet. 2007;39:212–217.
49. Debette S, Bis JC, Fornage M, Schmidt H, Ikram MA, Sigurdsson 
S, et al. Genome-wide association studies of MRI-defined brain 
infarcts: metaanalysis from the CHARGE Consortium. Stroke. 
2010; 41:210–217.
50. Joutel A, Corpechot C, Ducros A, Vahedi K, Chabriat H, Mouton P, 
et al. Notch3 mutations in CADASIL, a hereditary adult-onset 
condition causing stroke and dementia. Nature. 1996;383:707–710.
51. Fisher CM. Lacunar infarcts—a review. Cerebrovasc Dis. 1991; 
1:311–320.
52. Vermeer SE, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M, Hofman A, Breteler MM. 
Prevalence and risk factors of silent brain infarcts in the 
populationbased Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke. 2002;33:21–25.
53. van Swieten JC, van den Hout JH, van Ketel BA, Hijdra A, Wokke JH, 
van Gijn J. Periventricular lesions in the white matter on magnetic 
resonance imaging in the elderly. A morphometric correlation with 
arteriolosclerosis and dilated perivascular spaces. Brain. 1991;114(pt 
2):761–774.
54. Lammie GA, Brannan F, Wardlaw JM. Incomplete lacunar 
infarction (Type Ib lacunes). Acta Neuropathol. 1998;96:163–171.
55. Van Mieghem NM, Schipper ME, Ladich E, Faqiri E, van der Boon 
R, Randjgari A, et al. Histopathology of embolic debris captured 
during transcatheter aortic valve replacement. Circulation. 2013; 
127:2194–2201.
56. Kim SJ, Shin HY, Ha YS, Kim JW, Kang KW, Na DL, et al. 
Paradoxical embolism as a cause of silent brain infarctions in healthy 
subjects: the ICONS study (Identification of the Cause of Silent Cerebral 
Infarction in Healthy Subjects). Eur J Neurol. 2013;20:353–360.
57. Miao Q, Paloneva T, Tuisku S, Roine S, Poyhonen M, Viitanen M, 
et al. Arterioles of the lenticular nucleus in CADASIL. Stroke. 
2006;37:2242–2247.
58. Caplan LR, Hennerici M. Impaired clearance of emboli (washout) is 
an important link between hypoperfusion, embolism, and ischemic 
stroke. Arch Neurol. 1998;55:1475–1482.
59. de Jong G, Kessels F, Lodder J. Two types of lacunar infarcts: further 
arguments from a study on prognosis. Stroke. 2002;33:2072–2076.
60. Kruit MC, Launer LJ, Ferrari MD, van Buchem MA. Infarcts in the 
posterior circulation territory in migraine. The population-based 
MRI CAMERA study. Brain. 2005;128(pt 9):2068–2077.
61. Putaala J, Haapaniemi E, Kurkinen M, Salonen O, Kaste M, Tatlisumak
T. Silent brain infarcts, leukoaraiosis, and long-term prognosis 
in young ischemic stroke patients. Neurology. 2011;76:1742–1749.
62. Liu XQ, Sheng R, Qin ZH. The neuroprotective mechanism of brain 
ischemic preconditioning. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2009;30:1071–1080.
63. Chen X, Wen W, Anstey KJ, Sachdev PS. Prevalence, incidence, 
and risk factors of lacunar infarcts in a community sample. 
Neurology. 2009;73:266–272.
64. Kobayashi S, Okada K, Koide H, Bokura H, Yamaguchi S. 
Subcortical silent brain infarction as a risk factor for clinical stroke. 
Stroke. 1997;28:1932–1939.
65. Bokura H, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi S, Iijima K, Nagai A, Toyoda 
G, et al. Silent brain infarction and subcortical white matter lesions 
increase the risk of stroke and mortality: a prospective cohort study. 
J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 2006;15:57–63.
66. Wright CB, Festa JR, Paik MC, Schmiedigen A, Brown TR, Yoshita 
M, et al. White matter hyperintensities and subclinical infarction: 
associations with psychomotor speed and cognitive flexibility. 
Stroke. 2008;39:800–805.
67. Vermeer SE, Prins ND, den Heijer T, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, 
Breteler MM. Silent brain infarcts and the risk of dementia and 
cognitive decline. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1215–1222.
68. Liebetrau M, Steen B, Hamann GF, Skoog I. Silent and symptomatic 
infarcts on cranial computerized tomography in relation to dementia 
and mortality: a population-based study in 85-year-old subjects. 
Stroke. 2004;35:1816–1820.
69. Song IU, Kim JS, Kim YI, Eah KY, Lee KS. Clinical significance of 
silent cerebral infarctions in patients with Alzheimer disease. Cogn 
Behav Neurol. 2007;20:93–98.
70. Avdibegovic E, Becirovic E, Salimbasic Z, Hasanovic M, Sinanovic 
O. Cerebral cortical atrophy and silent brain infarcts in psychiatric 
patients. Psychiatr Danub. 2007;19:49–55.
71. Choi P, Ren M, Phan TG, Callisaya M, Ly JV, Beare R, et al. Silent 
infarcts and cerebral microbleeds modify the associations of white 
matter lesions with gait and postural stability: population-based 
study. Stroke. 2012;43:1505–1510.
72. Yamashita H, Fujikawa T, Yanai I, Morinobu S, Yamawaki S. 
Cognitive dysfunction in recovered depressive patients with silent 
cerebral infarction. Neuropsychobiology. 2002;45:12–18.
73. Hamada T, Murata T, Omori M, Takahashi T, Kosaka H, Wada Y, et 
al. Abnormal nocturnal blood pressure fall in senile-onset 
depression with subcortical silent cerebral infarction. Neuropsychobiology. 2003;47:187–191.
74. Fujikawa T, Yamawaki S, Touhouda Y. Silent cerebral infarctions in 
patients with late-onset mania. Stroke. 1995;26:946–949.
75. Nakagawa T, Sekizawa K, Nakajoh K, Tanji H, Arai H, Sasaki H. 
Silent cerebral infarction: a potential risk for pneumonia in the 
elderly. J Intern Med. 2000;247:255–259.
76. Willey JZ, Moon YP, Paik MC, Yoshita M, Decarli C, Sacco RL, et 
al. Lower prevalence of silent brain infarcts in the physically active: 
the Northern Manhattan Study. Neurology. 2011;76:2112–2118.
Key Words: brain infarction■magnetic resonance imaging■stroke
■ stroke, lacunar
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.134359289)
15
1(37)’2015
Развивающийся спектр бессимптомных инфарктов головного мозга
Источник: J.P. Fanning, A.J. Wesley, A.A. Wong, J.F. Fraser. Emerging Spectra of Silent Brain Infarction.  
Stroke 2014;45:11:3461-3471.
Дополнительные данные доступны on-line по адресу:
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.114.005919/-/DC1. 
School of Medicine (J.P.F., A.J.W., A.A.W., J.F.F.) and Critical Care Research Group (CCRG), The Prince Charles Hospital (J.P.F., J.F.F.), 
The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Department of Medical Imaging (A.J.W.) and Adult Intensive Care 
Services (J.F.F.), The Prince Charles Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia; Department of Medical Imaging, Monash Medical Centre, 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia (A.J.W.); and Department of Neurology, The Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia (A.A.W.).
Такое понятие, как бессимптомный инфаркт головного мозга (БИГМ), получает в последнее время более
широкое признание, но остается плохо изученным клиническим нарушением, которое характеризуется часто
случайным обнаружением церебрального инфаркта при
проведениивизуализациивотсутствиеклиническиочевидногоневрологическогодефицита.ВпервыеэтоявлениеописалFisherоколо50летназад[1]припроведении
аутопсии до появления более чувствительных методов
диагностики, позволяющих более детально охарактеризоватьэтотпатологическийпроцесс.
Среди эпидемиологических исследований БИГМ,
наиболее правдоподобные и обобщенные данные
представлены в исследованиях, проведенных в репрезентативных популяционных выборках, в которых распространенность БИГМ в общей популяции
составляла от 10 до 20%, а по результатам продольных
исследований ежегодная заболеваемость составляет
3—4% [2]. Однако этот показатель превышает 55%
в клиническихисследованияхсучастиемпрактически
здоровыхлиц[3],апопуляцияхпациентовсотдельнымизаболеваниямипревышает90%[4].
Несмотря на столь высокую распространенность,
растущее количество данных свидетельствуют о том,
что БИГМ является не бессимптомным событием,
а связано с незначительным неврологическим дефицитом
, нейрокогнитивной дисфункцией, психическими расстройствами, повышением частоты развития
явного инсульта и ранней смертностью. В свете этих
ассоциаций было высказано предположение, что термин «бессимптомный» следует заменить термином
«скрытый»[5].
Принципиальная цель данной работы заключается
в изучении данных современных опубликованных
медицинских исследований для: (1) определения
БИГМ и выявления проблем, присущих этому определению
;(2) изученияфакторовриска,заболеваемости и распространенности БИГМ; (3) оценки гипотез
о механизмах, лежащих в основе патогенеза БИГМ;
(4) обсуждения клинических последствий развития
этихпоражений.
ОПРЕДЕЛЕНИЕ БИГМ
Что представляет собой БИГМ?
Общепринятого определения БИГМ не существует,
что затрудняет попытки полностью охарактеризовать и
изучить эти поражения. В целом БИГМ был описан как
церебральный инфаркт, который выявляют при проведении компьютерной томографии или МРТ в отсутствиилюбогосоответствующегоклиническиочевидного
цереброваскулярногоишемическогособытия[6].
Проблемы в выявлении и диагностике БИГМ
Строгие критерии, по которым определяют соответствующие клинические события, влияют на регистрацию заболеваемости БИГМ, и исследователи применяют различные методы для клинического выявления
этого состояния. Во многих исследованиях подобные
случаи определяли по результатам собственных сообщенийилипутемретроспективногоанализамедицинскойдокументации.Этиметодикиявляютсяпричиной
появления систематической ошибки с учетом вариабельности повторных обследований, клинических
проявленийиисследованийвозможныхцереброваскулярныхсобытий.
Аналогичным образом вариации в стратегии диагностической визуализации оказывают сильное влияние на показатели заболеваемости и распространенности БИГМ. МРТ в настоящее время рассматривают в
качествеметодавыборадлядиагностикиБИГМ;однако
существуютзначительныеразличиявпримененииэтого
метода диагностики в исследованиях. К основным причинам гетерогенности данных в литературе относятся различные протоколы проведения МРТ, различия
в применяемых визуализационных критериях наличия
инфаркта,атакжестратегииисключениялицсвыявленныминакладывающимисяизображениями[6].
Протоколы МРТ 
Использование низкой напряженности магнитного
поля, толстых срезов, и больших интервалов между
срезами снижает чувствительность МРТ в отношении обнаружения БИГМ. В прошлом толщина среза
и интервалы между ними были больше, чем размер
структуры БИГМ, который наблюдают в настоящее
время, что привело к появлению неточности в докладах. До 2009 г. напряженность используемого магнит-
© American Heart Association, Inc., 2014 
Адрес для корреспонденции: Jonathon P. Fanning, BSc, MBBS, Critical Care 
Research Group (CCRG), University of Queensland, Level 2 Emergency Bldg, 
The Prince Charles Hospital, Rode Rd, Chermside, Brisbane, Queensland 
4032, Australia. E-mail Jonathon_fanning@me.com
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
16
1(37)’2015 ЭПИДЕМИОЛОГИЯИКЛИНИКА
ного поля варьировалась от 0,2 Тесла (T) до 1,5 Т, [6],
носовременныетехнологическиедостиженияпривели
к широкому использованию сверхпроводящих магнитов
,поэтомудлявизуализацииголовногомозгасейчас
используют напряженность магнитного поля не менее
1,5 T. Кроме того, улучшение приемных катушек и
обработкисигналапозволяютпроводитьисследование
в короткие сроки при высоком разрешении. Таким
образом, для определения структуры БИГМ с достаточным разрешением больше не требуется улучшения
методики МРТ-диагностики. В связи с этим можно
добиться практической стандартизации с использованием недавно предложенных стандартов нейровизуализационных исследований, разработанных рабочей группой STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes
on nEuroimaging (Стандартизация сосудистых измененийпринейровизуализации)[7].
Визуализационные критерии для выявления 
инфаркта и дифференциальная диагностика
Самая выраженная гетерогенность данных в литературе
, посвященной БИГМ, обусловлена визуализационными характеристиками инфаркта, при этом
большинство исследований были сосредоточены
на хронических субкортикальных кавитирующих
инфарктах.Этиповрежденияотносительнолегкоотличитьвсвязисотграничениемзоныгибелинейронови
глии,характернойдляпатофизиологическойконечной
точки хронического инфаркта. Тем не менее БИГМ
не ограничивается наличием хронических поражений.
При визуализации можно выявить инфаркт в более
раннемпериоде,докавитации,инасамомделеневсе
БИГМ являются кавитирующими. Кроме того, БИГМ
не ограничивается субкортикальными регионами и
может развиваться в неэхоплотных областях коры,
мозжечкаистволаголовногомозга.
Ниже мы обозначили спектр визуализации БИГМ
и описали визуализационное прогрессирование
отострогокхроническомуикавитирующемуинфаркту. Важно признать, что в настоящее время нет
доказательств, свидетельствующих о том, что все
хронические БИГМ обязательно начинаются как
инфаркты с характерными для острого периода особенностями визуализации. На самом деле существует несколько отклонений от континуума. Поэтому
при распознавании острого и неострого инфаркта
на изображениях следует учитывать, что некоторые
поражения будут следовать континууму, и они также
могутпредставлятьразличныепатофизиологические
механизмы БИГМ.
Острый инфаркт
В последние годы, диффузионно-взвешенная МРТ
(DWI)всечащеиспользуетсядляопределенияраспространенности БИГМ после различных вмешательств
с высокой степенью риска. Действительно, основное клиническое применение эта методика нашла
в диагностике острого инсульта, поскольку это более
чувствительный и специфичный метод в отношении
обнаружения ранних изменений, чем традиционная
МРТ и, таким образом, позволяет установить более
точныйдиагноз.
Инфаркт внутричерепной нейрональной или глиальной ткани независимо от пораженной области,
в остром периоде приводит к визуализируемым
временны`м ограниченимдиффузии:высокомууровню
сигналанаDWIисоответствующемунизкомувнешнему коэффициенту диффузии на карте (1А). Эти специфические изменения сигнала появляются в течение
4 часов в остром периоде, однако сохраняются только
в течение ≤14 дней [8], ограничивая применение DWI
для определения распространенности. При развитии
инфаркта можно одновременно обнаружить высокий
уровеньсигналанаТ2-взвешенныхпоследовательностях в режиме быстрого спин-эхо или T2-взвешенных
последовательностях в режиме с подавлением сигнала
от свободной жидкости и низкий уровень сигнала
на Т1-взвешенных изображениях в режиме спин-эхо
через6часов.Этиизменениямогутсохранятьсявтечение неопределенного срока или прогрессировать [8].
ПослеострогопериодаинормализациизначениявнешнегокоэффициентадиффузиивысокийсигналнаDWI
сохраняетсявсреднемвтечение57дней[9].
К заболеваниям головного мозга, имитирующим
острый инфаркт и также вызывающим ограничение
диффузии, относятся активные бляшки при рассеянном склерозе, герпетический энцефалит, болезнь
Крейтцфельда–Якоба, пиогенные внутричерепные абсцессы и некоторые многоклеточные опухоли
центральной нервной системы, такие как лимфома.
Несмотря на то что эти заболевания имеют сходные
с БИГМ визуализационные особенности, результаты
визуализации часто легко разграничить. Кроме того,
у лиц с такими заболеваниями, как правило, существует неврологический дефицит, что позволяет провести дифференциальную диагностику по клиническим
признакам.
Неострый инфаркт
В большинстве случаев при острых инфарктах происходит коагуляционный некроз с промежуточным
появлением гиперинтенсивности на T2-взвешенных и
гипоинтенсивности на Т1-взвешенных изображениях,
что в конечном итоге приводит к развитию хроническихпораженийсуменьшениемобъемаголовногомозга
и кавитацией зоны энцефаломаляции. В недавнем
продольном исследовании симптомных лакунарных
инфарктов продемонстрировали 97% кавитацию через
90 дней [10]. При развитии в белом веществе эти хронические поражения описаны как классические лакуны Poirier и Derouesse типа I, или в последнее время
с использованием более строгого определения размера
, предложенного рабочей группой Стандартизации
сосудистых изменений при нейровизуализации, как
лакуны предположительно сосудистого происхождения. Эти повреждения имеют определенные характеристики сигналов, которые сопровождают спинномозговую жидкость на всех последовательностях
(рис. 1Б). К ним относятся высокая интенсивность
сигнала на T2-взвешенном изображении в режиме
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
17
1(37)’2015
быстрого спин-эхо, обнуленный (низкий) сигнал
от изображений в режиме с подавлением сигнала
от свободной воды, с или без гиперинтенсивного сигнала от края глиоза в режиме с подавлением сигнала
от свободной воды и низким сигналом
на T1-взвешенных изображениях в режиме спин-эхо.
Приэтомпоследнийимеетвысокуючувствительность
в отношении выявления кавитации [10]. К дополнительным дискриминаторам относятся клиновидная
или щелевидная форма и неровная граница поражения. При развитии таких инфарктов в коре головного
мозга визуализационные хараткеристики аналогичны,
заисключениемтого,чтозонаинфарктанеполностью
окруженаинтактнойтканью.Происходитаналогичное
уменьшение объема инфарктной ткани, кроме того,
сигнал спинномозговой жидкости при энцефаломаляции заметен во всех последовательностях с или без
гиперинтенсивного сигнала от края глиоза в режиме
сподавлениемсигналаотсвободнойводы.
Наиболеечастокавитирующиеинфарктыимитируют
расширенные периваскулярные пространства, также
называемые пространствами Вирхова-Робина, которыеявляютсяобычнойнаходкойприпроведенииМРТ
с высоким разрешением, с возрастом частота их обнаружения повышается. Они визуализируются в виде
овальных или линейных образований с гладкими краями
,расположенныхвокругсосудов,сбилатеральным
симметричным распределением, обычно в основании
головногомозга,рядомсбазальнымиганглиямивблизи передней спайки или в супратенториальном белом
веществе (рис. 1В) [11]. Как правило, они меньше
поразмеру,чемкавитирующиелакунарныеинфаркты,
однакочастоу30%пожилыхлицихразмерможетбыть
больше (>3 мм) [12], что является причиной ошибок
диагностики. Действительно, при сравнении результатов визуализации и аутопсии пришли к выводу, что
расширенныепериваскулярныепространстваошибочнодиагностируюткакБИГМв10—20%случаев[13].
Кавитация не является универсальным явлением
при развитии БИГМ, и в продольных исследованиях бессимптомных и неинвалидизирующих инфрактов головного мозга продемонстрировали, что от 30
до80%инфарктовнекавитировалииоставалисьпоражениями с гиперинтенсивностью на Т2-взвешенном
изображенииигипоинтенсивностюнаТ1-взвешенном
изображении[14,15].Этинекавитирующиеинфаркты
имеют визуализационные особенности, неспецифичные для БИГМ, и только у некоторых лиц бывают
аналогичныепроявления.
Из поражений с гиперинтенсивностью на Т2-взвешенном изображении и гипоинтенсивностью на
Т1-взвешенном изображении, которые похожи на
БИГМ, наиболее существенным из-за их увеличения
распространенности с возрастом, является лейкоареоз
, поражение глубинного белого вещества (рис. 1Г).
Первоначально нейтральный визуализационный термин лейкоареоз относится к очагам или географическимрегионамТ2интенсивности,какправило,вперивентрикулярном белом веществе или субкортикальном глубоком белом веществе и в области моста [16].
Гистологические проявления патологии нейронов и
глии в этих поражениях разнообразны и включают
сосудистые изменения в виде липогиалиноза, атеросклерозамелкихсосудов,ивенозногоколлагеноза [17].
Патофизиологическое механизмы плохо изучены,
предположительно они являются многофакторными
, включающими хроническую ишемию/гипоксию,
гипоперфузию из-за измененной церебральной ауторегуляцииивоспаление[17].
В застарелых случаях лейкоареоза изменения Т2
интенсивности характерным образом присутствует
в периривентрикулярных регионах головного мозга
без фокального расширения бокового желудочка и
болеевыражены,чемтонкиеперивентрикулярныесигналывидеполосиликолпачковприобычномстарении
головногомозга.Приболеемягкойформепоражения,
А Б Г В
Рисунок  1. Типичные  проявления  поражений  на  МРТ  головного  мозга. А  –  высокий  сигнал  на  диффузионно-взвешенной  МРТ  в 
левом  перивентрикулярном  белом  веществе  (слева)  имеет  реципрокное  низкое  значение  внешнего  коэффициента  диффузии 
(справа) в соответствии с ограничением диффузии в зоне инфаркта. Б – клиновидные поражения с неровными краями размером 
>3 мм в глубинном белом веществе демонстрируют обнуленный центральный сигнал в режиме с подавлением сигнала от свободной 
жидкости (FLAIR) и толстые гиперинтенсивные края, соответствующие кавитирующему инфаркту. В – множественные билатеральные 
симметричные очаги (стрелки) размером от 2 до 4 мм с сигналом от спинномозговой жидкости. Эти расширенные периваскулярные 
пространства  не  имеют  гипертинтенсивного  края  на  FLAIR  в  отличие  от  кавитирующего  инфаркта  (закрытый  наконечник  стрелы). 
Г – типичные проявления лейкоареоза в виде сливных перивентрикулярных T2 гиперинтенсивностей (слева, открытые стрелки) и 
множественные гиперинтенсивности в белом веществе (слева, стрелки). Без доказательств болезни мелких сосудов/лейкоареоза 
(справа), T2 гиперинтенсивности (кончики стрелок), вероятно, представляют собой бессимптомный инфаркт головного мозга (БИГМ). 
T2 гиперинтенсивности при некавитирующих инфарктах (слева длинная стрелка) ничем не отличаются от гиперинтенсивностей при 
лейкоареозе (кончики стрелок) и, таким образом, не позволяют точно диагностировать БИГМ (N.B. Большинство инфарктов будут 
кавитировать).
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
18
1(37)’2015 ЭПИДЕМИОЛОГИЯИКЛИНИКА
на Т2 изображениях выявляются небольшие и очаговыеизмененияинтенсивностинауровнесубкортикального белого вещества и моста. При прогрессировании
заболевания они сливаются с развитием прогрессирующих перивентрикулярных изменений. В то время
как сливные перивентрикулярные изменения могут
свидетельствовать о наличии лейкоареоза, отдельные очаговые поражения глубокого белого вещества
ничем не отличаются от некавитирующих инфарктов.
ТранзиторныйсигналнаDWI,сохраняющийсявтечение≤2 месяцевпослеострогособытия,можетпомочь
различитьнекавитирующийинфарктотлейкоареоза.
Другимпатологическимявлением,проявлениекоторого напоминает БИГМ, являются поражения белого
вещества при мигрени. Они развиваются более чем у
половиныпациентовсмигреньюилокализуютсяпреимущественно в лобных и теменных долях, а увеличение их количества связано с наличием ауры и повышением частоты приступов мигрени [18]. Бляшки в
беломвеществеприрассеянномсклерозетакжеимеют
сходные особенности, в частности в более легких случаяхпостандартамвизуализации.Ктакимклинически
бессимптомнымслучаямбудутотноситьсярассеянный
склерозвстадииремиссии,атакжесравнительноредкий рентгенологически изолированный синдром [19].
Дляниххарактерныопределенныеособенности,хорошо описанные в литературе [20], которые позволяют
провести дифференциальный диагноз. Кроме того,
дифференциальную диагностику следует проводить с
редкими наследственными лейкоэнцефалопатиями,
токсическими/метаболическими причинами развития поражений, и постинфекционными поражениями
(например, острая демиелинизирующия энцефаломиелопатия
, подострый склерозирующий постинфекционный энцефалит, и посттравматическая контузия
/диффузное повреждение аксонов). Тем не менее
за исключением расширенных периваскулярных пространств и лейкоареоза, эти патологические состояния
, которые имитируют БИГМ и могут привести
кошибочнойдиагностике,имеютотличительныеклиническиеособенности.
ПРЕДЛАГАЕМЫЕКРИТЕРИИДЛЯДИАГНОСТИКИ БИГМ 
Визуализационные признаки инфаркта
На основании вышеизложенного, очевидно, что
БИГМ, независимо от анатомической локализации
и предполагаемого патогенеза, проявляется в виде
одного из 3 поражений на МРТ: (1) очаговое поражение с ограничением диффузии (DWI положительное
); (2) кавитирующее поражение; (3) менее специфическое поражение с гиперинтенсивностью
на Т2-взвешенном изображении и гипоинтенсивностью на Т1-взвешенном изображении. Для того
чтобысвестикминимумучислоошибочныхдиагнозов
БИГМ, мы предлагаем визуализационные критерии
и подход, представленные в таблице и на рис. 2, при
этом признавая, что визуализация не позволяет провести точный дифференциальный диагноз между лейкоареозоминекавитирующимиинфарктами.
По причинам, обсуждавшимся ранее, мы считаем,
что минимальное пороговое значение 3 мм для размера инфаркта подходит для дифференциации расширенных периваскулярных пространств, поскольку оно
соответствует дискриминационным гистологическим
данным [13] и имеет лучшую межэкспертную согласованность[21,22].Верхнеепороговоезначениеразмера,
которое, по мнению некоторых экспертов, составляет
15 мм [1, 7], может быть слишком ограничительным,
с учетом того, что на долю бессимптомных инфарктов
большегоразмерапришлось20%инфарктоввисследованиисериислучаев[21].
В случаях, когда где есть подозрение, что результаты визуализации отражают недифференцированное
от БИГМ поражение, мы рекомендуем проводить повторную МРТ через 3 месяца, поскольку этот период
относительнокороткийдлясохраненияспецифичности,
ноимеетдостаточнуюпродолжительностьдляобнаружения кавитации [10]. Это особенно актуально в условиях
клинической предсказуемости, например при проведении некоторых вмешательств/операций, когда стойкий
сигналнаDWIпринеспецифическойT2гиперинтенсивностиможетозначатьразвитиеинфаркта,иливусловиях
научной деятельности, когда необходима максимальная
чувствительностьвотношениивыявленияБИГМ.
Согласно определению визуализационных характеристик гиперинтенсивностей белого вещества предположительно сосудистого происхождения, предложенного рабочей группы Стандартизации сосудистых
изменений при нейровизуализации [7], к ним могут
относиться лейкоареоз и некавитирующие инфаркты.
Обоснованием для объединения этих нозологических
единиц являются общие патофизиологические особенности
, факторы риска и клинические корреляты.
С другой стороны, они могут быть достаточно разными
, чтобы оправдать проведение раздельных исследований
, и наши определения следует применять для их
дифференциальной диагностики во всех возможных
случаях.
Клиническая бессимптомность
Для исключения вариабельности в клиническом
определении острого БИГМ, необходимы стандартизированные методы оценки и учета симптоматики инсульта. Оценка по шкале тяжести инсульта Национальных институтов здравоохранения
(http://www.ninds.nih.gov/doctors/NIH_stroke_scale.pdf)
являетсянаиболееширокоиспользуемымипонятным
методом оценки и имеет преимущество в виде обучения
/сертификации для стандартизации его применения.Приоценкепоэтойшкалеисходнаяоценка0балловилиотсутствиеизмененийприповторномобследованииподтверждаютдиагнозБИГМ.Важнопризнать,
что шкала тяжести инсульта Национальных институтов здравоохранения имеет слабую чувствительность
приправостороннеминсульте[23]илиинсультеввертебробазилярном бассейне [24], а также при незначительных симптомах инсульта, таких как слабость дистальных отделов верхней конечности, которые можно
незаметить.Темнеменеемыучитываемэтиприемле-
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.120177423)
19
1(37)’2015
мые компромиссы для стандартизации клинической
оценкиврамкахпроспективныхисследований.
Гораздо труднее определить клиническую бессимптомность при дифференциальной диагностике
неострого БИГМ и клинически очевидного инсульта.
Шкала тяжести инсульта Национальных институтов
здравоохранения демонстрирует зависимую от времени валидность, с уменьшением чувствительности при
удлинении периода между началом появления клинических симптомов до проведения клинической оценки
, что не позволяет надежно диагностировать неострыйБИГМспомощьюэтогометода[25].Клиническое
обследование во время проведения визуализации
позволяет определить наличие стойкого очагового
неврологического дефицита, соответствующего клинически перенесенному инсульту. Поскольку симптомы инсульта могут разрешиться к моменту проведения
, решающее значение имеют самооценка пациента
и анализ медицинской документации, несмотря на их
хорошоизвестныенедостатки.
Распространенность и заболеваемость БИГМ
РаспространенностьБИГМ,обнаруженныхприпроведении МРТ, в популяционных когортных исследованиях (репрезентативные популяционные выборки и
регулярныемедицинскиеобследования)колебаласьот
5,5[26]до55,2%[3],когдаприобнаружениипоражений
опиралисьнаявлениекавитации.Однако,какпоказано на рис. I в дополнительных данных on-line, надежность данных исследований, в которых общий показаль распространенности составляет >30%, вызывает
сомнениz в связи с небольшими размерами выборки.
Действительно,вподавляющембольшинствекрупных
исследований (>1000 участников) распространенность
составила≤20%[2].
Длясравненияданныхозаболеваемостиоченьмало,
вероятно, из-за продольного дизайна исследований и,
следовательно,увеличениярасходовнаихпроведение.
Два значимых исследований в этой области продемонстрировали
, что ежегодная заболеваемость составляет от 3 до 4% среди пожилых пациентов (в возрасте
>60лет)ивыше6,5%улицстарше80лет[5,27].
ВсвязистемчтовпоследнеевремяБИГМвсечаще
рассматривают в качестве маркера неврологического
повреждения, в растущем количестве исследований
появляются данные о заболеваемости в специфических условиях проведения вмешательств и операций.
Подробное изучение каждого из этих условий выходит за рамки данной статьи; согласно имеющимся
насегодняшнийденьданным,транскатетернаязамена
аортального клапана представляет собой процедуру
высокогорискаразвитияБИГМсосреднейзаболеваемостью75%[28]ивыше93%[4].
Факторы риска развития БИГМ
При изучении факторов риска развития БИГМ внимание сосредотачивают на известных факторах риска,
связанных с развитием клинически явного инсульта.
Несмотряточторазличныецереброваскулярныесобытия развиваются в результате действия одних и тех же
Таблица. Предложенные визуализационные критерии для диагностики бессимптомного инфаркта головного мозга
ДВ-МРТ положительные поражения                                                                         Критерии
Критерии включения
Любой клинически бессимптомный очаг ограниченной диффузии (высокий ДВ-МРТ сигнал и низкое 
значение ВКД) в белом или сером веществе полушария, мозжечка или ствола головного мозга 
Критерии исключения
Ассоциированные поражения, которые удовлетворяют диагностическим критериям РС. ДВ-МРТ 
положительные поражения РС подразумевают активные поражения, приводящие к развитию 
клинических симптомов 
Кавитирующие поражения
Критерии включения
Поражения размером >3 мм, которые сопровождают СМЖ на всех последовательностях (высоко 
интенсивный сигнал T2W, низкий/нулевой сигнал FLAIR и низкий сигнла T1W), щелевидной или 
клинообразной формы с неровными краями. FLAIR гиперинтенсивность по краю глиоза позволяет 
предположить развитие инфаркта с высокой долей диагностической уверенности
Критерии исключения
Размер менее 3 или более 3 мм с ровными контурами, локализующиеся вдоль перфорантных сосудов; 
наличие большого количества билатеральных симметричных поражений является характерным 
признаком РПВП
Поражения с T2-взвешенной гиперинтенсивностью/T1-взвешенной гипоинтенсивностью 
Критерии включения
Очаговое поражение с высоким сигналом T2W и низким сигналом T1W с предыдущими признаками 
ограничения диффузии; или локализация в кортикальном сером веществе или ядрах глубокого серого 
вещества; или новое поражение по сравнению с МРТ, выполненной в течение 3 мес 
Неопределенные 
T2W гипер/T1W гипоинтенсивные поражения в белом веществе, которые не сливаются,  
но ассоциированы с классической сливным перивентрикулярным изменением T2 интенсивности  
при лейкоареозе 
Критерии исключения 
Ассоциированные поражения, которые удовлетворяют диагностическим критериям РС.  
Тяжелая травма, облучение, отравление или удушение угарным газом в анамнезе 
Примечание.  ВКД  –  внешний  коэффициент  диффузии,  СМЖ  –  спинномозговая  жидкость.  РПВП  –  расширенные  периваскулярные  пространства
 ДВ-МРТ – диффузионно-взвешенная  визуализация,  FLAIR  –  режим  с  подавлением  сигнала  свободной  жидкости;  РС  –  рассеянный  склероз,  
T1W – T1-взвешенная последовательноcть в режиме спин-эхо, T2W – T2-взвешенная последовательность в режиме (быстрого) спин-эхо.
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
20
1(37)’2015 ЭПИДЕМИОЛОГИЯИКЛИНИКА
факторов риска и часто являются сопутствующими
заболеваниями, между ними существуют различия, и
при любых попытках понять патогенез БИГМ следует
приниматьэтововнимание.
Возраст пациента и повышение артериального давления являются двумя факторами риска с надежной
доказательной базой [2]. К другим очевидным факторам
, представленным на рис. 3, относятся патология
сонных артерий, ишемическая болезнь сердца, хронические заболевания почек и метаболические синдромы. Также имеют большое значение сердечная
недостаточность, ишемическая болезнь, гипергомоцистеинемия
, обструктивное апноэ во сне, мигрень и
отдельные иммунологические/гематологические заболевания
, особенно связанные с развитием состояния
гиперкоагуляции. Несмотря на установленный риск
развития клинических проявлений инсульта, любая
ассоциация между БИГМ и полом, этнической принадлежностью
, курением и употреблением алкоголя,
ожирением, дислипидемией, фибрилляцией предсердийисахарнымдиабетомостаетсянеизученной.
Поскольку на сегодняшний день исследования проводили в условиях взаимодействия нескольких потенциальных факторов риска, необходимо использовать
методы многофакторного анализа, чтобы определить
относительноезначениеразличныхвыявленныхфак--
торовриска.Темнеменеестепеньнезависимостиэтих
факторов риска сомнительна, и до сих пор не удалось
осмыслить взаимодействие и ковариации между факторами. Кроме того, можно еще больше запутаться
при оценке различных факторов риска, поскольку
не всегда ясно, является ли определенная ассоциация
причинойилиэффектомБИГМ.
Потенциальные патогенетические механизмы 
развития БИГМ
Несмотря на то что должно быть сходство, предположение
,чтовосновевсехтиповцереброваскулярных
событий лежат одни и те же механизмы, выглядит
слишкомупрощенным.ОднакоприБИГМоченьтрудно определить эти механизмы, потому что подавляющее большинство поражений выявляют случайно,
и время их появления неизвестно. Кроме того, как
описано выше, БИГМ является гетерогенным заболеванием
, развивающимся в результате патологии
крупных и мелких сосудов различных анатомических
локализаций, потенциально отражающих различия
в патофизиологии. Таким образом, объяснения причинных механизмов в значительной степени носят
предположительный характер и основаны на оценке
корреляций и различий между факторами риска, изученииклиническогосостояния(вт.ч.явныйинсульт),
ДВ-МРТ положительные
Высокий ДВ-МРТ сигнал
Низкий ВКД
Высокий T2W/FLAIR   
Низкий T1W
Кавитирующие
Очень высокий T2W
Очень низкий T1W
Низкий(нулевой) FLAIR     
т.е. за сигналом СМЖ)
Интенсивность
T2W/FLAIR
(очаговая) 
Предыдущие признаки ограничения 
диффузии в зоне поражения
Новое очаговое поражение < 3 мес
В коре или глубоком сером 
веществе или ядре
Щелевидные/
клиновидные очаги
неровный контур
гиперинтенсивный край на FLAIR
 Ровный контур
Овоидная или линейная форма, 
расположены  вокруг сосудов
множественные билатеральные                                                          
симметричные очаги
≥ 3 мм
< 3 мм РПВП
Нет клинических признаков 
перенесенного/существующего 
заболевания, которое может вызвать 
бессимптомные Т2 поражения:
Рассеянный склероз
Диффузное поражение аксонов
Лучевая терапия
Отравление
Ассоциированные с 
болезнью 
мелких сосудов изменения,
такие как сливное 
перивентрикулярное
изменение интенсивности Т2 Неопределенные Бессимптомный инфаркт головного мозга
Неразличимый 
от лейкоареоза
Возможный БИГМ
 (повтор МРТ через 
3 мес)
Рисунок 2. Схема принятия решений при МРТ-диагностике инфаркта головного мозга у бессимптомного пациента. ВКД – внешний 
коэффициент  диффузии;  СМЖ  –  спинномозговая  жидкость;  РПВП  –  расширенные  периваскулярные  пространства;  ДВ-МРТ  – 
диффузионно-взвешенная МРТ; FLAIR – подавление сигнала свободной жидкости, БИГМ – бессимптомный инфаркт головного мозга; 
T1W – T1-взвешенная последовательность в режиме спин-эхо; T2W – T2-взвешенное (быстрое) спин-эхо.
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
( 8.0.0.2542.951398564 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
21
1(37)’2015
биохимических маркеров и результатов визуализации.
Кроме того, недостаток методов, позволяющих оценитьсостояниецеребральныхмикрососудов,которые,
вероятно, имеют гораздо большее значение в патогенезеБИГМ,чемдругихцереброваскулярныхсобытий,
создаетзначительныепроблемыдляпроверкигипотез.
Всвязисэтимисследователивобластибиологиисосудов уделяли БИГМ значительно меньше внимания,
чемявномуинсульту.
Факторы, повышающие предрасположенность  
к развитию БИГМ
Оксидантный стресс
Разнообразие вредных раздражителей, приводящих
ксосудистомуоксидантномустрессу,участвуетвпатогенезе различных заболеваний, в т.ч. инсульта [29].
Действительно, большинство выявленных факторов риска развития БИГМ облегчают образование и
накопление активных форм кислорода и акролеина
(продукта деградации полиамина при ишемии) или
приводяткхроническомувоспалению.
Изменение свойств гематоэнцефалического барьера
во время ишемии многие исследователи использовали для определения ассоциации между различными
молекулами, которые проходят через системный кровотокиБИГМ.Yoshidaисоавт.[30]сообщили,чтопри
сочетании с акролеином высокие уровни сосудистых
воспалительных маркеров были предикторами развития БИГМ с высокой чувствительностью и специфичностью. В другом исследовании с участием пациентов
без неврологического дефицита выявили значительное повышение содержания высоко чувствительного
С-реактивного белка и интерлейкина-6 у пациентов
с БИГМ по сравнению с лицами без бессимптомного
инфаркта [31]. У пациентов с БИГМ по сравнению
с пациентами без БИГМ обнаружили повышенное
содержание внутриклеточных растворимых молекул
адгезии-1[32, 33], сосудистой молекулы клеточной
адгезии-1 [33] и E-селектина [32], а внутриклеточная
молекула адгезии-1 также была тесно связана с прогрессированиемБИГМ[32].Темнеменеевовсехэтих
случаях неизвестно является ли воспалительная реакцияпричинойилиследствиемишемии.
Интересно, что в крупных популяционных исследованиях
, явившихся основным источником правдоподобных и обобщенных данных, не удалось определить связь между биохимическими маркерами и
Дислипидемия
ICAM-1
D-димер
Фибриноген
Фактор 
фон
Виллебранда
HS-CRP
Демографические 
характеристики/образ жизни
ОАС
ХЗП
Сахарный 
диабет
Мигрень
Метаболический
синдром
MTHFR
Генетические 
факторы
Медицинские процедуры ОА
ССВ
КЭАЭ/
ССА
КТХ
Другие 
тяжелые 
операции
eNos
Протеинкиназа
Cη 
(человеческая
) 
Фактор 
роста 
эндотелия 
сосудов
Нарушение
функции
сердца   
Стеноз
сонной 
артерии
Артериальная 
гипертензия
ИБС
Инсульт
ФП
Курение 
сигарет
Ожирение
Возраст
ЭП
Мочевая
кислота
Плазма
Htc
Лабораторные показатели Сердечно-сосудистые заболевания
Другие заболевания
Пол
ТПКА
Рисунок 3.Факторы риска развития бессимптомного инфаркта головного мозга. ФП – фибрилляция предсердий; КЭАЭ/ССА – каротидная 
эндартерэктомия/стентирование  сонной  артерии;  ССВ  –  сердечно-сосудистые  вмешательства;  ХЗП  –  хронические  заболевания 
почек; КТХ – кардиоторакальная хирургия; eNOS – эндотелиальная синтаза оксида азота; ОА – общая анестезия; Hct – гомоцистеин;  
HS-CRP – высокочувствительный С-реактивный белок; ICAM-1 – внутриклеточная молекула адгезии-1; MTHFR – метилентетрагидрофолат 
редуктаза;  ОАС  –  обструктивное  апноэ  сна;  PRKCH  –  протеинкиназа  C  (человеческая);  ТПКА  –  транскатетерное  протезирование  
клапанов аорты; VEGF – фактор роста эндотелия сосудов; vWF – фактор фон Виллебранда, ЭП – этническая принадлежность.
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(8.0.0.2542.1063795239 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
22
1(37)’2015 ЭПИДЕМИОЛОГИЯИКЛИНИКА
БИГМ [34, 35]. Гипотетически это можно объяснить
небольшим размером поврежденных сосудов и менее
понятной ролью атеросклероза в большинстве случаев БИГМ по отношению к крупным, как правило,
Антитромбин
Здоровый гликокаликс
Внутреняя 
оболочка
Средняя 
оболочка
Атеросклероз
Сужение сосудов
Наружняя 
оболочка
Нарушение целостности 
гематоэнцефалического 
барьера и отек
Активация тромбоцитов и 
образование тромба
Пролиферация 
гладкомышечных 
клеток
Разрушение гликокаликса
ICAM-1
P-selection
TFPI
VWF
Расщепление eNOS
↑экспрессия 
молекул адгезии
Полиамин-оксидаза
Эндотелиальная дисфункция мелких сосудов головного мозга
1 2
3
3
4
4
Факторы риска 
БИГМ
Ксантин-оксидаза НАДФ-оксидаза Акролеин
H
2
O
2
SOD O
2
Полиамин 
(спермин/спермидин)
eNOS
BH
4
NO
L-аргинин
ONOOОкисление
липидов
Активация металлопротеиназ
Окисление белков
Нитрирование ферментов
↑ROS
↓NO
Рисунок 4. Патогенез бессимптомного инфаркта головного мозга (БИГМ). Выявленные факторы риска развития БИГМ усиливают 
оксидативный  стресс,  приводя  к  эндотелиальной  дисфункции  мелких  сосудов  головного  мозга  и  разрушению  гликокаликса. 
Следовательно,  кровоток  снижается  из-за  (1)  воспаления,  нарушения  целостности  гематоэнцефалического  барьера,  и  отека;  (2) 
активации тромбоцитов и образования тромба; (3) артериосклероза, в т.ч. пролиферации гладкомышечных клеток и атеросклероза; 
(4) сужения сосудов. NO – оксид азота; ROS – активные формы кислорода.
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
23
1(37)’2015
атеросклерозированным сосудам, которые классически участвуют в развитии клинически явного инсульта [32, 36]. Аналогичным образом этот вывод может
отражать этнические различия, потому что многие
из соответствующих исследований были проведены
в Японии, в популяции, у которой содержание обсуждаемых биомаркеров, таких как высоко чувствительный С-реактивный белок, как правило, ниже, чем
взападныхкогортах[32,36].
Эндотелиальная дисфункция и гликокаликс
Было высказано предположение, что в патогенезе
БИГМпринимаетучастиедисфункцияэндотелиямелкихсосудовголовногомозга(рис. 4)сэкстравазацией
компонентов плазмы в стенки сосудов и окружающие
ткани головного мозга, вызывающей развитие периваскулярных повреждений, воспаления и внутрисосудистогогемостаза[37].Интактныйсосудистыйэндотелийтакженеобходимдляэффективнойауторегуляции
церебрального кровотока. В исследовании по мониторингу циркулирующих в крови маркеров лакунарного
инсультаKnottnerusисоавт.[38]пришликвыводу,что
дисфункция эндотелия является важным механизмом,
характернымдлябессимптомного,нонесимптомного
подтипа.
В последние годы теории о роли эндотелия в сосудистойпатологиипереключиливниманиенагликокаликс(рис.4).Этотонкий(50–100нм)слойферментов
и белков, содержащихся в полисахаридной матрице,
которая секретируется эндотелием. Она обеспечивает
барьер между апикальной поверхностью эндотелия и
просветом, и ее разрушение ослабляет защиту эндотелия.ТемнеменеенасегодняшнийденьрольгликокаликсаприБИГМнеизучали.
Гомоцистеин 
Как упоминалось выше, повышение содержания
гомоцистеина в плазме считают важным фактором
риска развития БИГМ [39–41]. Было высказано предположение
, что в патогенезе принимают участие
несколькомеханизмов,вт.ч.окислительноеповреждениесосудистогоэндотелияссоответствующимснижением образования оксида азота, увеличением адгезии
тромбоцитовкэндотелиальнымклеткамиповышением уровня протромботических факторов. Интересно,
что связь с повышенным содержанием гомоцистеина
вплазмеможетбытьболеенадежнойприболезнимелкихсосудовголовногомозгапосравнениюспатологиейкрупныхартерий[42].
Генетические факторы
Генетическиефакторыявляютсяизвестнымифакторомирискаразвитияявногоинсульта,итакже,вероятно
,будутигратьзначимуюрольвразвитииБИГМ.Хотя
связьмеждуконкретнымигенетическимифакторамии
БИГМ изучали очень редко, генетическую предрасположенность можно доказать выявлением семейного
анамнеза инсульта в качестве независимого фактора
рискаразвитияБИГМвмолодомвозрасте[43]исреди
потомства родителей с инсультом в анамнезе [44].
В соответствии с рассмотренным ранее значением
гомоцистеина и эндотелия мелких сосудов, специфические полиморфизмы генов метилентетрагидрофолат
редуктазы [45, 46] и эндотелиальной синтазы окиси
азота [47] были идентифицированы в качестве независимых факторов риска развития БИГМ. Некоторые
однонуклеотидныеполиморфизмыгенапротеинкиназы Cη [48], гена, содержащего домен MACRO 2 и гена
фибронектин лейцин-обогащенного трансмембран-
Рисунок 5. Последствия бессимптомного инфаркта головного мозга.
Деменция
Нарушение мобильности/походки Легкие когнитивные нарушения
Нейрокогнитивная
дисфункция
↑риск развития инсульта ↑смертность
Последствия бессимптомного
инфаркта 
головного мозга
Другие неблагопритяные
последствия
для здоровья
Депрессия Биполярное расстройство ↓физическая
активность
Пневмония
Психические
расстройства
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(8.0.0.2542.869432552 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
24
1(37)’2015 ЭПИДЕМИОЛОГИЯИКЛИНИКА
ного белка 3 [49] также были продемонстрированы.
Наконец, мутация гена Notch3 на Chr19q12 привели
к избыточному накоплению Notch3 белка в клетках
гладкой мускулатуры, вызвав развитие артериопатии
мелких сосудов [50]. Она является причиной развития
наиболее распространенной формы наследственного
инсультаиархетипапоражениямелкихсосудов,церебральной аутосомно-доминантной артериопатии с субкортикальными инфарктами и лейкоэнцефалопатией,
проявления которой варьируются от повторных клинически явных инсультов до нарушения когнитивных
функций и субкортикальной деменции при развитии
повторныхинсультов.
Факторы, провоцирующие развитие ишемических 
событий
По всей вероятности, как и при инсульте, существуют и взаимодействуют множество механизмов
развития БИГМ, в т.ч. микроангиопатия, эмболия
и гипоперфузия, в т.ч. при системной артериальной
гипотензии,котораяможетразвитьсявовремялюбого
тяжелогохирургическоговмешательства.
Болезнь мелких сосудов
В 1991 г. Fisher [51] предположил, что различие
между симптомным и бессимптомным инфарктом
обусловлено размером сосудов, поскольку в посмертных исследованиях при инфаркте головного мозга
были поражены артерии диаметром ≈40 до 200 мкм
посравнениюсдиаметромот200до800мкмприсимптомныхпоражениях.Этатеориятакжеподтверждается
темфактом,чтобольшинство(>90%)БИГМявляются
глубокими лакунарными инфарктами, где сосуды, как
правило, мелкие [52]. Потенциальной основной патологией
,связаннойсразвитиемлакунарногоинфаркта,
является васкулопатия мелких сосудов. Это привлекательная теория, учитывая, что васкулопатия мелких
сосудов также является предполагаемым механизмом
развитиялейкоареоза,которыйтесносвязансвозникновениемБИГМ[53].
Точная природа васкулопатии мелких сосудов неизвестна.Липогиалиноз,т.е.диффузноеутолщениестенки мелких сосудов с сужением просвета сосуда, был
главной патологоанатомической находкой, связанной
с лакунарным инфарктом [1]. Аналогичным образом
рассматривали микроатероматоз, но он, как правило,
ассоциируетсяскрупнымиперфорантнымиартериями
ичастоприводиткразвитиюодиночныхкрупныхсимптомных инфарктов. Несмотря на привлекательное
объяснениеразвитиябессимптомныхБИГМ,ассоциированныхсвозрастом,болезньмелкихсосудовнеобъясняют высокую заболеваемость БИГМ в некоторых
другихситуациях.
Дисфункция гематоэнцефалического барьера 
Повышенную проницаемость мелких сосудов, или
дисфункцию гематоэнцефалического барьера (ГЭБ),
также рассматривают в качестве потенциальной причины васкулопатии мелких сосудов. Это подтверждается выделением подгруппы лакунарных инфарктов
свыраженнымсходствомсповреждениями,связанными
с отеком [54]. Тем не менее поражение, вызывающее
дисфункцию ГЭБ, вероятно, является распространенныминеобъясняеточаговыйхарактерБИГМ.
Эмболия
Как уже говорилось ранее, высокий уровень заболеваемостиБИГМбылпродемонстрированприразвитии
эмболиивовремяпроведениявмешательств/операций
на аортальном клапане, восходящей части аорты или
дуге аорты. В этих условиях разрушения газообразных
, кальцинирующих, атероматозных и эндотелиальных тканей во время процедуры в исследованиях
по изучению детрита, захваченного устройствами для
защиты от эмболии, был выявлен острый и хронический тромботический материал и ятрогенные небиологические материалы [55]. Кроме того, в здоровой
популяциипарадоксальнаяэмболияможетбытьодним
изосновныхмеханизмовразвитияБИГМииметьособоезначениевразвитииБИГМзапределамибассейна
перфорантной артерии. В самом деле, расположение
шунта справа налево у лиц с БИГМ за пределами бассейна перфорантной артерии, согласно данным, аналогичнатаковойсредилицсдиагнозомкриптогенного
эмболическогоинсульта[56].
Гипоперфузия
Результаты некоторых исследований показывают,
что спазм сосудов и вызванная этим гипоперфузия,
или сама по себе гипоперфузия, связанная с другими причинами, отличными от окклюзии сосудов,
могутобъяснитьмногие,еслинебольшинствослучаев
БИГМ. Теории гипоперфузии соответствуют результаты контролируемого посмертного исследования
6 пациентов с церебральной аутосомно-доминантной
артериопатией, с субкортикальными инфарктами и
лейкоэнцефалопатией, согласно которому нарушение
ауторегуляции церебрального артериального кровотока
, а не окклюзия мелких сосудов, были причиной
развития лакунарных инфарктов в чечевицеобразном
ядре[57].
Изменения церебральной гемодинамики также
приводят к изменению оформления и распределения эмболических частиц. Кроме того, гипоперфузия
может усилить эффект частичной окклюзии, ускоряя
развитиеишемиииинфаркта[58].
Факторы, объясняющие отсутствие клинической 
неврологической дисфункции
Былопредложенонесколькотеорийдляобъяснения
отсутствия явной неврологической дисфункции при
БИГМнаосноверазличныххарактеристикинфарктов,
приводящих к появлению симптомов или протекающихбессимптомно.
Размер и локализация
Два изначально привлекательных и наиболее широко признанных объяснения развития бессимптомного
БИГМотносятсякразмеруилокализацииповрежденных тканей головного мозга. Как обсуждалось выше,
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
( 8.0.0.2542.398573053 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
25
1(37)’2015
приБИГМпреимущественнострадаютмелкиесосуды
и, следовательно, как правило, ограниченного размера. Было высказано предположение, что т.к. эти
инфаркты невелики, любые связанные с ними неврологические дефициты остаются скрытыми [51, 59].
Аналогичным образом, локализация инфаркта почти
наверняка имеет значение, поскольку большое количество нестратегической ткани может быть потеряно
без развития дефицита, в то время как небольшие
инфаркты в важных зонах (например, в стволе головного мозга и внутренней капсуле) часто имеют тяжелыеневрологическиепоследствия.Этопредположение
поддерживаетсяпреимущественнымразвитиемБИГМ
в определенных регионах. Например, при лакунарных
инфарктах бессимптомные поражения обычно возникают в сосудистом бассейне лентикулостриарных
пенетрирующих артерий, в то время как симптомные
пораженияпреимущественнорасполагаютсявбассейне передней хориоидальной артерии [59]. Интересно,
что наибольшее количество БИГМ в вертебральнобазилярном бассейне и мозжечке БИГМ развиваются у молодых пациентов и лиц с мигренью. Однако
в когорте лиц молодого возраста в аналогичных сосудистых бассейнах также часто развиваются явные
инсульты [60, 61].
Ишемическое прекондиционирование
Ишемическое прекондиционирование является
врожденной адаптивной и нейропротективной реакциейнаранееперенесенныйпотенциальнолетальный
инсульт, который приводит к образованию устойчивого к ишемии фенотипа и повышает устойчивость
к повторному, потенциально летальному инсульту.
Этот процесс опосредован геномным перепрограммированием
, приводящим к увеличению синтеза белка
de novo, клеточной памяти и пластичности нейронов
и, следовательно, ослаблению реакций на повреждение и улучшению восстановления. Внутриклеточные
сигналы выживания, скорее всего, имеют большое
значение для этой реакции, особенно гипоксия-активируемый фактор транскрипции, который активирует
гены, участвующие в синтезе эритропоэтина, ангиогенезе
, вазомоторном контроле, выживаемости клеток
, регулировании рН и метаболизме энергии [62].
По этой причине было высказано предположение,
чтохроническоеишемическоепрекондиционирование
и толерантность могут улучшать клинические исходы
, связанные с ишемией и инфарктом ткани мозга.
Действительно,этоподтверждаетсясочетаниемБИГМ
и лейкоареоза, где последний предположительно развиваетсяврезультатенеполнойишемиинафонепатологиисосудовсреднегоразмера[63].
Последствия БИГМ
Были опубликованы многочисленные исследования
по сравнению последствий для здоровья у лиц с и
без БИГМ. Существует достаточно доказательств, что
БИГМ негативно влияет на риск и исходы последующего инсульта, а также в целом на нейрокогнитивные
и психоневрологические функции, а также риск смертности(рис. 5).
Инсульт
Последние контролируемые исследования свидетельствуют о повышенном риске развития первого
инсультаулицсБИГМ,которыйсоставляет10%вгоди
в5разпревышаетрискразвитияинсультаупациентов
без БИГМ [64]. В крупнейшем популяционном проспективном исследовании, посвященном изучению
этого вопроса, Bokura и соавт. [65] вели наблюдение
за2684неврологическиздоровымилицамибезинсульта в анамнезе (средний возраст 58±7 лет при зачислении
),которымпроводилимедицинскоеобследование,
в т.ч. МРТ для регистрации наличия или отсутствия
поражений,такихкакБИГМ,изатемвелинаблюдение
втечениевсреднем6,3года.Показателизаболеваемости клиническим инсультом были значительно выше
у пациентов с исходным БИГМ (отношение шансов
[ОШ]=3,66;95%доверительныйинтервал[ДИ]от2,28
до5,89).
БИГМ также был ассоциирован с развитием повторного инсульта у пациентов с впервые развившимся
инсультом. Putaala и соавт. [61] выполнили регрессионныйанализКоксаданных655молодых(15—49 лет)
жертвинсульта,закоторымивелинаблюдениевсреднемвтечение8,7±3,8годаиобнаружили,чтоналичие
несколькихБИГМбылонезависимосвязаносриском
рецидива ишемического инсульта (ОШ=2,48; 95% ДИ
от1,24до4,94),дажепослевнесенияпоправокнавозраст
,полидругиефакторыриска,патогенезинсульта,
илейкоареоз.
Нейрокогнитивная дисфункция
Разнообразиенейрокогнитивныхассоциацийбыло
отмечено у лиц с БИГМ от глобального ухудшения
когнитивных функций до уменьшения возможностей
, связанных с более специфическими мозговыми
процессами, такими как память, скорость реакции и
речь [66]. Выявление БИГМ при визуализации было
ассоциированос2—3-кратнымповышениемчастоты
развития деменции, предположительно в результате
прогрессированияинфарктаголовногомозга [67,68].
Крометого,впопуляциисдеменциейулицсБИГМ
были более выражены нарушения по нескольким
когнитивным доменам, в т.ч. функции речи, отсроченного запоминания и семантической беглости [69]. К другим ассоциациям с БИГМ относятся
атрофия головного мозга, выпадение полей зрения,
замедленные,быстроповторяющиесямелкиедвижения
, нарушение походки, нарушение ходьбы на пяткахиносках,паденияинарушениемобильности[22,
70, 71]. Неудивительно, что влияние БИГМ на нейрокогнитивные функции изменяется в зависимости
от локализации; например в исследовании Northern
Manhattan Study, БИГМ в лобных областях влияли
на когнитивную гибкость, в то время как глубокие
инфарктыбылисвязанысзамедлениемпсихомоторных функций [66].
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.862341619)
26
1(37)’2015 ЭПИДЕМИОЛОГИЯИКЛИНИКА
Психические расстройства
Кроме того, БИГМ часто выявляли у пациентов с различными психическими расстройствами.
Распространенность БИГМ у пожилых людей (средний возраст > 60 лет) с депрессией составляет от 40
до 50% [70, 72, 73]. В дополнение к этому БИГМ выявляли у 65% пациентов с биполярными расстройствами
, у которых психоз начался в возрасте после 50 лет
посравнениюс25%упациентовспоявлениемсимптомов
вболеераннемвозрасте(р<0,05),чтопредположительно
связано с разными механизмами развития заболевания
в двух возрастных группах [74]. Существует несколько
ограниченийэтихрезультатов,вт.ч.неспособностьконтролироватьдругиесопутствующиезаболевания,небольшие клинические (а не популяционные) и неслучайно
отобранные выборки пациентов, и перекрестный сбор
данных,чтонепозволяетсделатьпредположенияобпричинноследственнойсвязи.Темнеменееэтирезультаты,
безусловно,подлежатдальнейшемуизучению.
Другие неблагоприятные последствия для здоровья
Многочисленные другие неблагоприятные последствиядляздоровьябылисвязанысповышениемчастоты развития БИГМ. Риск развития пневмонии среди
пожилыхлюдейсБИГМ(среднийвозраст79 лет)был
почти в 5 раз выше, чем у лиц контрольной группы
(ОШ=4,67; 95% ДИ от 1,9 до 11,7) [75]. Кроме того,
Willeyисоавт. [76]проверилиобщийуровеньздоровья
и активности у 1238 взрослых лиц без клинического
инсульта,отобранныхврамкахисследованияNorthern
Manhattan Study (средний возраст 70±9 лет), и обнаружили
, что уровень активности был ниже среди лиц
с БИГМ, но не удалось выяснить является ли снижениеактивностиследствиемБИГМилинаоборот.
Смертность
Наконец, повышенная смертность была зарегистрирована во всех исследованиях БИГМ, посвященных
изучению этой проблемы. Особо следует отметить
2 крупных продольных популяционных исследования
, [5, 27], в которых риск развития летального
исходабылв3—4разавышеулицсБИГМ.
■ВЫВОДЫ
До сегодняшнего дня исследователи страдали из-за
несоответствия в определениях и методологии, ограничивающих наше понимание такого феномена, как
БИГМ. Однако понятно, что БИГМ не является
редкостью и не может больше рассматриваться как
случайный и клинически доброкачественный артефакт при проведении визуализации. Действительно,
данные исследований убедительно показывают, что
эти повреждения часто ассоциированы с нейрокогнитивным
, функциональным дефицитом и нарушением походки/мобильности, которые могут остаться
незамеченными или быть приписанными к другим
заболеваниям, и что они являются предикторами
повышения риска развития более серьезных неблагоприятных неврологических и сердечно-сосудистых событий, включая инсульт и преждевременную
смертность. Гораздо больше известно о факторах
риска развития БИГМ, чем об основных патогенетических механизмах. Таким образом, понимание
первых является устойчивой платформой для целенаправленного изучения последних. Несмотря на то
что между БИГМ, клинически явными инсультами и
транзиторными ишемическими атаками есть много
общего,очевидно,чтосуществуютиразличия.Кроме
того, слишком простым было бы предположение, что
одниитежемеханизмылежатвосноверазвитиявсех
видов цереброваскулярных событий. В настоящей
работемыпредложилиединыекритериидлястандартизации определений БИГМ, которые необходимы
для обеспечения однородности данных в будущих
исследованиях.
ЛИТЕРАТУРА
1. Fisher  C.M.  Lacunes:  small,  deep  cerebral  infarcts.  Neurology. 
1965;15:774–784.
2. Fanning J.P., Wong A.A., Fraser J.F. The epidemiology of silent brain 
infarction:  a  systematic  review  of  population-based  cohorts.  BMC 
Med. 2014;2014:119.
3. Waldstein S.R.,  Siegel  E.L.,  Lefkowitz  D.,  Maier  K.J.,  Brown J.R., 
Obuchowski  A.M.,  et  al.  Stress-induced  blood  pressure 
reactivity  and  silent  cerebrovascular  disease.  Stroke.  2004;35: 
1294–1298.
4. Astarci  P.,  Glineur  D.,  Kefer  J.,  D’Hoore  W.,  Renkin  J., 
Vanoverschelde J.-L.,  et  al.  Magnetic  resonance  imaging 
evaluation  of  cerebral  embolization  during  percutaneous  aortic 
valve  implantation:  comparison  of  transfemoral  and  trans-apical 
approaches  using  edwards  sapiens  valve.  Eur  J  Cardio  Thoracic 
Surgery. 2011;40:475–479.
5. Longstreth  W.T.  Jr.,  Dulberg  C.,  Manolio  T.A.,  Lewis  M.R., 
Beauchamp N.J. Jr.,  O’Leary  D.,  et  al.  Incidence,  manifestations, 
and predictors of brain infarcts defined by serial cranial magnetic 
resonance imaging in the elderly: the Cardiovascular Health Study. 
Stroke. 2002;33:2376–2382.
6. Zhu Y.C.,  Dufouil  C.,  Tzourio  C.,  Chabriat  H.  Silent  brain  infarcts:  
a review of MRI diagnostic criteria. Stroke. 2011;42:1140–1145.
7. Wardlaw J.M., Smith E.E., Biessels G.J., Cordonnier C., Fazekas F., 
Frayne  R.,  et  al;  STandards  for  ReportIng  Vascular  changes  
on nEuroimaging (STRIVE v1). Neuroimaging standards for research 
into  small  vessel  disease  and  its  contribution  to  ageing  and 
neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol. 2013;12:822–838.
8. Allen L.M.,  Hasso  A.N.,  Handwerker  J.,  Farid  H.  Sequence-specific 
mr  imaging  findings  that  are  useful  in  dating  ischemic  stroke. 
Radiographics. 2012;32:1285–1297.
9. Eastwood  J.D.,  Engelter  S.T.,  MacFall  J.F.,  Delong  D.M., 
Provenzale J.M. Quantitative  assessment  of  the  time  course  of 
infarct  signal  intensity  on  diffusion-weighted  images.  AJNR  Am  J 
Neuroradiol. 2003;24:680–687.
10. Moreau  F.,  Patel  S.,  Lauzon  M.L.,  McCreary  C.R.,  Goyal  M., 
Frayne R., et al. Cavitation after acute symptomatic lacunar stroke 
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
27
1(37)’2015
depends  on  time,  location,  and  MRI  sequence.  Stroke.  2012;43: 
1837–1842.
11. Groeschel  S.,  Chong  W.K.,  Surtees  R.,  Hanefeld  F.  Virchow-
Robin  spaces  on  magnetic  resonance  images:  normative  data, 
their  dilatation,  and  a  review  of  the  literature.  Neuroradiology. 
2006;48:745–754.
12. Zhu Y.C., Dufouil C., Mazoyer B., Soumaré A., Ricolfi F., Tzourio C., 
et  al.  Frequency  and  location  of  dilated  Virchow-Robin  spaces  
in elderly people: a population-based 3D MR imaging study. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol. 2011;32:709–713.
13. Bokura H., Kobayashi S., Yamaguchi S. Distinguishing silent lacunar 
infarction from enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces: a magnetic resonance 
imaging and pathological study. J Neurol. 1998;245:116–122.
14. Koch S., McClendon M.S., Bhatia R. Imaging evolution of acute lacunar 
infarction: leukoariosis or lacune? Neurology. 2011;77:1091–1095.
15. Potter G.M., Doubal F.N., Jackson C.A., Chappell F.M., Sudlow C.L., 
Dennis M.S., et al. Counting cavitating lacunes underestimates the 
burden of lacunar infarction. Stroke. 2010;41:267–272.
16. Hachinski V.C.,  Potter  P.,  Merskey  H.  Leuko-araiosis.  Arch  Neurol. 
1987;44:21–23.
17. Gouw  A.A.,  Seewann  A.,  van  der  Flier  W.M.,  Barkhof  F., 
Rozemuller A.M., Scheltens P., et al. Heterogeneity of small vessel 
disease: a systematic review of MRI and histopathology correlations. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011;82:126–135.
18. Dinia L., Bonzano L., Albano B., Finocchi C., Del Sette M., Saitta L.,  
et al. White matter lesions progression in migraine with aura: a clinical 
and MRI longitudinal study. J Neuroimaging. 2013;23:47–52.
19. Okuda D.T., Mowry E.M., Beheshtian A., Waubant E., Baranzini S.E., 
Goodin  D.S.,  et  al.  Incidental  MRI  anomalies  suggestive  
of multiple sclerosis: the radiologically isolated syndrome. Neurology. 
2009;72:800–805.
20. Polman C.H.,  Reingold  S.C.,  Banwell  B.,  Clanet  M.,  Cohen  J.A., 
Filippi M., et  al.  Diagnostic  criteria  for  multiple  sclerosis:  2010 
revisions to the McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:292–302.
21. Bryan R.N., Cai J., Burke G., Hutchinson R.G., Liao D., Toole J.F., et al.  
Prevalence  and  anatomic  characteristics  of  infarct-like  lesions 
on  MR  images  of  middle-aged  adults:  the  atherosclerosis  risk  
in communities study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 1999;20:1273–1280.
22. Price  T.R.,  Manolio  T.A.,  Kronmal  R.A.,  Kittner  S.J.,  Yue  N.C., 
Robbins J., et  al.  Silent  brain  infarction  on  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  and  neurological  abnormalities  in  community-dwelling 
older  adults.  The  Cardiovascular  Health  Study.  CHS  Collaborative 
Research Group.
23. Stroke. 1997;28:1158–1164.
24. Fink J.N., Selim M.H., Kumar S., Silver B., Linfante I., Caplan L.R., et al. 
Is  the  association  of  National  Institutes  of  Health  Stroke  Scale 
scores and acute magnetic resonance imaging stroke volume equal  
for patients with right- and left-hemisphere ischemic stroke? Stroke. 
2002;33:954–958.
25. Heldner M.R., Zubler C., Mattle H.P., Schroth G., Weck A., Mono M.L., 
et  al.  National  Institutes  of  Health  stroke  scale  score  and  vessel 
occlusion  in  2152  patients  with  acute  ischemic  stroke.  Stroke. 
2013;44:1153–1157.
26. Olavarría  V.V.,  Delgado  I.,  Hoppe  A.,  Brunser  A.,  Cárcamo  D., 
Díaz-Tapia V., et al. Validity of the NIHSS in predicting arterial occlusion 
in  cerebral  infarction  is  time-dependent.  Neurology.  2011;76: 
62–68.
27. Lee S.C., Park S.J., Ki H.K., Gwon H.C., Chung C.S., Byun H.S., et al. 
Prevalence and risk factors of silent cerebral infarction in apparently 
normal adults. Hypertension. 2000;36:73–77.
28. Vermeer S.E., Den Heijer T., Koudstaal P.J., Oudkerk M., Hofman A., 
Breteler  M.M.;  Rotterdam  Scan  Study.  Incidence  and  risk  factors  
of  silent  brain  infarcts  in  the  population-based  Rotterdam  Scan 
Study. Stroke. 2003;34:392–396.
29. Fanning J.P., Walters D.L., Platts D.G., Eeles E., Bellapart J., Fraser J.F. 
Characterization of neurological injury in transcatheter aortic valve 
implantation:  how  clear  is  the  picture?  Circulation.  2014;129: 
504–515.
30. Olmez  I.,  Ozyurt  H.  Reactive  oxygen  species  and  ischemic 
cerebrovascular disease. Neurochem Int. 2012;60:208–212.
31. Yoshida M., Tomitori H., Machi Y., Katagiri D., Ueda S., Horiguchi K., 
et al. Acrolein, IL-6 and CRP as markers of silent brain infarction. 
Atherosclerosis. 2009;203:557–562.
32. Hoshi T., Kitagawa K., Yamagami H., Furukado S., Hougaku H., Hori M. 
Relations  of  serum  high-sensitivity  C-reactive  protein  and  interleukin-6
 levels  with  silent  brain  infarction.  Stroke.  2005;36: 
768–772.
33. Kawamura T., Umemura T., Kanai A., Nagashima M., Nakamura N., 
Uno T., et al. Soluble adhesion molecules and C-reactive protein in 
the progression of silent cerebral infarction in patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Metabolism. 2006;55:461–466.
34. Kawamura  T.,  Umemura  T.,  Kanai  A.,  Uno  T.,  Matsumae H., 
Sano  T.,  et  al.  The  incidence  and  characteristics  of  silent  cerebral
 infarction  in  elderly  diabetic  patients:  association  with 
serum-soluble  adhesion  molecules.  Diabetologia.  1998;41: 
911–917.
О
О
О
 "
Б
И
О
Н
И
К
А
М
Е
Д
И
А
"
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1581166085)
