Acta Pharmacologica Sinica (2015) 36: 748–757
© 2015 CPS and SIMM All rights reserved 1671-4083/15
www.nature.com/aps

npg

Original Article

DanHong injection dose-dependently varies amino
acid metabolites and metabolic pathways in the
treatment of rats with cerebral ischemia
Zhi-li GUO1, 2, Yan ZHU1, 3, 4, Xiao-tao SU4, Jun LIU1, Qian-xu YANG5, Jing-yi NAN4, Bu-chang ZHAO4, Ying-ying ZHANG1,
Ya-nan YU1, Bing LI1, Hong-bin XIAO5, *, Zhong WANG1, *
1

Institute of Basic Research in Clinical Medicine, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100700, China; 2Jiaxing
Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Jiaxing 314000, China; 3Beijing Electric Power
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100073, China; 4Xi’an Buchang Pharmaceutical Co, Ltd, Xi’an 712000, China; 5Dalian
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China
Aim: To determine how the relative amino acid contents and metabolic pathways regulate the pharmacological phenotypes in rats with
cerebral ischemia after treatment with varying doses of DanHong injection (DHI).
Methods: Adult male rats underwent middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO), and were injected with DHI (DH-1: 1 mL/kg; DH-2:
2.5 mL/kg; DH-3: 5 mL/kg, and DH-4: 10 mL/kg, iv) daily for 3 d. The neurological deficit score, body weights and infarct volume
were assessed. Serum levels of 20 free amino acids were determined using HPLC, and the values were transformed through the
quantitative analysis of the amino acids in the serum metabolic spectrum. Multivariate statistical analysis methods (PCA and PLS-DA)
and web-based metabolomics tools (MetPa and MetaboAnalyst) were used to analyze the biological data sets for the amino acids.
Results: Administration of DHI dose-dependently decreased cerebral infarct volume, and ameliorated neurological deficits. A total of
5, 6, 7 and 7 non-overlapping metabolites were identified in the DH-1, DH-2, DH-3, and DH-4 groups, respectively. Eight metabolites
were shared between the DHI groups and the vehicle group. In addition, the serum levels of glutamic acid, aspartic acid and serine
increased with increasing DHI dose. A total of 3, 2, 2 and 5 non-overlapping metabolic pathways were identified in the DH-1, DH-2,
DH-3 and DH-4 groups, respectively, and glycine, serine, threonine and histidine metabolism were identified as overlapping pathways
among the 4 dose groups.
Conclusion: Overlapping and non-overlapping amino acid metabolites and metabolic pathways are associated with the dose-dependent
neuroprotective effect of DHI.
Keywords: DanHong injection; traditional Chinese medicine; cerebral ischemia; amino acid metabolomics; metabolic pathways
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica (2015) 36: 748–757; doi: 10.1038/aps.2014.167; published online 4 May 2015

Introduction

DanHong injection (DHI), a Chinese Materia Medica standardized product extracted from Radix Salviae miltiorrhizae and
Flos Carthami tinctorii, has been effective for the treatment of
cerebral ischemia and other cardiovascular diseases in China
for several years[1]. The main bioactive constituents of DHI are
salvianic acid A and B, protocatechuic aldehyde and rosmarinic acid (Figure S1). Previous studies have shown that DHI
exhibited diverse pharmacological effects, including protection against vascular endothelium injury[2, 3], improvements
* To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail hbxiaodicp@126.com (Hong-bin XIAO)
zhonw@sina.com (Zhong WANG)
Received 2014-08-05 Accepted 2014-12-08

in atherosclerosis and microcirculation[4], and neuroprotective
effects[5]. It has also been suggested that DHI might have a
dose-dependent protective effect on promoting angiogenesis
and mesenteric microcirculation in acute hypoxia[6, 7]. In addition, an experimental study indicated that DHI had a concentration-response relationship in promoting angiogenesis
potentially via the increased expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)[8]. However, concentration-response
studies on DHI in the treatment of cerebral ischemia are lacking.
The potential methods for studying the dose-effect relationship of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) drugs include
orthogonal design, uniform design, pharmacokinetics, serum
pharmacology, and serum metabolomics [9, 10]. The emerging field of metabolomics provides a promising approach

www.chinaphar.com
Guo ZL et al

npg
749

to explore the potential mechanisms of diverse diseases and
assess the therapeutic effects of drugs[11, 12]. Metabolomics has
previously been applied to investigate the efficacy of TCM
treatment. For example, a study on the changes in metabolism
under different doses of Xiao-Yao powder demonstrated that
the metabolic patterns in the high-dose group were more similar to the healthy control group than other dose groups[11].
In addition, a metabolomics study on the dose-effect of
Heart Soft Capsule found dose-dependent changes in the
levels of several potentially important biomarkers[13]. Metabolomics has also been applied to assess the efficacy and quality
control of DHI[14]. However, the mechanism underlying the
concentration-response relationship of DHI at the metabolomics level remains unclear. The aim of the present study was
to examine the effects of DHI on metabolic pathways and the
generation of new metabolites in the treatment of cerebral
ischemia.
It has been shown that the development of cerebral ischemia
is closely associated with the metabolic spectral migration of
amino acids[15]. Amino acid metabolomics is an important
part of metabolomics research[16], and the results of a previous
study suggested that Chinese medicine could relieve stroke
rats suffering from ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury by ameliorating defects in amino acid metabolism[17]. Therefore, in
the present study, we examined how the relative amino acid
contents and metabolic pathways regulate the pharmacological phenotypes observed after treatment with varying doses of
DHI.

Materials and methods

Sample acquisition and preprocessing
The protocols used in the present study were approved by the
national legislations of China as well as local guidelines, in
accordance with the ethical principles of animal use and care.
Experimental drugs
DHI original fluid (intermediate concentrate; batch number:
120 705) was applied. The dilution ratio (original fluid:water)
of the DHI was 1:2 or 1:3 (v:v). The DHI was prepared by
decocting 250 g of safflower and 750 g of Salvia miltiorrhiza
twice, following by filtration, pooling, and concentration. The
final filtrate was collected, and diluted with water to a final
injection volumn of 1000 mL.
The quality control was performed using high performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) fingerprinting (Figure S1), and
each batch of DHI was manufactured strictly in accordance
with the standards of “good manufacturing practice” (Figure
S2).
Experimental animals
A total of 39 adult male Sprague-Dawley rats, weighing
200±20 g, were purchased from the Experimental Animal
Center, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
All animals were housed in cages and maintained under
standard conditions (24±1 °C, 45%±15% relative humidity).
The rats were divided into the 6 groups: vehicle group, sham

group and 4 DHI dose groups (DH1, 1 mL/kg, iv qd; DH2, 2.5
mL/kg, iv qd; DH3, 5 mL/kg, iv qd; and DH4, 10 mL/kg, iv
qd). The drug was administered daily for 3 days.
Preparation of the middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO)
model
The Longa bolt wire method[18] was applied with slight modifications. Briefly, the rats were anesthetized with 10% chloral
hydrate (4 mL/kg, ip) and fixed in the supine position. Subsequently, the skin of each rat was disinfected on a sterile towel.
MCAO was performed as previously described[18]. Rectal
temperature was monitored and maintained at 37 °C using
a heating blanket. The right common, external, and internal
carotid arteries were isolated. The tip of a nylon suture was
rounded through heating on a flame, and subsequently the
suture was advanced from the external carotid artery (ECA)
into the lumen of the internal carotid artery to obstruct the
origin of the middle cerebral artery (MCA). At 1 h after
MCAO, reperfusion was performed through the removal of
the suture. MCAO rats were evaluated for neurological damage as previously described[18]. The average depth of filament
insertion was 18.5±0.5 mm away from the bifurcation. Then,
the exposed vessels were carefully ligated to prevent bleeding,
and the incision was aseptically closed. The rectal temperature of the rats was maintained at 37±0.5 °C using a temperature-regulated heating pad. After revival from anesthesia, the
animals were returned to the cages and maintained at room
temperature (24±1 °C).
The rats in the sham group were treated in the same manner
as the MCAO rats without ischemia. The sham group received
an incision on the neck to separate the neck blood vessels and
branches, without artery ligation.
In the vehicle group, MCAO rats received 0.9% NaCl
(1 mL/kg). The animals were euthanized through decapitation at 72 h after modeling.
The weight and neurological deficit score were measured in
all rats. The neurological deficit scoring system, based on the
Bederson[19] and Garcia score[20], used a scale from 0 to 4: (0) no
observable deficit; (1) decreased forelimb resistance to a lateral
push; (2) forelimb flexion; (3) circling behavior in addition to
the former symptoms; and (4) deficiency in spontaneous walking. When no deficit was observed at 60 min after occlusion,
the animal was excluded from further study. After treatment
for 3 d, the rats were sacrificed for triphenyl tetrazolium chloride solution (TTC) staining, cerebral infarct volume calculation and biochemical analysis.
Calculation of the cerebral infarct volume
The rats in each group were sacrificed through rapid decapitation under deep anesthesia with 10% chloral hydrate at
1 h after treatment injection. The rat brain was immediately
removed and placed at -20 °C for 10 min, followed by slicing
into five 2-mm-thick consecutive coronal sections, staining
with 2% TTC at 37 °C for 30 min in the dark, and fixing with
4% polyformaldehyde solution at 4 °C for 24 h. The slices were
photographed using a digital camera and analyzed using an
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Guo ZL et al

npg
750

image processing system (AlphaEaseFC 4.0, Alpha Innotech,
San Leandro, CA, USA) (Figure 1B). We measured the infarct
volume for each brain slice using an image analysis Luxex-F
instrument and calculated the infarct volume according to the
formula V=t(A1+A2+...+An)–(A1+An)t/2, where t indicates
the slice thickness and A indicates the infarct size.
HPLC sample treatment
After precise measurement of the 100-µL serum samples collected from the abdominal aorta of the sacrificed rats at 1 h
after the last treatment injection, 800 µL of pure water and 100
µL of internal standard (IS) solution (norvaline 250 ng/mL)
were added. After blending, 200 µL of the supernatant was
collected, and subsequently 800 µL of 85% methanol was
added. After eddy mixing for 5 min, incubation for 1 h at 4 °C,
and centrifugation at 12 000 rounds/min for 10 min, 200 µL of
the supernatant fluid was collected and filtered using a 0.22µm microfiltration membrane to generate clear liquid. The
filtrate was subsequently packed into a liquid vial for examination using an online derivative HPLC-fluorescence detector
(HPLC-FLD).
Instruments and reagents
The experiments were conducted at the Dalian Institute of
Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. An Agilent
1200 HPLC system equipped with variable wavelength fluorescence detector (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA USA)
was used.
The following amino acid reference substances were used
(in order of the peaks): aspartic acid, glutamic acid, asparagine, serine, histidine, glycine, alanine, citrulline, threonine,
arginine, taurine, tyrosine, valine, methionine, tryptophan,
phenylalanine, isoleucine, ornithine, leucine, and lysine (IS is
norvaline).
The following derivatization reagents were used: o-phthaldialdehyde (OPA), 3-mercaptoethanol (3-MPA) (Accustandard
Company, New Haven, Connecticut, USA); chromatographic
pure acetonitrile and methanol; and Milli-Q low organic matter ultrapure water (Millipore Company, Boston, Massachusetts, USA).
Online derivatization
For online derivatization, 1 mL of OPA reserve liquid (10
mg/mL) was mixed with 1 mL of borate buffer (pH 10.2) and
100 µL of 3-MPA. This mixture was filtered through a 0.22-µm
filter and subsequently stored at 4 °C in the dark. Derivatization was performed using the Agilent 1200 automatic sampler
online system (Agilent Technologies).
Metabolic profiling
HPLC-FLD analysis
The following chromatographic conditions were used: room
temperature set at 5 °C; Hypersil c18 reversed phase chromatographic column (250 mm×4.6 mm, 5 µm, Dalian Elite Analytical Instruments Co, Ltd, Dalian, China); mobile phase A liquid

Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

(10 mmol/L Na2HPO4-Na2B4O7 buffer, pH 7.95); and mobile
phase B liquid (acetonitrile:methanol:water at a volume ratio
of 45:45:10). The gradient elution conditions included mobile
phase B for 6 min, increasing from 5% to 17.2% and 6–35 min,
increasing from 17.2% to 52%.
The fluorescence detection wavelength was 338 nm (spectral
bandwidth 10 nm), and the reference wavelength was 390 nm
(spectral bandwidth 10 nm). The sample quantity was 5 µL[21].
Validation of assay method
Using 20 standard amino acid solutions, we evaluated the reliability of the serum sample pretreatment, amino acid derivatives and separation methods. The R values with peak area
and concentration of the linear correlation coefficient were
between 0.9215–0.9995; the coefficient of retention time and
peak area were 0.09%–0.28% and 0.8%–0.28%, respectively; the
average recovery rate was 85.2%–103.6%; and the coefficients
of intra-day and inter-day variation were <7.5%.
Data and pathways analysis
The data obtained from commercial assay kits are presented
as the mean±standard deviation (SD). Statistical significance
was assessed using Student’s t-test. SPSS analysis of variance
between the groups was performed to analyze the changes
in neurological deficit score, brain index, and body weight
in each group. Single-factor analysis of variance of multiple
comparison (Q inspection) was used to examine the differences within groups.
The multivariate statistical analyses, PCA and PLS-DA, were
employed to process the HPLC-FLD data to reveal the influential ions responsible for separations between sample classes[22].
To detect the common metabolites in the biological function of whole information and channel transduction, we first
observed the relevant metabolites according to the Human
Metabolome Database (HMDB) or Kyoto Encyclopedia of
Genes and Genomes (KEGG) ID number and subsequently
imported MetPa bioinformatics software (http://metpa.
metabolomics.ca) using an Excel format. MetPa and MetaboAnalyst[23] software was used to identify network pathways.
This software was based on high-quality KEGG metabolic
pathways as the backend knowledgebase to identify the most
relevant pathways involved in the conditions under study[23].
Using these approaches, the amino acids in the 36 serum
samples were quantitatively analyzed for further metabolomics study.

Results

Dose-effect relationship of DHI
After treatment for 3 d, a concentration-response relationship
was observed between the infarct volume and DHI dosage
among the 4 dose groups, indicating that DHI could reduce
cerebral ischemia in a dose-dependent manner. The cerebral
infarct volume gradually decreased with increasing DHI
dose, reflecting a negative correlation (Figure 1A). The TTC
images showed the effects of DHI on infarct volume in MCAO

www.chinaphar.com
Guo ZL et al

npg
751

rats (Figure 1B). The infarct areas of sham, vehicle and some
DHI treatment group were analyzed through TTC staining.
Representative TCC-stained brain sections were obtained at
72 h after MCAO. Compared with the vehicle group, all DHI
dose groups (DH1, 2, 3, and 4) increased the body weight and
reduced the cerebral infarct volume (significantly in DH4),
brain index (brain weight to body weight) and neurological
deficit score (Figure 1C–1E) (P<0.05). Therefore, DHI had a
dose-dependent therapeutic effect against cerebral ischemia.
Multivariate statistical analysis of the amino acid metabolites
HPLC-FLD metabolic profiling of serum samples
Typical HPLC-FLD total metabolism chromatograms are
shown in Figure S3. The endogenous metabolites were identified through comparison with the corresponding standards
according to the retention times. In total, 20 metabolites were
identified in the serum profile.
PCA analysis
PCA, the most commonly used algorithm in metabolomics
studies, was used to process the HPLC-FLD data. The resulting data were displayed as “score plots,” representing the
distribution of samples in the multivariate space. In the present study, a 2D and 3D-PCA score plot was initially obtained
from the HPLC-FLD data of the 6 groups. As shown in the
PCA score plots (Figure 2A and 2B), the rats in the lowest
dose groups obtained better separation, far from those of the
vehicle group, compared with the other 3 dose groups.
Using PCA analysis, we detected a clear separation in the
metabolic profiling: the X-axis represented the score of principal component 1 (PC1), accounting for 15.5827% of the total
variance, while the Y-axis indicated the score of PC2, accounting for 11.9811% of the total variance (R2X=0.857; Q2=0.614)
(Figure 2C). Thus, we assumed that the PCA model demonstrated the development phase of intervention dosagebased cerebral ischemia treatment. The relative amount of the
20 amino acids in the 4 dose groups was outlined using the
NIPALS scoring diagram, and we observed that the levels of
glutamic acid, aspartic acid, and serine increased with increasing dilution of the DHI (Figure 2D).
PLS analysis and variable importance of projection (VIP) stati­
stics
The loadings plot indicated that the most influential ions, farthest away from the main cluster, were responsible for the separation between samples classes, showing the greatest influence in the PCA score plots. VIP statistics and loadings plots
were used to identify biomarker ions. A total of 5, 6, 7 and 7
metabolites were identified in each of the 4 dose groups (Figure 3A–3D). From these treatment groups, 15 variables were
screened out based on the variable importance of projection
value >0 compared with the vehicle group (Figure 4A–4D).
Compared with the vehicle group, 8 overlapping metabolites
were shared among the 4 dose groups. Figure 5 also shows
that the serum levels of glutamic acid, aspartic acid and serine
increased with increasing DHI dose.

Effect of different doses of DHI on serum amino acid metabolic
pathways
The detailed results from the pathway analysis are shown in
Table 1, and the changing amino acid metabolic pathways
compared with the vehicle and sham groups are illustrated
in Figure S4. The channel number and properties of the
pathways, such as the name of the related pathways, the hits
number and the impact value, were changed in response
to drug intervention according to MetPa and MetaboAnalyst. Compared with the vehicle group, 3, 2, 2 and 5 nonoverlapping metabolic pathways were observed in each of the
4 dose groups; and glycine, serine, threonine metabolism and
histidine metabolism were identified as overlapping pathways
among the 4 dose groups.

Discussion

We performed an HPLC-based metabolomics study in rats
with cerebral ischemia to identify the dose-dependent metabolic mechanism of DHI. The relationship between DHI doses
and amino acid relative peak area values showed that the
serum levels of aspartic acid, glutamic acid, and serine gradually changed with increasing dose.
DH4 had the largest number of variables with a VIP value
>1 (6 variables), and the hits number (number of participating amino acid pathways) and impact value calculated from
pathway topology analysis were also increased compared
with the other dose groups, potentially associated with the
dose variation. Serine, as a principal variable with a VIP value
invariably greater than 3, is a nonessential amino acid derived
from glycine, and serine is highly concentrated in all cell
membranes. Compared with other amino acids, muscle tissue
contains a low-average concentration of serine[24]. Serine and
the products of serine metabolism are not only essential for
cell proliferation, but are also necessary for specific functions
in the central nervous system[25].
The overlapping and non-overlapping pathways among different DHI dose groups might provide information concerning the assembly mechanism of pathway variations. Glycine,
serine, threonine and histidine metabolism were identified as
the common pathways among the 4 dose groups.
As shown in Table 1, the serine metabolic pathway had the
biggest impact value among all other pathways, indicating a
leading role for this amino acid in the metabolic mechanism of
DH in the treatment of cerebral ischemia. Serine metabolism
pathway might be associated with the incidence of cerebral
ischemia[4]. Glycine is involved in the production of DNA,
phospholipids and collagen and the release of energy in the
body. Glycine levels are effectively measured in plasma in
both normal patients and individuals with inborn errors of
glycine metabolism[26]. A wide range of symptoms, from mental and physical retardation to poor intellectual functioning,
emotional instability, tremor, ataxia and psychosis, hallmark
elevated blood histidine[27, 28].
Based on the analysis of the available data, the occurrence
and development of cerebral ischemia involves several abnormal structures and malfunctions[29], indicating that cerebral
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Guo ZL et al

npg
752

Figure 1. Dose-effect relationship of DHI in the treatment of cerebral ischemia. (A) The effect of DHI on cerebral infarct volume. (B) The TTC staining
results of the rat brains in different treatment groups. The rats from each group were decapitated at 24 h after surgery. The 2-mm spacing line coronal
brain slices were incubated in a 2% TTC solution in the dark at 37 °C for 30 min. The TTC images showed the effects of DHI for I/R injury on infarct
volume in MCAO rats. The infarct areas of the sham, vehicle and DHI treatment groups (the two DH1 and DH4 images were randomly selected from all
treatment groups, 1 mL/kg, iv qd and 10 mL/kg, iv qd, respectively) were analyzed through TTC staining. Representative TCC-stained brain sections
obtained at 72 h after MCAO. NO #1–#5 represent the 5 slices of the brain from frontal to occipital. (C–E) Changes in the body weight, neurological
deficit score, and brain index in each group (analysis of variance). Mean±SD, n=6 for vehicle and each of DHI group, and n=9 for sham group. bP<0.05
compared with vehicle.

Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.chinaphar.com
Guo ZL et al

npg
753

Figure 2. Analysis of the metabolic patterns in rat serum using HPLC-FLD and the effect of DHI on the serum metabolism and MCAO. (A, B) NIPLS2D and 3D score plot of the DHI treatment groups compared with vehicle group ( nonlinear iterative partial least squares analysis). (C) The overall
metabolism spectrum for the 20 amino acids in the 4 dose groups in the NIPALS scoring diagram. (D) Quantitative relationship between the relative
peak area values for the amino acids and the DHI doses groups compared with the sham and vehicle groups.
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Guo ZL et al

npg
754

Figure 3. PLS (partial least-squares) loading plot using the NIPALS algorithm.

Table 1. Results of variables screening and related metabolic pathways.
Variable weights and trends
compared with vehicle	

Groups
Vehicle-Sham

Glutamicacid↓, Asparagine↑, Serine↑, Glycine↓,
Threonine↓, Taurine↑, Tyrosine↓, Valine↓,
Ornithine↑, Leucine↓

Vehicle-DH1

Serine↑, Glyine↓, Alanine↑, Glutamic acid↓,
Histidine↓

Vehicle-DH2

Serine↑, Glutamic acid↓, Aspartic acid↓, Glyine↑,
Histidine↓, Alanine↓
Serine↑, Alanine↑, Arginine↑, Glutamic acid↓,
Lysine↑, Glyine↓, Histidine
Serine↑, Glyine↑, Glutamic acid↓,
Arginine↑,
Aspartic acid↓,
Alanine↓,
Histidine↑

Vehicle-DH3
Vehicle-DH4

Related metabolic pathways
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism
Taurine and hypotaurine metabolism
D-Glutamine and D-glutamate metabolism
Arginine and proline metabolism
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism
Alanine, aspartate andglutamatemetabolim
Histidine metabolism
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism
Histidine metabolism
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism
Histidine metabolism
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism
Arginine and proline metabolism
Histidine metabolism
Alanine,aspartate andglutamatemetabolim
Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis

Hits

Impact (↓)

3
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
4

0.42039
0.33094
0.3262
0.12956
0.32378
0.20703
0.13988
0.32378
0.13988
0.6884
0.24194
0.50732
0.40000
0.24194
0.14979
0.12903

The change tendency of corresponding variables compared with the vehicle group. “↑” and “↓” represent the compound is up or down-regulated. And
the properties of the pathways, such as the name of the related metabolic pathways, the hits number and the impact value are listed. Since we are
testing many pathways at the same time, the hits value is the actually matched number from the user uploaded data; and the impact value is the
pathway impact value calculated from pathway topology analysis in particular.

ischemia is a typical multi-pathway and multi-system complex
disease, which is not induced via a single abnormal pathway
or the abnormal expression of a single system[30]. The results
of the present study indicated that the dose-response relationship of DHI might be associated with glycine, serine, threoActa Pharmacologica Sinica

nine, and histidine metabolism; however, further studies are
required to quantitatively confirm this relationship.
The highlights of this study are summarized as follows:
(1) A negative correlation between the DHI dosage and cerebral infarct volume was observed. (2) A total of 5, 6, 7 and 7

www.chinaphar.com
Guo ZL et al

npg
755

Figure 4. The variable importance of the projection of the variables. The colored boxes on the right indicate the relative concentrations of the
corresponding metabolite. (Univariate analysis, including t-test, ANOVA, and linear regression).

non-overlapping metabolites were identified in the 4 dose
groups. (3) A total of 3, 2, 2 and 5 non-overlapping metabolic
pathways were identified in each of the 4 dose groups. (4)
Glycine, serine, threonine and histidine metabolism pathways
overlapped among the 4 dose groups. These findings reveal
the dose-dependent neuroprotective effect of a drug through
overlapping and non-overlapping metabolites and metabolic
pathways, and demonstrate that metabolomics might be a
novel approach to explore the systematic pharmacological
mechanism of reversing complex diseases.

Acknowledgements

This research was funded by the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian, China.

Buchang Pharmaceutical provided the drugs used in this
study. However, the funder played no role in the study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript. The researchers are all independent from the funder. This study was part of the National
Project of New Drug R&D (2011ZX09304).

Author contribution

Zhong WANG and Hong-bin XIAO conceived and designed
the experiments; Zhi-li GUO and Yan ZHU performed the
experiments; Qian-xu YANG, Bing LI, Ya-nan YU, and Yingying ZHANG analyzed the data; Xiao-tao SU, Jing-yi NAN,
Qian-xu YANG, and Ying-ying ZHANG contributed reagents/
materials/analysis tools; Zhi-li GUO wrote the paper; Jun LIU
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

www.nature.com/aps
Guo ZL et al

npg
756

Figure 5. Serine, glutamic acid and aspartic acid show potential
concentration-response relationships within the 8 common metabolites of
the 4 dose groups .

reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the manuscript.

Supplementary information

Supplementary information is available at Acta Pharmacologica Sinica’s website.

References

1	 Sun M, Zhang JJ, Shan JZ, Zhang H, Jin CY, Xu S, et al. Clinical
observation of Danhong Injection (herbal TCM product from Radix
Salviae miltiorrhizae and Flos Carthami tinctorii) in the treatment of
traumatic intracranial hematoma. Phytomedicine 2009; 16: 683–9.
2	 Gao X, Zheng X, Li Z, Zhou Y, Sun H, Zhang L, et al. Metabonomic
study on chronic unpredictable mild stress and intervention effects
of Xiaoyaosan in rats using gas chromatography coupled with mass
spectrometry. J Ethnopharmacol 2011; 137: 690–9.
3	 Zhi XW, Su XM, Feng WY, Zhang HM. Effect and mechanism of DH
injection on isolated mesenteric arterial rings in rats. Zhong guo
Zhong Yao Za Zhi 2012; 37: 2607–11.
4	 Jung JY, Lee HS, Kang DG, Kim NS, Cha MH, Bang OS, et al. 1H-NMRbased metabolomics study of cerebral infarction. Stroke 2011; 42:
1282–8.
5	 He Y, Wan H, Du Y, Bie X, Zhao T, Fu W, et al. Protective effect of
Danhong injection on cerebral ischemia-reperfusion injury in rats. J
Ethnopharmacol 2012; 144: 387–94.
6	 Guan Y, Yin Y, Zhu YR, Guo C, Wei G, Duan JL, et al. Dissection of
mechanisms of a Chinese medicinal formula: danhong injection
therapy for myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury in vivo and in vitro.
Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2013; 2013: 972370.
7	 Liu H, Wang S, Sun A, Huang D, Wang W, Zhang C, et al. Danhong
inhibits oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced immune maturation
of dentritic cells via a peroxisome proliferator activated receptor
gamma-mediated pathway. J Pharmacol Sci 2012; 119: 1–9.
8	 Luo HM, Lu HD, Yu SC. The experimental research of Dan hong
injection effect on promoting angiogenesisand the concentrationresponse relationship. Chin J Integr Med Cardio-Cerebrovasc Dis
2007; 5: 504–7.
9	 Ma XJ, Yin SJ, Jin JC, Wu CF, Huang Y, Shi DZ. Synergistic protection
Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

of DH injection and ischemic post conditioning on myocardial
reperfusion injury in minipigs. Chin J Integr Med 2010; 16: 531–6.
10	 Liu JR, Jensen-Kondering UR, Zhou JJ, Sun F, Feng XY, Shen XL, et
al. Transient filament occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in rats:
does the reperfusion method matter 24 hours after perfusion? BMC
Neurosci 2012; 13: 154.
11	 Dai Y, Li Z, Xue L, Dou C, Zhou Y, Zhang L, et al. Metabolomics study
on the anti-depression effect of xiaoyaosan on rat model of chronic
unpredictable mild stress. J Ethnopharmacol 2010; 128: 482–9.
12	 Yang Q, Shi X, Wang Y, Wang W, He H, Lu X, et al. Urinary meta­
bo­n omic study of lung cancer by a fully automatic hyphenated
hydrophilic interaction/RPLC-MS system. J Sep Sci 2010; 33: 1495–
503.
13	 Zhao X, Zhang Y, Meng X, Yin P, Deng C, Chen J, et al. Effect of a
traditional Chinese medicine preparation Xindi soft capsule on rat
model of acute blood stasis: a urinary metabonomics study based
on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B Analyt
Technol Biomed Life Sci 2008; 873: 151–8.
14	 Liu X, Wu Z, Yang K, Ding H, Wu Y. Quantitative analysis combined
with chromatographic fingerprint for comprehensive evaluation of
Danhong injection using HPLC-DAD. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2013; 76:
70–4.
15	 Cheung BMY, Li C. Diabetes and hypertension: is there a common
metabolic pathway? Curr Atheroscler Rep 2012; 14: 160–6.
16	 Mäkinen VP, Soininen P, Forsblom C, Parkkonen M, Ingman P, Kaski K,
et al. 1H NMR metabonomics approach to the disease continuum of
diabetic complications and premature death. Mol Syst Biol 2008; 4:
167.
17	 Wang PR, Wang JS, Yang MH, Kong LY. Neuroprotective effects of
Huang-Lian-Jie-Du-Decoction on ischemic stroke rats revealed by
1
H NMR metabolomics approach. J Pharm Biomed Anal 2014; 88:
106–16.
18	 Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R. Reversible middle
cerebral-artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 1989;
20: 84–91.
19	 Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski
H. Rat middle cerebral-artery occlusion-evaluation of the model and
development of a neurologic examination. Stroke 1986; 17: 472–6.
20	 Garcia JH, Wagner S, Liu KF, Hu XJ. Neurological deficit and extent of
neuronal necrosis attributable to middle cerebral-artery occlusion in
rats-statistical validation. Stroke 1995; 26: 627–34.
21	 Han XF, Huang YH, Wang LX. Plasma amino acid metabolism spectral
correlation studies associated with diabetes. Chin J Anal Chem 2010;
5: 697–701.
22	 Wang-Sattler R, Yu Z, Herder C, Messias AC, Floegel A, He Y, et al.
Novel biomarkers for pre-diabetes identified by metabolomics. Mol
Syst Biol 2012; 8: 615.
23	 Wang X, Wang H, Zhang A, Lu X, Sun H, Dong H, et al. Metabolomics
study on the toxicity of aconite root and its processed products using
ultraperformance liquid-chromatography/electrospray-ionization
synapt high-definition mass spectrometry coupled with pattern
recognition approach and ingenuity pathways analysis. J Proteome
Res 2012; 11: 1284–301.
24	 Cynober LA. Plasma amino acid levels with a note on membrane
transport: characteristics, regulation, and metabolic significance.
Nutrition 2002; 18: 761–6.
25	 Furuya S, Watanabe M. Novel neuroglial and glioglial relationships
mediated by L-serine metabolism. Arch Histol Cytol 2003; 66: 109–
21.
26	 Christie GR, Ford D, Howard A, Clark MA, Hirst BH. Glycine supply
to human enterocytes mediated by high-affinity basolateral GLYT1.

www.chinaphar.com
Guo ZL et al

npg
757

Gastroenterology 2001; 120: 439–48.
27	 Gerber DA. Low free serum histidine concentration in rheumatoid
arthritis. A measure of disease activity. J Clin Invest 1975; 55:
1164–73.
28	 Hemler RJ, Hoogeveen JH, Kraaier V, Van Huffelen AC, Wieneke GH,
Hijman R, et al. A pharmacological model of cerebral ischemia. The
effects of indomethacin on cerebral blood flow velocity, quantitative
EEG and cognitive functions. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol 1990;
12: 641–3.

29	 Zhang A, Sun H, Dou S, Sun W, Wu X, Wang P, et al. Metabolomics
study on the hepatoprotective effect of scoparone using ultraperformance liquid chromatography/electrospray ionization quadruple
time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Analyst 2013; 138: 353–61.
30	 Feng Z, Sun X, Yang J, Hao D, Du L, Wang H, et al. Metabonomics
analysis of urine and plasma from rats given long-term and lowdose dimethoate by ultra-performance liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry. Chem Biol Interact 2012; 199: 143–53.

Acta Pharmacologica Sinica

