The Journal of Neuroscience, February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111 • 2101

Neurobiology of Disease

Augmentation of M-Type (KCNQ) Potassium Channels as a
Novel Strategy to Reduce Stroke-Induced Brain Injury
Sonya M. Bierbower,1 Frank S. Choveau,1 James D. Lechleiter,2 and Mark S. Shapiro1
Departments of 1Physiology and 2Cellular and Structural Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229

Cerebral ischemic stroke is a worldwide cause of mortality/morbidity and thus an important focus of research to decrease the severity of
brain injury. Therapeutic options for acute stroke are still limited. In neurons throughout the brain, “M-type” K ⫹ currents, underlain by
KCNQ subunits 2–5, play dominant roles in control over excitability, and are thus implicated in myriad neurological and psychiatric
disorders. Although KCNQ channel openers, such as retigabine, have emerged as anti-epilepsy drugs, their effects on ischemic injury
remain unknown. Here, we investigated the protective effects of M-channel openers on stroke-induced brain injury in mouse photothrombotic and middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) models. Both photothrombosis and MCAo led to rapid, predictable, and
consistently sized necrotic brain lesions, inflammatory responses, and behavioral deficits. Administration of three distinct M-channel
openers at 0 – 6 h after ischemic injury significantly decreased brain infarct size and inflammation, and prevented neurological dysfunction, although they were more effective when administered 0 –3 h poststroke. Thus, we show beneficial effects against stroke-induced
brain injury and neuronal death through pharmacological regulation of ion channels that control neuronal excitability.
Key words: ischemia; motor deficits; pathological disease; potassium channel; stroke

Introduction
Cerebrovascular stroke is a leading cause of adult disability (Sidney et al., 2013), with few current options to improve neurological outcomes. Recent advances suggest that stroke is a potentially
treatable disease, leading to interest in developing novel neuroprotective therapeutics. KCNQ2–5 K ⫹ channels underlie neuronal M-currents, which are found ubiquitously in the nervous
system. M-channels are important regulators of neuronal excitability since they stabilize the resting membrane potential, influence neuronal subthreshold excitability, and regulate spike
generation (for a review, see Delmas and Brown, 2005). The inhibition of M-channels is thus excitatory, whereas their greater
activation has an antiexcitatory, silencing effect. For example, the
depression of M-currents turns single-spiking sympathetic neurons into tonically firing cells (Wang and McKinnon, 1995) and
greatly induces spontaneous firing of hippocampal neurons
Received Sept. 10, 2014; revised Nov. 3, 2014; accepted Dec. 15, 2014.
Author contributions: S.M.B., J.D.L., and M.S.S. designed research; S.M.B. performed research; S.M.B., F.S.C.,
J.D.L., and M.S.S. contributed unpublished reagents/analytic tools; S.M.B. and F.S.C. analyzed data; S.M.B. and
M.S.S. wrote the paper.
This research was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Research Service Award
1F32NS079148-01 and NIH Training Grant T32-HL-07446-29 (2010 –2012) awarded to S.M.B; NIH Grants R01-AG007218 to J.D.L.; and NIH National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Grants R01-NS-43394 and R01-NS065138 to M.S.S. We thank Pamela Reed for expert technical assistance. We also thank Shane Sprague and the
Department of Neurosurgery Research Core for their assistance with the middle cerebral artery occlusion experiments.
This paper is in memory of Dr. Herbert Shapiro, late father of M.S.S., who passed away of stroke-related complications in 2012.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Mark S. Shapiro, Department of Physiology/Neuroscience Program,
University of Texas Health Science Center, 8403 Floyd Curl Drive, MS 7756, San Antonio, TX 78229. E-mail:
shapirom@uthscsa.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3805-14.2015
Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/352101-11$15.00/0

(Lawrence et al., 2006). The critical effect of M-channels on neuronal excitability is underscored by epileptic seizures caused by
inherited mutations, or transgenic suppression, of functional
KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 channels in humans or mice, respectively
(Biervert et al., 1998; Singh et al., 1998, 2008; Peters et al., 2005).
In accordance with this, retigabine (RTG), which enhances
M-channels by shifting their voltage dependence to more hyperpolarized membrane potentials, has emerged as a novel anticonvulsant drug (Main et al., 2000; Rundfeldt and Netzer, 2000;
Wickenden et al., 2000; Miceli et al., 2008).
The most common form of stroke, acute ischemic stroke, produces a core area of damaged tissue close to an occluded blood
vessel, which is surrounded by a penumbra of tissue at risk because of low vascular perfusion. These neurons die as a result of
neurotoxic biochemical cascades initiated by reduced energy
stores, failure of the Na ⫹/K ⫹ pump, excess release of excitatory
amino acids, and elevated [Ca 2⫹]I levels, resulting in neuronal
hyperexcitability. Furthermore, excessive production of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), such as superoxide free radicals and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), play critical roles in ischemic injury and
damage, especially in the penumbral zone (Yamato et al., 2003;
Cheng et al., 2004; Sugawara et al., 2004). Intriguingly, M-current
is augmented by ROS such as H2O2 (Boscia et al., 2006; Gamper
and Shapiro, 2006), perhaps representing a homeostatic neurobiological mechanism against cytotoxicity.
Previous work showed RTG and its predecessor, flupertine, to
be neuroprotective during an oxygen/glucose deprivation model
in organotypic hippocampal slices (Boscia et al., 2006; Gamper
and Shapiro, 2006). Whereas that work was exciting, it represents
an “in vitro” system that may not be the case in a living animal.
Thus, we used two in vivo mouse stroke models. We discovered a
cytoprotective role of M-channels during and after ischemic

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

2102 • J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111

stroke, as well as the therapeutic possibility of M-channel openers
against stroke-induced neurological deficits. We show that
M-channel openers exert in vivo neuroprotective actions, which
are most likely due to decreases in ischemia-induced hyperexcitability. We further demonstrate that these neuroprotective actions have a critical “therapeutic window” of drug delivery,
making it a viable acute therapeutic target for the treatment of
ischemic stroke. Finally, M-channel openers also largely prevented the stroke-induced impairment of motor function, thus
limiting behavioral motor deficits.

Materials and Methods
Animals
Male C57BL/6 white albino mice (⬃25 g) were used in our experiments,
given the known significant variation due to gender on stroke outcome in
rodents. All animals were used, and none were eliminated once experiments had started, with only three deaths occurring after surgery. The
mice were randomly allocated to receive drug treatment or vehicle and
underwent stroke induction. Previous experiments indicated that the
variability in infarct size was minimal and thus the power calculation,
used by Zhao et al. (2006), showed that a minimum of eight animals per
group were required to detect with 80% power and an ␣ of 0.05. The age
of the mice ranged from 4 to 6 months and were obtained from Charles
River Laboratories. Mice colonies were bred and housed at the University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio animal facilities under
standard conditions on a 12 h light/dark cycle with food and water available ad libitum. Animal procedures were performed in accordance with
the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, and were in compliance
with the National Institutes of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

Surgical procedures
Focal ischemia by photothrombosis. Mice were initially anesthetized using
3% isoflurane with 100% oxygen and maintained at 1.5% isoflurane,
which was administered through a nosecone. The depth of anesthesia was
carefully monitored and regulated according to vital signs, pinch withdrawal, and eye blinks. Body temperature was maintained at 37°C by a
feedback-controlled heating pad (T/Pump, Gaymar Industries). Their
scalp was shaved and incised down the midline, and the scalp was exposed and cleaned. A stainless steel ring, which was attached to a stereotaxic frame, was glued (VetBond, 3M) to the scalp. A small portion of the
skull, overlaying the somatosensory cortex, was thinned (between ⬃1
and ⬃3 mm from bregma, and 2– 4 mm lateral) using a variable-speed
electric drill (Fine Science Tools), and was further thinned using a surgical blade to a final thickness of ⬃50 ␮m to create the thin-skull cranial
window.
A solution containing 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 2 mM MgCl2,
10 mM glucose, and 26 mM NaHCO3, pH 7.4, was maintained on the
cortical surface. After a cranial window was made, mice were transferred
to the microscope stage and used for induction of a photothrombosis.
After thrombosis, the stainless steel ring was carefully removed from the
skull and the scalp was sutured (6 – 0 silk suture, Ethicon).
Cortical infarcts designed to mimic a human transient ischemic attack
(TIA) were produced by transcranial illumination of focused laser light
onto the surface of the brain of mice tail-vein injected with the photosensitive dye, Rose Bengal (RB). The photochemical reaction of RB activates a tissue factor that triggers an intrinsic coagulation cascade,
producing an ischemic lesion that is pathologically relevant to clinical
stroke. Mice were given a 0.1 ml tail-vein injection of sterilized RB
(Sigma) in aCSF at 20 mg/ml. Arteries were identified by the direction of
blood flow and were followed downstream to locate arterioles. Arterioles
of 20 –30 mm were targeted and exposed to light from a 561-nm laser
through a 0.8 numerical aperture, 40⫻ water-immersion objective
(Nikon) until clot formation and/or after 20 min of light exposure. Mice
were sutured and allowed to recover in an incubator before being returned to their home cages. Drugs were delivered through the tail vein at
different time intervals.

Focal ischemia by middle cerebral artery occlusion and drug delivery.
Infarcts were induced using a temporary left common carotid artery/
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo). The intraluminal monofilament model of middle cerebral artery occlusion involves the insertion of
a surgical filament into the external carotid artery and the threading of
the filament forward into the flow, with subsequent brain infarction in
the MCA perfused area. The suture is removed after 1 h, and reperfusion
is achieved resulting in transient MCAo. Core body temperature was
maintained at 37°C by a heating pad (T/Pump, Gaymar Industries) during ischemia and the first hour of reperfusion. Mice were sutured and
allowed to recover in an incubator before being returned to their home
cages. Drugs were delivered through the tail vein at different time
intervals.

Neuronal lesion evaluation and quantification following stroke
The infarct area after photothrombotic and MCAo stroke models was
determined by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazoluim chloride (TTC) at staining
24 h or 5 d poststroke. Infarct quantification was made by tracing the
infarct zone of a high-contrast image of slices directly scanned with a
high-resolution flatbed scanner (Scanjet G4050, Hewlett-Packard). To
ensure that the same ischemic and normal areas of the brain were available, the same relative slice was used for each brain, and only those brains
that had infarcts extending throughout the thickness of the slice and into
a consecutive slice were included in the study, although only one slice was
used for analysis. All scans were made at 4500 dpi with no color correction or image enhancement. Infarct area calculations (in square millimeters) were conservative in that only a clearly defined absence of TTCstained areas were considered the necrotic core area, and “pink” or more
compromised areas were designated as healthy tissue for the purpose of
analysis. Each slice was measured on the caudal and rostral sides three
times each, and an average area of necrotic death for the slice was calculated using ImageJ software and mosaicJ plug-in. Any areas not clearly
considered part of the necrotic core were measured and subtracted from
the average area to ensure a conservative approach to the measurement of
the necrotic core (found only in the MCAo model). Mice were killed by
cervical dislocation, and their brains were removed and then placed in
ice-cold HBSS for 3 min. The brain was subsequently transferred to a
precision brain slicer, sliced into 1 mm sections, and immersed in 2%
TTC for 5 min at 37°C. The sections were fixed in 10% buffered formaldehyde solution overnight at 4°C. TTC is a colorless dye that stains
healthy brain tissue red when reduced by the mitochondrial enzyme
succinyl dehydrogenase (Bederson et al., 1986). The absence of staining
in necrotic tissue is then used to determine the area of a brain infarction.
TTC staining is a postmortem basic standard in the field and served as
our basic assessment tool for measuring infarct size.

Statistical analysis
All data were analyzed using ImageJ and Systat SigmaPlot version 12.5
software. Quantitative data were expressed as the mean ⫾ SEM. Statistical comparisons were performed by one-way ANOVA followed by pairwise multiple-comparison Holm–Sidak test. Differences with p ⬍ 0.05
were considered to be significant.

Reagents and drug delivery
In control experiments, neither laser illumination nor Rose Bengal injection (20 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) itself led to clot formation. RTG (10.5
mg/kg; AdooQ Bioscience) was coinjected with Rose Bengal into the tail
vein at the time of stroke or at designated varying time points. NH29
(10.0 mg/kg; from Bernard Attali, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel) or
QO-58 (0.01 mg/kg; from Hailin Zhang, Hebei Medical University, Hebei, People’s Republic of China) were coinjected with RB into the tail vein
at the time of stroke or at designated varying time points. The M-channel
blocker XE991 (3.0 mg/kg; Tocris Bioscience) was also coinjected with
RTG and/or RB at the time of the stroke. RTG administered after stroke
was dissolved in aCSF.

SDS-PAGE and Western blotting
Brain tissue samples removed 24 h poststroke were flash frozen and
stored at ⫺80°C until all samples were collected. Samples were homogenized in PBS, and supernatants were collected for 12.5% SDS-PAGE.

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

Five microliters of the homogenized sample was loaded into each well
used. The sample was prepared from taking a 1 ⫻ 1 mm square of tissue
from the penumbral area of the brain slice. Each slice generated two
samples, and, with three mice per experimental condition, there were
therefore a total of six samples. A loading control dose of ␤-actin was
used to ensure that the same amount of protein was used for all treatment
conditions in the Western blot, and the data for CD40L were normalized
to ␤-actin for quantitative measures. The standard BCA protein assay
could not be used since it uses a color development reaction for analysis
and our brain slices were stained with TTC to locate the stroke core and
penumbral areas. Gels were run at 150 V for 90 min and then transferred
to nitrocellulose transfer paper for 45 min at 35 mA. The nitrocellulose
membrane was labeled by a monoclonal anti-CD40 primary antibody
(1:1000; Abcam) overnight at 4°C after three washes with TBS-T. Then
membranes were incubated in goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:
2000; Sigma) for 45 min at room temperature in 5% nonfat milk dissolved in TBS-T, followed by enhanced chemiluminescence (GE
Healthcare). Blots were then washed in TBS-T and put into monoclonal
primary antibody ␤-actin (1:1000; Sigma) and mouse secondary antibody (1:2000; Sigma) for 45 min at room temperature in 5% nonfat milk
dissolved in TBS-T. A total of 96 mice were used with 3 mice used per
experiment.

Neurological deficit behavior assessment
Behavioral tests were performed only on photothrombotic mice due to
profoundly severe motor impairment in MCAo stroked mice. All tests
were performed in a soundproof room with a neutral environment in a
blinded study. The animals were tested 24 h postoperatively.
In the balance beam test (Stanley et al., 2005), mice were trained on a
balance beam (104 cm long ⫻ 1.3 cm wide ⫻ 54.5 cm high) by placing
each mouse on the balance beam at one end and requiring it to traverse
the beam three times in one direction before any surgical experiments
were performed to obtain optimal performance (see Fig. 5B). If the
mouse stopped midway on the beam, it was gently nudged on its
haunches to reinitiate movement during the training phase. Once the
mouse made three complete trips across the beam in a single direction,
three consecutive trials were recorded and scored for behavior. The total
number of foot slips was counted from digital recordings for each trial
and then averaged across the three trials for each mouse. For recording, a
camera was positioned at a slight ventral angle so that all four limbs could
be simultaneously recorded. First, each balance beam test was performed, and then the ladder dexterity test.
In the ladder dexterity test (Metz and Whishaw, 2002), a horizontal
ladder rung walking test apparatus (1 m long ⫻ 3 mm wide ⫻ 19 cm
high) was placed 30 cm above the ground, and the rungs were placed 2 cm
apart from each other (see Fig. 5C). Mice were trained on the ladder by
placing each mouse at one end and requiring them to traverse the ladder
three times in one direction. As described for the balance beam, a mouse
that stopped was gently nudged to reinitiate movement. Once the mouse
made three complete trips during the training phase, three consecutive
trials were recorded and scored for the total number of foot slips, stumbles, and/or falls, which were counted from digital recordings for each
trial, and then averaged across the three trials for each mouse. A camera
was positioned at a perpendicular angle to capture foot slips through the
ladder rungs (see Fig. 5B, red arrow). Experimental groups consisted of
the following: (1) controls (no surgery), (2) sham surgery (skull thinning
and RB injection, but no irradiation), (3) stroke (with RB injection only),
(4) stroke with RTG, (5) stroke with XE991, (6) stroke with NH29, (7)
stroke with QO-58, and (8) stroke with RTG plus XE991 coinjection (see
Fig. 5A). For cohorts 2– 8, each mouse was tested before undergoing the
stroke (or sham stroke). Thus, in addition to the control cohorts for the
experimental animals, each mouse served as its own control.

Results
M-channel openers decrease acute transient cerebral infarcts
in mice
The first aim of our study was to investigate the neural protective
efficacy of M-channel openers against ischemic injury. In those
experiments, we tested the effects of M-channel openers RTG,

J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111 • 2103

NH29, and QO-58, as well as the blocker XE991, on infarct size in
the parietal cortex. All M-channel openers were administered as
single doses, applied at concentrations previously used in other
studies, and predicted to exert a maximal effect on the channels.
Thus, we used a pharmacological approach, which is also more
directly relevant to the clinic. We mostly used the photothrombotic stroke model, which may correlate with TIAs often seen in
humans. This is a minimally invasive technique and, thus, was
our primary in vivo model. In brief, an acute cerebral infarction
was induced in a small region in the mouse parietal cortex by
occluding a blood vessel using the photosensitive dye RB and
laser-induced photothrombosis. The skull of the mouse was
thinned and irradiated with green laser light (561 nm) for ⬃10
min after tail vein injection of RB. When RB is excited, singlet
oxygen molecules that locally damage the blood vessel walls are
formed, which ultimately triggers a thrombosis (Watson et al.,
1985). We used this paradigm to visualize RB-induced cerebral
infarctions. In the photothrombotic stroke model, the infarct size
evolves such that maximal cell death effect is ultimately reached
by 1–2 d after stroke (Braun et al., 1996; Zheng et al., 2010). Given
that RTG can readily cross the blood– brain barrier, free concentrations in the brain are assumed to be those of plasma concentrations. The M-channel drugs used here are assumed to cross the
stroke-induced breakdown of the blood– brain barrier, a disruption that has been shown by earlier studies focused on astrocytes
(Longa et al., 1989; Zheng et al., 2010).
Figure 1 illustrates the effect of M-channel openers and the
blocker XE991 on the lesion sizes of brains removed 24 h after
photothrombotic stroke. M-channel openers administered at the
time of stroke significantly reduced the infarct size (RTG: 1.08 ⫾
0.03 mm 2, p ⫽ 0.001, n ⫽ 8); NH29: 0.98 ⫾ 0.13 mm 2, p ⫽ 0.001,
n ⫽ 5; and QO-58: 0.98 ⫾ 0.24 mm 2, p ⫽ 0.001, n ⫽ 5), compared with the stroke control group (2.00 ⫾ 0.03 mm 2, n ⫽ 5).
On the other hand, the administration of XE991 significantly
enhanced lesion size (3.93 ⫾ 0.32 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6). Coadministration of RTG plus XE991 resulted in a lesion size that
was larger than that of controls (3.93 ⫾ 0.21 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽
6), indicating that the effect of RTG was due to effects on
M-channels. Additionally, NH29 and QO-58 had effects that
were indistinguishable from those of RTG, suggesting that upregulation of M-channels by openers, regardless of the compound, results in reductions in the infarction area induced by
stroke. Thus, simultaneous administration of M-channel openers at the onset of ischemia significantly reduced the infarct area
induced by the photothrombotic stroke.
M-channel openers decrease MCAos in mice
To further investigate the neuroprotective effects of M-channel
openers on lesion size after more severe cerebrovascular events,
we used the catastrophic stroke model, MCAo, which is known
for severe debilitating effects and large areas of cell death. MCAo
is the most frequently used model in translational stroke research
involving catastrophic events resulting in cell death of almost a
full hemisphere (Longa et al., 1989). As indicated in Figure 2, all
three M-channel openers significantly decreased infarct volume
after 60 min of occlusion and then reperfusion with brains removed 24 h poststroke. Infarct size was significantly reduced in
conditions of stroke plus RTG administration (11.7 ⫾ 0.4 mm 2,
p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6), stroke plus NH29 administration (11.0 ⫾ 0.2
mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6), and stroke plus QO-58 administration
(11.6 ⫾ 0.3 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6), compared with the RB-only
control group (16.6 ⫾ 0.2 mm 2, n ⫽ 5). In summary, using the

2104 • J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

Figure 1. M-channel openers decrease acute transient cerebral infarcts in mice. A, Brains were removed 24 h poststroke and stained for live mitochondria at the time of sacrifice, using TTC
staining. Necrotic tissue is identified in each panel (dashed rectangles) as the absence of red staining, indicating non-metabolically active mitochondria at the time of sacrifice. B, Bars show the
average lesion area for stroke control, stroke plus retigabine-treated, stroke plus NH29-treated, stroke plus QO-58-treated, stroke plus XE991-treated and stroke plus RTG plus XE991-treated animals.
Means are calculated from at least five mice for each point. All drugs were injected into the tail vein at the time of the stroke. ***p ⬍ 0.001.

Figure 2. M-channel openers decrease middle cerebral artery occlusion infarcts. A, Images of brains removed and sliced 24 h poststroke and TTC stained from stroke mice, or from those stroked
and injected with RTG, NH29, or QO-58 into the tail vein at the time of the stroke. B, Quantification of lesion size in the MCAo model, with reperfusion after 60 min. Bars show summarized data. N ⫽
8 mice. ***p ⬍ 0.001.

more catastrophic MCAo stroke model, we also showed a significant decrease in necrotic lesion size with the administration of
RTG via the tail vein during reperfusion after a 60 min occlusion,
as well as by administration of the structurally distinct compounds NH29 and QO-58. Thus, increasing the opening of
M-channels results in significant decreases in lesion size after
either a modest or a catastrophic ischemic event. We focused all
further experiments on one channel opener, RTG. The advantage
of using RTG in our studies is that it is available in the clinic in the
U.S. under the trade name ezogabine and, thus, is probably most
directly clinically relevant.

Therapeutic time window of effectiveness for
M-channel openers
The possible clinical relevance of retigabine treatment was investigated by evaluating normalized infarct size following both photothrombotic and MCAo models at 1, 3, or 6 h poststroke, with
brains removed at 24 h poststroke (Fig. 3). Figure 3A shows TTCstained brain slices obtained after either the photothrombotic
(Fig. 3A, top) or the MCAo model (Fig. 3A, bottom). In strokeonly animals, significantly larger infarctions developed when
compared with M-channel opener-treated animals or when RTG
administration was delayed for up to 3 h. Delayed administration

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111 • 2105

Figure 3. Therapeutic time window of effectiveness for M-channel openers. A, Brains were removed 24 h poststroke and stained for live mitochondria at the time of sacrifice, using TTC staining.
Necrotic tissue is identified in each panel (dashed rectangles) as the absence of red staining, indicating non-metabolically active mitochondria at the time of sacrifice. B, Bars show the average lesion
area for photothrombotic stroke, stroke plus retigabine treatment after 1 h, stroke plus retigabine treatment after 3 h, and stroke plus retigabine treatment after 6 h. C, Bars show the average lesion
area for MCAo stroke, stroke plus retigabine treatment after 1 h, stroke plus retigabine treatment after 3 h, and stroke plus retigabine treatment after 6 h. Means are calculated from at least five mice
for each point. D, All drugs were injected into the tail vein at various times after the stroke, as indicated by the arrows. *p ⬍ 0.05, ***p ⬍ 0.001.

of RTG up to 3 h resulted in the same significant reduction in
lesion size response as if it were given at the time of stroke for both
stroke models (Fig. 3 B, C). For the photothrombotic stroke, infarct size was significantly reduced in stroke plus RTG administration at 1 h (0.99 ⫾ 0.07 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 5), stroke plus
RTG administration at 3 h (0.96 ⫾ 0.08 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 5),
and stroke plus RTG administration at 6 h (1.65 ⫾ 0.15 mm 2, p ⫽
0.014, n ⫽ 5), when compared with the control group (2.0 ⫾ 0.1
mm 2, n ⫽ 8). For the MCAo stroke, the infarct size was significantly reduced in stroke plus RTG administration at 1 h (11.1 ⫾
0.7 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 5), stroke plus RTG administration at
3 h (11.3 ⫾ 0.5 mm 2, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 5), and stroke plus RTG
administration at 6 h (15.5 ⫾ 0.2 mm 2, p ⫽ 0.008, n ⫽ 6), when
compared with controls (16.6 ⫾ 0.6 mm 2, n ⫽ 6). For both stroke
models, RTG administered 6 h after the stroke had reduced efficacy compared with RTG administered at 0, 1, or 3 h poststroke,
but still significantly less than control animals, indicating a critical time window closer to 3 h than 6 h. These results suggest that
the impact of RTG on lesion size and brain injury is dependent on
the time of administration. Up to 6 h poststroke, M-channel
openers were neuroprotective for cells in the penumbra region,
whose viability would otherwise be metabolically compromised
and thus would mostly likely not survive.
Photothrombotic clot stability
To test how long after the stroke onset the protective mechanism
of RTG could be observed, experiments were performed to directly measure the size of photothrombotic lesions in brain slices
after 1 and 5 d poststroke (Fig. 4). Consistent with previous experiments shown in this study, we found that RTG administered
immediately after the photothrombosis resulted in significantly
reduced brain infarcts (RTG: 0.93 ⫾ 0.13 mm, p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 5)
when compared with controls (stroke: 2.04 ⫾ 0.11 mm, n ⫽ 5)
and that the reduction in infarct area was still significant in ani-

mals 5 d after photothrombosis (stroke: 2.44 ⫾ 0.34 mm, n ⫽ 5;
RTG: 0.92 ⫾ 0.07 mm, n ⫽ 5; p ⬍ 0.001). Furthermore, the
infarct size was shown to significantly increase from day 1 to day
5 in controls ( p ⫽ 0.008), whereas the infarct size after stroke plus
RTG administration did not significantly change ( p ⫽ 0.485)
over the same time frame. Thus, the clot is stable over time, and
the effect of RTG on lesion size when administered in the therapeutic window shows consistent results.
M-channel opener retigabine modulates CD40L as a cell
injury marker for brain infarcts
CD40 is a 45–50 kDa membrane protein of the tumor necrosis
factor receptor family, which is important in cellular signaling,
and is an early important contributor to tissue necrosis during
acute ischemic infarction, with activation playing a key role in the
inflammatory response. Various immune cells including B lymphocytes, T cells, monocytes, macrophages, and activated platelets have the capability to express CD40, in addition to many
other cell types (Pamukcu et al., 2011). CD40 interaction with its
ligand CD40L has been shown to be involved in inflammation
and thrombosis, as well as to play a crucial role in cellular and
humoral immune responses (Schönbeck et al., 1997). Additionally, CD40 expression can be induced by different proinflammatory stimuli such as IL-1, IL-3, and IL-4, as well as other factors.
They usually appear on the cell surface within 6 –12 h and remain
for 24 –72 h. The role of CD40-CD40L appears to be to induce
endothelial cells to secrete chemokines and express adhesion
molecules at the site of injury, and to recruit leukocytes. In Figure
5, we analyzed Western blots of brain tissue lysates exposed to
anti-CD40 antibodies to measure the amount of CD40L after the
photothrombotic stroke for stroke-only and RTG-treated mice.
Brains were removed 24 h poststroke. We predicted that strokeonly mice would have markedly increased levels of CD40Lexpressing cells compared with control mice, and that this would
correlate with our histological data.

2106 • J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

Figure 4. Photothrombotic clots remain after 5 d. A, Images of brains removed and stained with TTC at 5 d or 24 h poststroke from stroke-only mice or from mice stroked and injected with RTG
into the tail vein at the time of stroke. B, Bars show the average size of lesions at 1 and 5 d after the photothrombotic stroke. Means are calculated from five mice for each time point. *p ⬍ 0.05,
***p ⬍ 0.001. NS, Not significant.

Figure 5A shows Western blot expression of CD40L in which
we can detect clear CD40L-reactive bands at ⬃45 kDa. No
CD40L was detectable in the nonstroked control mice or the
contralateral hemisphere of stroked mice, compared with the
ipsilateral hemisphere of stroke-only and RTG-treated photothrombotically stroked mice. Furthermore, the blot visually
shows that untreated mice had an increased amount of CD40L,
compared with RTG-treated mice for all time points. Quantitative analysis of the band intensity shown in Figure 5B shows that
at 24 h after stroke the amount of CD40L was significantly decreased when RTG is administered during the therapeutic window of 0 h ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6) and 3 h ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6), but was
not significant at 6 h after stroke ( p ⫽ 0.58, n ⫽ 6). Additionally,
when RTG was administered during the 0 – 6 h therapeutic window and levels were sampled periodically over 5 d, there was a
significant difference over time in the CD40L levels when compared with stroke-only animals at the same time points. Quantitative analysis of CD40L band intensity in Figure 5C shows that at
1 d ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6), 3 d ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6), and 5 d ( p ⬍ 0.001,
n ⫽ 6) poststroke the amount of CD40L was significantly reduced
when compared with untreated animals at the same time points.
Thus, pharmacological M-current enhancement ameliorates the
inflammatory response that is central to brain injury after a
stroke.
M-channel openers improves poststroke motor function
in mice
With clear evidence of the efficacy of M-channel openers to reduce infarct size and to moderate the inflammatory response
following strokes, we next probed for corresponding efficacy in
reducing or preventing deficits in motor coordination commonly
experienced after a stroke (Brima et al., 2013). As well accepted
assays for motor coordination, we used the balance beam and
ladder dexterity assays. Since MCAo is a commonly used model
of catastrophic stroke, we attempted to look for a behavioral
deficit after an MCAo event. However, due to the severe nature of
the stroke outcome and the resulting complete inability of the

mouse to perform the tasks on the balance beam and ladder
dexterity tests, we did not use MCAo-stroked mice in behavioral
assays. In many cases, these mice could not traverse the balance
beam without falling off or scale the ladder in the ladder dexterity
test without falling through; consequently, further testing after
MCAo strokes was stopped, and we focused on the photothrombotic stroke model for behavioral testing (Fig. 6). This model has
been shown to produce both motor and cognitive impairments in
many other studies (Brima et al., 2013). Casual observation of the
mice after lesion induction did not reveal any profound behavioral differences. They appeared to be unimpaired in their movements and readily ate after a few hours when placed back into
their original cages. Behavioral testing consisted of watching for
foot slips, defined as mis-steps, on behavioral apparatuses. Figure
6A–C outlines the mouse groups involved in our behavioral testing and shows images of mice performing these two tests.
Balance beam test
To ensure that none of the M-channel openers, or RB, affect
motor coordination on the balance beam test, we first assayed for
behavioral effects before stroke experimentation. We found that
RB only ( p ⫽ 0.504, n ⫽ 10), RTG ( p ⫽ 0.961, n ⫽ 11), NH29
( p ⫽ 0.975, n ⫽ 6), or QO-58 ( p ⫽ 0.972, n ⫽ 6) did not show any
significant difference in behavior, compared with controls. However, mice that were administered either XE991 ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽
8) or XE991 plus RTG ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 10) showed a significant
increase in the average number of mis-steps compared with the
control group, suggesting that hyperexcitability induced by
M-channel blockade itself affects motor coordination.
Next, we examined the effect of drugs on behavioral responses
using the balance beam test after photothrombotic stroke (Fig.
6D). In comparing control mice (no operation or drugs, n ⫽ 16)
with sham mice (operation only, n ⫽ 10), we found no statistical
difference in behavior ( p ⫽ 0.91). However, the stroked mice
displayed much slower progress on the balance beam, with significantly more mis-steps (RB-injection only: p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 8;
Movie 1). Remarkably, stroked mice that were administered

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111 • 2107

Figure 5. The M-channel opener retigabine modulates CD40L as a cell injury marker. A, Western blotting analysis with anti-CD40 was performed to quantify levels of CD40L in infarct plus
penumbra compared with normal contralateral hemispheres. CD40L was used to visualize the ischemic injury response with drug delivery at time points 0, 3, and 6 h poststroke (analysis conducted
24 h after drug delivery), as well as on days 1, 3, and 5 (with drug administered at 0 h). The relative expression of CD40L protein was determined by normalization to ␤-actin. Western blots are
representative of multiple independent experiments. N ⫽ 6. B, Quantitative analysis of CD40 protein normalized to ␤-actin shows significant differences when RTG was administered during the
therapeutic window. C, Quantitative analysis of CD40 protein normalized to ␤-actin of RTG given at 0 h with sampling of CD40L over 5 d shows a significant decrease with RTG administration and
significant changes over time. Line graphs show the relative expression of CD40 protein. The most relevant statistically significant differences are shown between ipsilateral–no drug and
ipsilateral–retigabine time points. All drugs were injected into the tail vein at various designated time points. Data are presented as the mean ⫾ SEM. *p ⬍ 0.05, **p ⬍ 0.01, ***p ⬍ 0.0001.

three different M-channel openers showed no significant differences in behavior, compared with the sham controls (stroke plus
RTG administration: p ⫽ 0.43, n ⫽ 6; stroke plus NH29 administration: p ⫽ 0.72, n ⫽ 6; and stroke plus QO-58 administration:
p ⫽ 0.69, n ⫽ 6), and thus performed significantly better than
stroked mice not administered any of the M-channel openers
(stroke plus RTG administration: p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6; stroke plus
NH29 administration: p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6; stroke plus QO-58 administration: p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6). Indeed, for all three openers, the
performance of the mice on the balance beam was indistinguishable from the controls or shams. Conversely, mice that had undergone stroke plus XE991 administration ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 6) and
stroke plus XE991 plus RTG administration ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 10)
performed very poorly on the balance beam test (Fig. 6D), with
much greater numbers of mis-steps, stumbles, and long hesitations, consistent with fear-like responses (Movie 1).
Ladder dexterity test
To ensure that none of the M-channel openers, or RB, affect
motor coordination on the ladder dexterity test, we first assayed
for behavioral effects before stroke experimentation. We found
that RB only ( p ⫽ 0.504, n ⫽ 10), RTG ( p ⫽ 0.961, n ⫽ 11),

NH29 ( p ⫽ 0.975, n ⫽ 6), or QO-58 ( p ⫽ 0.972, n ⫽ 6) did not
show any significant differences in behavior, compared with controls. However, mice administered either XE991 ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽
8) or XE991 plus RTG ( p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 10) showed a significant
increase in the average number of mis-steps compared with the
control group, suggesting that hyperexcitability induced by
M-channel blockade affects motor coordination.
The findings for the ladder dexterity test were similar to those
seen for the balance beam test after photothrombotic stroke (Fig.
6E). Again, we compared control mice (no drugs, n ⫽ 16) to
sham mice (operation only, n ⫽ 10) and found no statistical
difference in behavior ( p ⫽ 0.98). However, the stroked mice
displayed much slower progress on the balance beam, with significantly more mis-steps, compared with sham controls (RB only: p ⬍
0.001, n ⫽ 8). Remarkably, mice with stroke plus RTG administration ( p ⫽ 0.99, n ⫽ 6), stroke plus NH29 administration ( p ⫽
0.99, n ⫽ 6), and stroke plus QO-58 administration ( p ⫽ 0.99,
n ⫽ 6) again displayed no significant deficits in behavior, compared with the sham controls (Movie 2). Thus, the administration of all three M-channel openers at the time of the stroke
completely prevented deficits in motor coordination resulting
from photothrombotic strokes, and those mice showed a signif-

2108 • J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

Figure 6. M-channelopenerspreservepoststrokemotorfunction.A,Experimentalparadigmandcohortsofmicetobetested.Foreachtest,thecohortswerecontrols(nosurgery);shamsurgery;strokeonly
(nodrugadministration);strokewithRTG,NH29,QO-58,andXE991administration;orstrokewithRTGplusXE991administration.B,Imageofamouseonthebalancebeam,withazoomedviewintheinset.C,
Imageofamouseontheladderdexteritytest,withazoomedviewfromaboveintheinset.Anexampleofamis-stepisindicatedbytheredarrow.D,Summaryofbehavioraldataforthebalancebeamtestresults
ofmicetowhichdrugswereadministered.E,Summaryofbehavioraldatafortheladderdexteritytestresultsofmicetowhichdrugswereadministered.Thenumbersofmicetestedisgivenwithineachbar.The
numberofmis-stepsisdramaticallyincreasedinthemicethatwerenotgivenanM-channelopenerorwerecoinjectedwithRTGplusXE991inbothbehavioralmodels.***p⬍0.001forshamandstrokecomparisons.

Movie 1. Enhancement of neuroprotection in stroked mice correlated with the preservation of
motor functions to prestroke levels on the balance beam behavioral test. The multimedia file shows
movement and foot slips for examples of mice from each cohort that traversed the balance beam.

icant decrease in the average number of mis-steps, compared
with stroke-only mice (stroke plus RTG administration mice: p ⬍
0.001, n ⫽ 6; stroke plus NH29 administration mice: p ⬍ 0.001,
n ⫽ 6; and stroke plus QO-58 administration mice: p ⬍ 0.001,
n ⫽ 6). Conversely, the motor coordination displayed on the

Movie 2. Enhancement of neuroprotection in stroked mice correlated with the preservation of
motorfunctionstoprestrokelevelsontheladderdexteritytest.Themultimediafileshowsmovement
andfootslipsforexamplesofmicefromeachcohortthattraversedtheladderintheladderdexteritytest.

ladder dexterity test of stroked mice given the M-channel blocker
(either with or without RTG) was, again, much worse than that of
the sham controls (stroke plus XE991 administration mice: p ⬍
0.001, n ⫽ 6; stroke plus XE991 plus RTG administration mice:

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke

p ⬍ 0.001, n ⫽ 10; Movie 2). Again, such mice exhibited much
greater numbers of mis-steps, stumbles, and long hesitations,
which is consistent with fear-like responses. Thus, we obtained
the stunning result that M-channel openers wholly ablate deficits
in motor coordination produced by the moderate strokes induced in the photothrombotic model, and that this efficacy is
very likely due to specific actions of the drugs on M-channels.

Discussion
We show that the augmentation of M-channel activity after experimental stroke in mice results in both histologically and functionally neuroprotective outcomes. An obvious improvement
was shown in M-channel opener-treated mice in the reduction of
brain injury and functional impairment. The enhanced protection was less effective when the M-channel openers were used
outside a clearly defined critical period of time (the “therapeutic
window”) and was prevented by M-channel blockade. The in vivo
neuroprotective effects are likely caused by decreased excitotoxicity, which is known to heavily contribute to ischemic cell death.
Our working model assumes that by decreasing the excitability
of, or “silencing,” neurons, we can rescue neurons in the penumbral region that are metabolically compromised but not yet damaged beyond repair. Furthermore, we established that enhanced
neuroprotection correlates with in vivo administration of
M-channel openers in models of both transient ischemic attacks
and more catastrophic strokes. Finally, the enhancement of neuroprotection in stroked mice correlated with complete preservation of motor function. Since lesion size was consistent in the
photothrombotic model, our behavioral test results support our
histological findings.
Other pharmacological interventions specifically targeting
neurons in the brain have failed to demonstrate efficacy in the
clinic for decades. These include drugs targeting the AMPA and
NMDA types of glutamate receptors; Na ⫹, K ⫹, and Ca 2⫹ channels; and GABAA receptor agonists, with most of the failures due
to lack of specificity, unacceptable side effects, or lack of efficacy
in human brain (Donnan et al., 2008). Given the parallel molecular events occurring from seizures and vascular brain injuries,
others have previously hypothesized that antiepileptic drugs to be
efficacious against stroke-induced morbidity as well; however, all
those drugs targeting excitatory ion channels or GABAA receptors have proven to be of marginal use (Calabresi et al., 2003).
Interestingly, hyperexcitability underlies not only the pathophysiology of epileptic seizures, but also of chronic pain (Abogadie et
al., 2002), and M-current openers are under investigation as an
antinociception therapy as well (Miceli et al., 2008; Fleckenstein
et al., 2013).
Despite having different structures, the compounds RTG,
NH29, and QO-58 all had similar effects. The effects of RTG were
blocked when RTG plus XE991 were coadministered, suggesting
that the effects of RTG are mediated by specific actions on
M-channels. Furthermore, doses of RTG at 10 mg/kg (⬃0.05 ␮M)
are within known effective ranges and under the maximally tolerated dose achieved in humans at 20 mg/kg/d (⬃0.1 ␮M;
Gunthorpe et al., 2012). We note that the administration of
XE991 alone at the time of the stroke resulted in an exacerbated
lesion size and behavioral deficits, which is consistent with XE991
causing hyperexcitability (Zaczek et al., 1998) and with proper
M-channel function being critical to neuronal survival. This is
important, because M current is famously depressed by stimulation of Gq/11-coupled receptors, with its namesake muscarinic
(M1) receptors being the most classic. Thus, we predict that cholinergic input to brain regions, such as the hippocampus (which

J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111 • 2109

is also the primary locus of temporal lobe seizures), that are
known to have strong acetylcholine (ACh) release (Cobb and
Davies, 2005; Lawrence et al., 2006) will exacerbate strokeinduced damage via closure of M-channels. Moreover, such cholinergic tone also stimulates excitatory ionotropic nicotinic ACh
receptors, adding to excitotoxicity. It will be interesting to know
whether cholinergic antagonists can have neuroprotective efficacy via these mechanisms.
It is widely accepted that a disruption of GABAergic synaptic
transmission plays a pivotal role in neuronal hyperexcitability
and, specifically, that a decrease of inhibitory responses contributes to the generation of ischemic insults (Pentón-Rol et al.,
2011). Additionally, other studies (Zhou et al., 2008) have suggested that neuroprotection can occur from increased activity of
GABA receptors that inhibits NMDA receptor-mediated nitric
oxide (NO) production by neuronal NO synthase during ischemia. Furthermore, NO was shown to inhibit M-current in
small-diameter trigeminal ganglion neurons, ultimately increasing excitability (Ooi et al., 2013). In the last few years, the role of
excitatory amino acids in ischemic brain injury has become well
established (McCulloch and Iversen, 1991). Glutamate is the
most common excitatory neurotransmitter in the CNS and has
been shown to be released excessively during ischemia (Guyot et
al., 2001). Cerebral ischemia correlates with a rapid increase in
extracellular glutamate, regardless of the primary cause of the
ischemic insult, initiating a sequence of neurochemical events
resulting in neuronal death.
The idea that the augmentation of K ⫹ channels in the brain
could be neuroprotective during strokes has precedent. The compound BMS-204352 targeted Ca 2⫹-sensitive maxi-K and KCNQ
channels with the rationale of preventing pathological hyperexcitability of ischemic neurons, causing high levels of intracellular
Ca 2⫹, but that strategy was ultimately unsuccessful (Gribkoff et
al., 2001). However, that research provided the valuable insight
that drugs causing excessive activation of K ⫹ channels may have
deleterious effects as well significant differences in effects at various dosing levels. Other K ⫹ channels tested in mice using this
strategy have included the “two-pore, leak” (TASK, TRAAK) and
KATP-gated (Kir6; Sun and Feng, 2013) types. For the two-pore
types, inhibition or gene deletion of TASK1 channels, which are
also enhanced by reactive oxygen species, increased the severity of
MCAo strokes (Meuth et al., 2009), whereas gene deletion of
TRAAK decreased the severity (Laigle et al., 2012). A neuroprotective role for Kir6 channels that are opened by depletion of ATP
is logical; however, results suggesting that blockade of these channels by glibenclamide (Simard et al., 2009) actually improves
poststroke outcomes in rats and the severe cross talk with those
channels in the heart cast doubt on the utility of this target. A
thorough study from the Clapham laboratory (Wu et al., 2012)
highlighted voltage-gated proton channels (Hv1) as contributing
to stroke-induced brain injury via participation in NADPH
oxidase-mediated ROS production, and novel Hv1 therapeutics
would indeed be interesting to test. Importantly, in none of these
studies were results from modest stroke models, corresponding
with the ischemic events commonly experienced in people, evaluated, as we do here. KCNQ1, KCNQ4, and KCNQ5 are expressed in vascular smooth muscle, and have been shown to be
potent potential targets against vasoconstriction (Mackie et al.,
2008), including cerebral vasospasm (Mani et al., 2013). Finally,
the same photothrombotic stroke model as used in this study was
used to implicate astrocyte metabolism in providing protection
against brain injury (Zheng et al., 2010, 2013), and combinatorial

2110 • J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111

therapy targeting neurons and astrocytes simultaneously is predicted to be powerfully efficacious in both animals and people.
Early work used a baboon model to show that after the onset
of focal ischemia, measurements of electrical activity uncovered
electrically silent regions, such as the penumbra, that were dysfunctional, but metabolically were not yet dead (Astrup et al.,
1977). Thus, the challenge becomes to either restore adequate
blood flow quickly after vessel occlusion or to protect viable tissue from mechanisms that lead to cell and brain tissue death.
Importantly, although neurological dysfunction occurs immediately seconds to minutes after ischemic insult, the progression of
ischemic injury and cell death continues in stages from minutes
to days. Within the ischemic penumbra, multiple mechanisms
have been identified over the past few decades that lead to irreversibly damaged brain tissue. Early restoration of blood flow by
breakdown of the clot is known to decrease ischemic injury and
this is done through the only Food and Drug Administrationapproved treatment, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA). However, tPA is only used in ⬍10% of patients and not at all after ⬃4
h, since it has been shown to increase the risk of hemorrhage into
the ischemic tissue. Furthermore, tPA may have other risks such
as injury to the blood– brain barrier, activation of matrix metalloproteinases (Wang et al., 2003), and increased excitotoxicity in
some experimental models (Nicole et al., 2001). Thus, combination therapies that ameliorate these effects may extend the therapeutic window of tPA while also mitigating the untoward
effects. In the case of limited blood supply, ischemic cell death
cannot be equated with limited ATP availability only, but rather
tissue death develops as a result of numerous biochemical and
cellular events that further stress the already compromised tissue
(for a review, see Lo, 2008).
More than 20 years of research has focused on discovering and
developing neuroprotective agents that might intervene in the
ischemic cascade. Thus far, no protective agent has been shown to
improve outcome in phase III clinical trials, but newer approaches continue to be investigated. Importantly, relatively few
drugs have been shown to be neuroprotective (decrease infarction), and in fact many are known to cause acute brain edema and
hemorrhagic transformation of the infarct. VEGF has been
shown to aid in recovery (Sun et al., 2003), and purinergic agonists (Zheng et al., 2010) targeting astrocytes have shown rapid
effects. Here, we show a viable option for protection of neuronal
tissue without the additional insults to the already compromised
brain and suggest that neuroprotection through specific openers
of M-type potassium channels does not activate a global potassium channel response that worsens the chaotic poststroke environment. M-channel openers have the potential to reduce brain
injury after modest and severe cerebrovascular events, and to
preserve poststroke motor function, making them strong candidates to be tested for treatment of stroke in the clinic.

References
Abogadie FC, Bron R, Marsh SJ, Drew LJ, Haley JE, Buckley NJ, Brown DA,
Delmas P (2002) Adenovirus-mediated G␣q-protein antisense transfer
in neurons replicates G␣q gene knockout strategies. Neuropharmacology
42:950 –957. CrossRef Medline
Astrup J, Symon L, Branston NM, Lassen NA (1977) Cortical evoked potential and extracellular K⫹ and H⫹ at critical levels of brain ischemia.
Stroke 8:51–57. CrossRef Medline
Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Germano SM, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski
HM (1986) Evaluation of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride as a stain
for detection and quantification of experimental cerebral infarction in
rats. Stroke 17:1304 –1308. CrossRef Medline
Biervert C, Schroeder BC, Kubisch C, Berkovic SF, Propping P, Jentsch TJ,

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke
Steinlein OK (1998) A potassium channel mutation in neonatal human
epilepsy. Science 279:403– 406. CrossRef Medline
Boscia F, Annunziato L, Taglialatela M (2006) Retigabine and flupirtine exert neuroprotective actions in organotypic hippocampal cultures. Neuropharmacology 51:283–294. CrossRef Medline
Braun JS, Jander S, Schroeter M, Witte OW, Stoll G (1996) Spatiotemporal
relationship of apoptotic cell death to lymphomonocytic infiltration in
photochemically induced focal ischemia of the rat cerebral cortex. Acta
Neuropathol 92:255–263. CrossRef Medline
Brima T, Mikulecká A, Otáhal J (2013) Impacts of perinatal induced photothrombotic stroke on sensorimotor performance in adult rats. Physiol Res
62:85–94. Medline
Calabresi P, Cupini LM, Centonze D, Pisani F, Bernardi G (2003) Antiepileptic drugs as a possible neuroprotective strategy in brain ischemia. Ann
Neurol 53:693–702. CrossRef Medline
Cheng YD, Al-Khoury L, Zivin JA (2004) Neuroprotection for ischemic
stroke: two decades of success and failure. NeuroRx 1:36 – 45. CrossRef
Medline
Cobb SR, Davies CH (2005) Cholinergic modulation of hippocampal cells
and circuits. J Physiol 562:81– 88. CrossRef Medline
Delmas P, Brown DA (2005) Pathways modulating neural KCNQ/M (Kv7)
potassium channels. Nat Rev Neurosci 6:850 – 862. CrossRef Medline
Donnan GA, Fisher M, Macleod M, Davis SM (2008) Stroke. Lancet 371:
1612–1623. CrossRef Medline
Fleckenstein J, Sittl R, Averbeck B, Lang PM, Irnich D, Carr RW (2013)
Activation of axonal Kv7 channels in human peripheral nerve by flupirtine but not placebo—therapeutic potential for peripheral neuropathies:
results of a randomised controlled trial. J Transl Med 11:34. CrossRef
Medline
Gamper N, Shapiro MS (2006) Exogenous expression of proteins in neurons using the biolistic particle delivery system. Methods Mol Biol 337:
27–38. CrossRef Medline
Gribkoff VK, Starrett JE Jr, Dworetzky SI, Hewawasam P, Boissard CG, Cook
DA, Frantz SW, Heman K, Hibbard JR, Huston K, Johnson G, Krishnan
BS, Kinney GG, Lombardo LA, Meanwell NA, Molinoff PB, Myers RA,
Moon SL, Ortiz A, Pajor L, et al. (2001) Targeting acute ischemic stroke
with a calcium-sensitive opener of maxi-K potassium channels. Nat Med
7:471– 477. CrossRef Medline
Gunthorpe MJ, Large CH, Sankar R (2012) The mechanism of action of
retigabine (ezogabine), a first-in-class K⫹ channel opener for the treatment of epilepsy. Epilepsia 53:412– 424. CrossRef Medline
Guyot LL, Diaz FG, O’Regan MH, McLeod S, Park H, Phillis JW (2001)
Real-time measurement of glutamate release from the ischemic penumbra of the rat cerebral cortex using a focal middle cerebral artery occlusion
model. Neurosci Lett 299:37– 40. CrossRef Medline
Laigle C, Confort-Gouny S, Le Fur Y, Cozzone PJ, Viola A (2012) Deletion
of TRAAK potassium channel affects brain metabolism and protects
against ischemia. PLoS One 7:e53266. CrossRef Medline
Lawrence JJ, Saraga F, Churchill JF, Statland JM, Travis KE, Skinner FK,
McBain CJ (2006) Somatodendritic Kv7/KCNQ/M channels control interspike interval in hippocampal interneurons. J Neurosci 26:12325–
12338. CrossRef Medline
Lo EH (2008) Experimental models, neurovascular mechanisms and translational issues in stroke research. Br J Pharmacol 153 [Suppl 1]:S396 –
S405. CrossRef
Longa EZ, Weinstein PR, Carlson S, Cummins R (1989) Reversible middle
cerebral artery occlusion without craniectomy in rats. Stroke 20:84 –91.
CrossRef Medline
Mackie AR, Brueggemann LI, Henderson KK, Shiels AJ, Cribbs LL, Scrogin
KE, Byron KL (2008) Vascular KCNQ potassium channels as novel targets for the control of mesenteric artery constriction by vasopressin, based
on studies in single cells, pressurized arteries, and in vivo measurements
of mesenteric vascular resistance. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 325:475– 483.
CrossRef Medline
Main MJ, Cryan JE, Dupere JR, Cox B, Clare JJ, Burbidge SA (2000) Modulation of KCNQ2/3 potassium channels by the novel anticonvulsant
retigabine. Mol Pharmacol 58:253–262. CrossRef Medline
Mani BK, O’Dowd J, Kumar L, Brueggemann LI, Ross M, Byron KL (2013)
Vascular KCNQ (Kv7) potassium channels as common signaling intermediates and therapeutic targets in cerebral vasospasm. J Cardiovasc
Pharmacol 61:51– 62. CrossRef Medline
McCulloch J, Iversen LL (1991) Autoradiographic assessment of the effects

Bierbower et al. • M-Channels Protect Brain after Ischemic Stroke
of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists in vivo. Neurochem Res 16:951–963. CrossRef Medline
Metz GA, Whishaw IQ (2002) Cortical and subcortical lesions impair
skilled walking in the ladder rung walking test: a new task to evaluate foreand hindlimb stepping, placing, and co-ordination. J Neurosci Methods
115:169 –179. CrossRef Medline
Meuth SG, Kleinschnitz C, Broicher T, Austinat M, Braeuninger S, Bittner S,
Fischer S, Bayliss DA, Budde T, Stoll G, Wiendl H (2009) The neuroprotective impact of the leak potassium channel TASK1 on stroke development in mice. Neurobiol Dis 33:1–11. CrossRef Medline
Miceli F, Soldovieri MV, Martire M, Taglialatela M (2008) Molecular pharmacology and therapeutic potential of neuronal Kv7-modulating drugs.
Curr Opin Pharmacol 8:65–74. CrossRef Medline
Nicole O, Docagne F, Ali C, Margaill I, Carmeliet P, MacKenzie ET, Vivien D,
Buisson A (2001) The proteolytic activity of tissue-plasminogen activator enhances NMDA receptor-mediated signaling. Nat Med 7:59 – 64.
CrossRef Medline
Ooi L, Gigout S, Pettinger L, Gamper N (2013) Triple cysteine module
within M-type K ⫹ channels mediates reciprocal channel modulation by
nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species. J Neurosci 33:6041– 6046.
CrossRef Medline
Pamukcu B, Lip GY, Snezhitskiy V, Shantsila E (2011) The CD40-CD40L
system in cardiovascular disease. Ann Med 43:331–340. CrossRef Medline
Pentón-Rol G, Marín-Prida J, Pardo-Andreu G, Martínez-Sánchez G, AcostaMedina EF, Valdivia-Acosta A, Lagumersindez-Denis N, Rodríguez-Jiménez E,
Llópiz-Arzuaga A, López-Saura PA, Guillén-Nieto G, Pentón-Arias E (2011)
C-Phycocyanin is neuroprotective against global cerebral ischemia/reperfusion
injury in gerbils. Brain Res Bull 86:42–52. CrossRef Medline
Peters HC, Hu H, Pongs O, Storm JF, Isbrandt D (2005) Conditional transgenic suppression of M channels in mouse brain reveals functions in
neuronal excitability, resonance and behavior. Nat Neurosci 8:51– 60.
CrossRef Medline
Rundfeldt C, Netzer R (2000) Investigations into the mechanism of action
of the new anticonvulsant retigabine. Interaction with GABAergic and
glutamatergic neurotransmission and with voltage gated ion channels.
Arzneimittelforschung 50:1063–1070. CrossRef Medline
Schönbeck U, Mach F, Bonnefoy JY, Loppnow H, Flad HD, Libby P (1997)
Ligation of CD40 activates interleukin 1beta-converting enzyme
(caspase-1) activity in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells and
promotes elaboration of active interleukin 1beta. J Biol Chem 272:19569 –
19574. CrossRef Medline
Sidney S, Rosamond WD, Howard VJ, Luepker RV (2013) The “heart disease
and stroke statistics—2013 update” and the need for a national cardiovascular surveillance system. Circulation 127:21–23. CrossRef Medline
Simard JM, Yurovsky V, Tsymbalyuk N, Melnichenko L, Ivanova S, Gerzanich V (2009) Protective effect of delayed treatment with low-dose glibenclamide in three models of ischemic stroke. Stroke 40:604 – 609.
CrossRef Medline
Singh NA, Charlier C, Stauffer D, DuPont BR, Leach RJ, Melis R, Ronen GM,
Bjerre I, Quattlebaum T, Murphy JV, McHarg ML, Gagnon D, Rosales
TO, Peiffer A, Anderson VE, Leppert M (1998) A novel potassium channel gene, KCNQ2, is mutated in an inherited epilepsy of newborns. Nat
Genet 18:25–29. CrossRef Medline
Singh NA, Otto JF, Dahle EJ, Pappas C, Leslie JD, Vilaythong A, Noebels JL,
White HS, Wilcox KS, Leppert MF (2008) Mouse models of human
KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 mutations for benign familial neonatal convulsions

J. Neurosci., February 4, 2015 • 35(5):2101–2111 • 2111
show seizures and neuronal plasticity without synaptic reorganization.
J Physiol 586:3405–3423. CrossRef Medline
Stanley JL, Lincoln RJ, Brown TA, McDonald LM, Dawson GR, Reynolds DS
(2005) The mouse beam walking assay offers improved sensitivity over
the mouse rotarod in determining motor coordination deficits induced
by benzodiazepines. J Psychopharmacol 19:221–227. CrossRef Medline
Sugawara T, Fujimura M, Noshita N, Kim GW, Saito A, Hayashi T,
Narasimhan P, Maier CM, Chan PH (2004) Neuronal death/survival
signaling pathways in cerebral ischemia. NeuroRx 1:17–25. CrossRef
Medline
Sun HS, Feng ZP (2013) Neuroprotective role of ATP-sensitive potassium
channels in cerebral ischemia. Acta Pharmacol Sin 34:24 –32. CrossRef
Medline
Sun Y, Jin K, Xie L, Childs J, Mao XO, Logvinova A, Greenberg DA (2003)
VEGF-induced neuroprotection, neurogenesis, and angiogenesis after focal cerebral ischemia. J Clin Invest 111:1843–1851. CrossRef Medline
Wang HS, McKinnon D (1995) Potassium currents in rat prevertebral and
paravertebral sympathetic neurones: control of firing properties. J Physiol
485:319 –335. CrossRef Medline
Wang X, Lee SR, Arai K, Lee SR, Tsuji K, Rebeck GW, Lo EH (2003) Lipoprotein receptor-mediated induction of matrix metalloproteinase by tissue plasminogen activator. Nat Med 9:1313–1317. CrossRef Medline
Watson BD, Dietrich WD, Busto R, Wachtel MS, Ginsberg MD (1985) Induction of reproducible brain infarction by photochemically initiated
thrombosis. Ann Neurol 17:497–504. CrossRef Medline
Wickenden AD, Yu W, Zou A, Jegla T, Wagoner PK (2000) Retigabine, a
novel anti-convulsant, enhances activation of KCNQ2/Q3 potassium
channels. Mol Pharmacol 58:591– 600. CrossRef Medline
Wu LJ, Wu G, Akhavan Sharif MR, Baker A, Jia Y, Fahey FH, Luo HR, Feener
EP, Clapham DE (2012) The voltage-gated proton channel Hv1 enhances brain damage from ischemic stroke. Nat Neurosci 15:565–573.
CrossRef Medline
Yamato M, Egashira T, Utsumi H (2003) Application of in vivo ESR spectroscopy to measurement of cerebrovascular ROS generation in stroke.
Free Radic Biol Med 35:1619 –1631. CrossRef Medline
Zaczek R, Chorvat RJ, Saye JA, Pierdomenico ME, Maciag CM, Logue AR, Fisher BN,
Rominger DH, Earl RA (1998) Two new potent neurotransmitter release enhancers, 10,10-bis(4- pyridinylmethyl)-9(10H)-anthracenone and 10,10-bis(2fluoro-4- pyridinylmethyl)-9(10H)-anthracenone: comparison to linopirdine.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther 285:724–730. Medline
Zhao J, Kobori N, Aronowski J, Dash PK (2006) Sulforaphane reduces infarct volume following focal cerebral ischemia in rodents. Neurosci Lett
393:108 –112. CrossRef Medline
Zheng W, Watts LT, Holstein DM, Prajapati SI, Keller C, Grass EH, Walter
CA, Lechleiter JD (2010) Purinergic receptor stimulation reduces cytotoxic edema and brain infarcts in mouse induced by photothrombosis by
energizing glial mitochondria. PLoS One 5:e14401. CrossRef Medline
Zheng W, Talley Watts L, Holstein DM, Wewer J, Lechleiter JD (2013)
P2Y1R-initiated, IP3R-dependent stimulation of astrocyte mitochondrial
metabolism reduces and partially reverses ischemic neuronal damage in
mouse. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 33:600 – 611. CrossRef Medline
Zhou C, Li C, Yu HM, Zhang F, Han D, Zhang GY (2008) Neuroprotection
of gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor agonists via enhancing neuronal
nitric oxide synthase (Ser847) phosphorylation through increased neuronal nitric oxide synthase and PSD95 interaction and inhibited protein
phosphatase activity in cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Res 86:2973–2983.
CrossRef Medline

