European Journal of Neuroscience, Vol. 41, pp. 965–975, 2015

doi:10.1111/ejn.12830

CLINICAL AND TRANSLATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE

Deficiency of Factor VII activating protease alters the
outcome of ischemic stroke in mice
A. U. Joshi,1,2 C. Orset,3 B. Engelhardt,4 E. Baumgart-Vogt,5 T. Gerriets,6 D. Vivien3 and S. M. Kanse1,7
1

Institute for Biochemistry, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany
Chemical & Systems Biology, School of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
3
 de Caen
Inserm, Inserm UMR-S U919, Serine Proteases and Pathophysiology of the Neurovascular Unit, Universite
Basse-Normandie, GIP Cyceron, Caen, France
4
Theodor Kocher Institute, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
5
Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany
6
Department of Neurology, Justus-Liebig-University, Giessen, Germany
7
Institute for Basic Medical Sciences, University of Oslo, Sognvannsveien 9, Oslo 0372, Norway
2

Keywords: apoptosis, hypoxia, inflammation, stroke, thrombosis

Abstract
Factor VII activating protease (FSAP) is a circulating protease with a putative role in hemostasis, remodeling and inflammation. A
polymorphism giving rise to low proteolytic activity has been associated with an increased risk of stroke and carotid stenosis. To
date, no in vivo studies or mechanistic information is available to explain these results. Based on the polymorphism data we
hypothesize that a lack of endogenous FSAP will increase the severity of stroke. Stroke was induced by applying thrombin in the
middle cerebral artery in wild-type (WT) and FSAP/ mice. Increased stroke volume and worsened neurological deficit were
observed in FSAP/ mice. Raised levels of FSAP protein were detected in the infarcted area of WT mice together with
enhanced leukocyte infiltration and apoptosis in FSAP/ mice. There was a concomitant increase in the activation of the NFjB
pathway and decrease in expression of the PI3K/AKT pathway proteins. At a cellular level, FSAP increased cell survival and
decreased apoptosis in primary cortical neurons and astrocytes exposed to tPA/NMDA excitotoxicity or oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD)/reoxygenation, respectively. This was mediated via the PI3K/AKT pathway with involvement of the protease activated
receptor-1. To corroborate the human epidemiological data, which link FSAP with stroke, we now show that the lack of FSAP in
mice worsens the outcome of stroke. In the absence of FSAP there was a stronger inflammatory response and lower cell survival
due to insufficient activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway.

Introduction
Factor VII activating protease (FSAP) is an extracellular circulating
serine protease thought to be involved in the regulation of hemostasis, inﬂammation and remodeling (Kanse & Etscheid, 2011). It circulates in human plasma at a concentration of 180 nM as an inactive
zymogen and is activated by factors released by dead cells such as
histones, nucleosomes and nucleic acids (Stephan et al., 2011;
Yamamichi et al., 2011). A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP),
Marburg I polymorphism, G534E (Marburg I, MI), exists in the
FSAP-encoding gene, which results in an exchange of an amino
acid in the protease domain. About 5% of Caucasians are carriers of
this SNP and in genetic epidemiological studies this MI-SNP has
been associated with an increased risk of stroke (Trompet et al.,
2011) as well as late complications of carotid stenosis (Willeit et al.,
2003). The odds ratio for stroke was 1.52 (1.05–2.19), P = 0.026,
in heterozygous subjects and 4.44 (1.42–13.90), P = 0.010, in
Correspondence: Dr S. M. Kanse, 7Institute for Basic Medical Sciences, as above.
E-mail: sandip.kanse@medisin.uio.no
Received 22 October 2014, revised 8 December 2014, accepted 10 December 2014

homozygous subjects, suggesting a gene dosage effect (Trompet
et al., 2011). Recently, we observed that FSAP antigen and activity
in plasma were elevated in patients with ischemic stroke (Hanson
et al., 2012). Based on these human studies a role for FSAP in the
pathogenesis of stroke has been postulated.
Ischemic stroke can ensue through changes in the pro-thrombotic
status of the vessel wall because of atherosclerosis or due to changes
in the propensity of the blood to coagulate. On the basis of current
information, FSAP could be involved in either of these processes.
FSAP is known to inﬂuence Factor VII (FVII) and pro-urokinase
(uPA) activation (Romisch, 2002) as well as inactivation of tissue
factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) (Kanse et al., 2012a). In mouse
models in vivo, FSAP has a prothrombotic effect (Subramaniam
et al., 2014). Thereby, it can potentially inﬂuence both coagulation
and ﬁbrinolysis. Human atherosclerotic plaques are associated with
increased FSAP expression that is related to monocyte inﬁltration
(Parahuleva et al., 2008). FSAP also inﬂuences pathways related to
inﬂammation and remodeling, including endothelial permeability via
protease activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) (Mambetsariev et al., 2010),
generation of anaphylatoxins C5a and C3a (Kanse et al., 2012b),

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd

966 A. U. Joshi et al.
and the regulation of leukocyte adhesion and transmigration (Parahuleva et al., 2013). In vivo mouse studies show that exogenously
applied FSAP can inhibit neointima formation in a mouse model of
vascular injury (Sedding et al., 2006) and that FSAP/ mice are
more prone to liver ﬁbrosis (Borkham-Kamphorst et al., 2013). Thus,
FSAP is an enzyme with seemingly broad substrate speciﬁcity and
based on the in vitro data it is difﬁcult to ascertain its role in stroke.
If the MI-SNP increases the predisposition to stroke we hypothesize that a lack of endogenous FSAP will increase the severity of
stroke. Thus, we have tested FSAP/ mice in a model of ischemic
stroke. We found that the outcome of stroke in these mice was
worse compared to wild-type (WT) mice and that this was related to
increased inﬂammation and apoptosis in the infarcted brain regions.
These results were further consolidated by the ﬁndings that FSAP
could activate the phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K)/AKT survival
pathway in astrocytes and neurons via the PAR-1 receptor. Thus,
we provide evidence for the involvement of a novel circulating factor in stroke and deﬁne the mechanisms involved.

Materials and methods
Materials
The preparation of FSAP and Phe–Pro–Arg chloromethylketone
(PPACK)-inactivated FSAP from human plasma has been described
previously (Roedel et al., 2013). The following reagents were
obtained from vendors – tissue plasminogen activator (tPA;
Actilyse; Boehringer Ingelheim, Ingelheim, Germany); 2-morpholin4-yl-8-phenylchromen-4-one (LY294002) and wortmannin (Cell
Signaling Technology, Frankfurt, Germany); PAR-1 antagonist
SCH79797 (Tocris Bioscience; Ellisville, MO, USA).

measured before the injection of alpha-thrombin (100% baseline)
and measured during the next 60 min during clot stabilization.
Thrombin-induced in situ clot formation was associated with a dramatic and sustained reduction in the local cerebral blood velocity
(Orset et al., 2007). Laser speckle perfusion imaging of the brain
was performed before surgery and 24 h after surgery using moorFLPI2, full-ﬁeld laser perfusion imager (Moor Instruments, Axminster, UK) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as
described previously (Manwani et al., 2014). In brief, complete
hemispheres were used to evaluate the relative cerebral perfusion
and the imaging was set up at a display rate of 25 Hz and time constant of 1 s, with a camera exposure time of 4 ms.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 24 h after
stroke on a dedicated 7T MR small animal imaging system (ClinScan;
Bruker, Ettlingen, Germany). The image protocol comprised T2weighted imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). Planimetric
measurements of MRI images (IMAGEJ software; National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) were performed and used to calculate
lesion volumes, which were corrected for brain edema as described by
Gerriets et al. (2004). To account for variations in brain size, we
determined infarct volumes as a percentage of the contralateral hemisphere. Magnetic resonance angiographies were performed using a
two-dimensional time-of-ﬂight sequence (Gauberti et al., 2014).
Neurological evaluation was assessed by a blinded operator 24 h
after induction of ischemia and scored on a six-point scale according
to the modiﬁed Bederson’s test: 0 = no apparent deﬁcit; 1 = contralateral forelimb ﬂexion; 2 = decreased grip of contralateral forelimb
grip while tail pulled; 3 = spontaneous movement in all directions,
contralateral circling only if pulled by tail; 4 = spontaneous contralateral circling; 5 = no movement (Masada et al., 2001).
Immunohistochemical analyses

Animals
All experiments were performed in accordance with French ethical
laws (act no. 87–848) and European Communities Council Directives of 24 November 1986 (86/609/EEC) regarding guidelines for
the care and use of laboratory animals and were approved by
Comite d’Ethique Normandie en Matiere d’Experimentation Animale (N/03-01-13/03/01-18). Male C57/BL6J (Janvier, France) and
FSAP/ mice (Borkham-Kamphorst et al., 2013) (B6129S5Habp2tm1Lex) backcrossed for at least 10 generations on the C57/
BL6J background were housed in the same room.
Induction of ischemic stroke and downstream analysis
Mice were anesthetized with 5% isoﬂurane and, thereafter, maintained with 2.5% isoﬂurane in a 70/30% mixture of NO2/O2. Middle
cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion was induced by thrombin-mediated
thrombus formation, as described by Orset et al. (2007). Brieﬂy, a
small craniotomy was performed and the dura mater was excised to
expose the MCA. A micropipette was introduced into the lumen of
the MCA and 2 lL (1.5 U) of puriﬁed murine alpha-thrombin
(Haematologic Technologies, Essex Junction, VT, USA) was
injected to induce the formation of a clot. Ten minutes after injection the clot had stabilized and the micropipette was removed. After
surgery the incision wound was sutured. Rectal temperature was
maintained at 37  0.5 °C throughout the surgical procedure. All
operations were performed by a surgeon in a blinded fashion. Cerebral blood velocity was determined by laser Doppler ﬂowmetry
using a ﬁberoptic probe (Oxford Optronix, Abingdon, UK) glued to
the skull in the MCA territory. Cerebral blood velocity was

Mice were perfused through the left ventricle with phosphatebuferred saline (PBS) followed by 4% (w/v) paraformaldehyde
(PFA). Brains were post-ﬁxed in 4% PFA overnight at 4 °C and
cryoprotected in 30% (w/v) sucrose in PBS. After snap freezing in
Tissue-Tek OCT Compound (Sakura Finetek Europe B.V, Flemingweg, the Netherlands), the embedded brains were cut into 6-lm
frontal sections using a Leica CM3050 cryotome taken between
bregma 1.6 and 1.3 mm. Sections were then exposed to PBS containing 0.3% (w/v) Triton X-100 and 10% (v/v) normal goat serum
to block non-speciﬁc antibody binding, followed by incubation with
the primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight (n = 6 each). Sections
were then incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody at
room temperature for 1 h. Control sections from each animal were
prepared for immunohistochemical staining in an identical manner
except that the primary antibodies were omitted. The following antibodies were used: rat anti-mouse CD68 (1 : 50) (SeroTec, Oxford,
UK), and rabbit polyclonal anti-FSAP antibody (1 : 200) kindly
provided by M. Etscheid (Paul Ehrlich Institute, Langen, Germany).
For analysis of FSAP staining in the brain, images were analysed
using IMAGEJ to quantify the channel-speciﬁc ﬂuorescence.
SDS-PAGE and Western blot analyses
Plasma or tissue extracts were separated by 10 or 12% SDS-PAGE
under non-reducing conditions. Proteins were transferred onto PVDF
membrane (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and probed with primary
antibodies. Bound antibodies were detected using horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Dako, Glostrup,
Denmark) and an enhanced chemiluminescence detection system

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

FSAP and ischemic stroke 967
A

B

C

D

E

Fig. 1. Comparison of post-stroke outcome in FSAP/ and WT mice. (A) Longitudinal serial T2-weighted images for WT and FSAP/ mice 24 h after
stroke indicating the infarcted area. (B) Infarct volumes represented as percentage of the contralateral hemisphere as measured by MRI, (C) functional neural
deﬁcit at 24 h and (D) relative reperfusion at 24 h as measured by Laser speckle ﬂowmetry. (E) Bar graph showing the mean cortical baseline perfusion (CBFFlux) of WT compared with FSAP/ mice before (pre) stroke induction and 24 h after stroke. Data are represented as mean  SD in sham group (n = 5) mice
and stroke group (n = 11 mice). Data from B and D were analysed with unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test; Data from C and E were evaluated with the
Mann–Whitney U-test. *P < 0.05.

(Amersham-Pharmacia, GE Healthcare, Germany). Blots were reprobed for either the plasma protein ceruloplasmin or GAPDH or bactin as appropriate. The following primary antibodies were used:
rabbit polyclonal phospho-Akt (Ser473), rabbit polyclonal total Akt,
rabbit polyclonal phospho-p38 MAPK (1 : 500), rabbit polyclonal
total p38 MAPK, rabbit polyclonal c-fos, rabbit polyclonal GAPDH
and rabbit polyclonal b-actin (1 : 2000) (all Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit polyclonal total IjBa, mouse monoclonal Bcl-2, rabbit
polyclonal p53 and mouse monoclonal phospho-IjBa (1 : 500) (all
Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); and rabbit polyclonal ceruloplasmin (1 : 2000) (Dako). All antibodies were used at
1 : 1000 dilution unless stated otherwise.
Isolation and culture of mouse neurons
Primary cultures of cortical neurons were prepared from fetal mice
[embryonic day (E)15–E16] as described previously (Roussel et al.,
2011). In brief, dissociated cortical cells were resuspended in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5%
(v/v) fetal calf serum (FCS), 5% (v/v) horse serum and 1 mM glutamine, and plated dishes coated with poly-D-lysine (0.1 mg/mL) and
laminin (0.02 mg/mL). After 3 days in vitro the cells were exposed
to 10 lM Ara-C to inhibit glial proliferation and used after 14 days.
Cultures from three different isolations were stained with neuronal
nuclei antibody (anti-NeuN, MAB377; Millipore) and 95% of the
cells were identiﬁable as neurons.

Isolation and culture of mouse astrocytes
Primary astrocytes were prepared as described by Enzmann et al.
(2013). Brieﬂy, cortices from 1-day-old mouse pups were aseptically
removed, minced, dissociated by trypsinization and maintained in
DMEM supplemented with 20% (v/v) FCS and penicillin/streptomycin. Fourteen days after plating, the ﬂasks were shaken for 15–18 h
at 37 °C to remove oligodendroglial and microglial cells. The
remaining cells were identiﬁed by glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein
(GFAP) immunohistochemical staining (anti GFAP, MAB360; Millipore). In total, 95% of the cells were found to be GFAP-positive.
Cortical astrocytes were incubated under 1% O2, 5% CO2 at 37 °C
(oxygen glucose deprivation, OGD) in a CO2 incubator (Innova
CO-48; New Brunswick Scientiﬁc, Enﬁeld, CT, USA) for 6 h in
glucose-free medium followed by 20% O2, 5% CO2 at 37 °C (reoxygenation) in glucose-containing medium. For normoxic controls,
cells were exposed to serum-free medium during the OGD period
and thereafter this medium was changed with reoxygenation medium. FSAP and other test substances were added during the reoxygenation phase of the experiment.
Apoptosis assays
Caspase 3 and 7 activities were measured using a Caspase 3/7
system according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Promega, Madison,
WI, USA). The results were expressed as fold change in Caspase

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

968 A. U. Joshi et al.
A

B

D

E

C

Fig. 2. FSAP levels are elevated after stroke. (A) Representative image from mouse brain showing FSAP immunostaining (n = 5 mice). (B) Intensity of FSAP
ﬂuorescence was measured by IMAGEJ and plotted as fold change compared with WT Sham. (C) Representative western blot for FSAP and ceruloplasmin in
mouse plasma. (D) Intensity of FSAP signal as measured by densiometry and normalized to ceruloplasmin. (E) Circulating FSAP activity in mouse plasma.
Data are represented as mean  SD in sham group (n = 5) mice and stroke group (n = 11 mice). Data from B, D and E were analysed with unpaired two-tailed
Student’s t-test; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.

3/7 activity compared with control. DNA fragmentation by terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling
(TUNEL) assay was performed with the ﬂuorescein in situ cell death
detection kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA strand breaks were labeled with digoxigenin-deoxy-UTP using terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT,
0.18 U/lL). The incorporation of nucleotides into the 30 -OH end of
damaged DNA was detected with an anti-digoxigenin–ﬂuorescein
antibody. Negative control slides were incubated in the absence of
TdT.

Statistical analysis
For statistical analysis, GRAPHPAD PRISM version 5.1 software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used. For the in vivo studies,
after testing for Gaussian distribution with the D’Agostino and Pearson omnibus normality test, data were analysed using either the
unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test or non-parametric Mann–Whitney U-test. Analysis of immunohistochemistry images was
performed using one way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparison test. For the in vitro studies, one-way ANOVA and posthoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test was used.

Cell viability assays
Cell death was quantiﬁed by measurement of the activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) released from damaged cells into the
supernatant with a Roche Diagnostics kit. In addition, cytotoxicity
was also quantiﬁed by measurement of the reduction of 3-(4, 5dimethylthiazol-2-yl) 2, 5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT)
(Sigma Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) to produce a dark blue
formazan product. This assay assesses the integrity of mitochondrial function.

Results
Lack of endogenous FSAP alters the outcome of stroke
The development of ischemic stroke in FSAP/ mice was investigated in a model that depends on the induction of thrombosis in the
MCA by microinjected thrombin, which would bypass any potential
effects of FSAP on the process of thrombus development. Animals
were analysed 24 h later for infarct volumes and reperfusion using

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

FSAP and ischemic stroke 969
A

B

C

D

Fig. 3. Increased leukocyte inﬁltration, microglial activation and apoptosis in FSAP/ mice after stroke. (A) Representative images of CD68 immunostaining
of mouse infarcted region of the brain in WT and FSAP/ mice after sham or 24 h after stroke. (B) Percentage of CD68-positive cells was calculated in at
least three sections per mouse (n = 5 mice). (C) TUNEL staining of mouse brain tissue in WT and FSAP/ mice after sham or stroke after 24 h. (D) The
number of TUNEL-positive cells was quantiﬁed and amount expressed as a percentage of the total number of cells. Data represented as mean  SD (n = 5
mice). One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test: *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.

MRI. Infarct region in all animals was restricted to the cortical part of
the brain. The lesion volume extended from the anterior (position +3.2
from bregma) to the posterior brain (4.8 mm from bregma) with a
distribution that was homogeneous between animals (Fig. 1A). Infarct
volumes were signiﬁcantly higher at 24 h in FSAP/ mice compared
with WT mice (Fig. 1A and B). Using non-invasive MRI, we calculated the mean angiography score to evaluate embolism in the larger
arteries, which revealed no difference between the WT and FSAP/
mice at 24 h. The MRI angiogram also revealed no difference in the
cerebral vasculature of the WT and FSAP/ mice at 24 h after the
infarction (data not shown).
Next, we investigated if the increased tissue damage in FSAP/
mice was also functionally relevant by determining post-stroke neural function. The performance of FSAP/ mice was signiﬁcantly
worse compared with WT mice as determined by higher frequencies
in spontaneous contralateral circling and lack of any movement
(Fig. 1C). Using laser speckle ﬂowmetry, we evaluated the relative
reperfusion in both hemispheres after ischemic stroke. There was no
signiﬁcant difference in the relative cerebral reperfusion before
stroke and 60 min and 24 h after stroke onset in WT and FSAP/
mice, indicating that FSAP deﬁciency did not alter the course of
thrombosis and spontaneous endogenous ﬁbrinolysis (Fig. 1D and
E). Cerebral blood ﬂow velocity, before and after induction of
stroke, and resting arterial blood pressure as well as blood cell

counts were identical in both strains of mice (data not shown).
Hence, compared with WT mice, the lack of FSAP leads to a poor
outcome after stroke and this is not related to differences in thrombosis, ﬁbrinolysis, blood pressure or blood ﬂow.
FSAP levels are elevated after stroke
It is known that plasma proteins cross the blood–brain barrier following ischemia reperfusion injury due to alteration in barrier integrity.
We observed increased FSAP staining in the WT mice in the infarcted
region (Fig. 2A and B), but no FSAP mRNA was detected in the
brains of these mice (data not shown). FSAP staining was co-localized
to a large extent with the neuronal marker NeuN. Circulating levels of
FSAP protein (Fig. 2C and D) increased substantially as did its activity after stroke as compared with sham operated mice (Fig. 2E).
No FSAP staining, circulating antigen or activity were detected in
FSAP/ mice. Thus, stroke-induced loss of barrier function allows
FSAP to enter the extravascular space and interact with resident cells.
Alterations in microglia/macrophages, apoptosis as well as
associated signaling pathways in FSAP/ mice
Stroke progression is known to rely on the activation and recruitment of immune cells to the infarcted region (Iadecola & Anrather,

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

970 A. U. Joshi et al.
inﬂammation. Akt activation is one of the principal factors that prevents apoptosis in many cellular systems. It has been previously
reported that tPA/N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) excitotoxicity
induces a decrease in Akt phosphorylation and that this is a key pathway in mediating neuronal cell survival (Liu et al., 2004; Guo et al.,
2011). Western blot analysis of Akt phosphorylated at serine 473 in
brain extracts of WT and FSAP/ 24 h after stroke (Fig. 4) showed
that this was signiﬁcantly down-regulated in the stroke-affected hemisphere of FSAP/ mice. Pro-apoptotic p53 expression after ischemic
stroke is also a prominent marker of the extent of cell injury (Vaseva
et al., 2012). p53 was increased and the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 was
decreased in the stroke-affected hemisphere of FSAP/ mice as compared with WT mice but no such change was observed for phosphop38 MAPK (Fig. 4). The nuclear proto-oncogene c-fos is activated by
various physiological stimuli and noxious insults in the brain. Elevated c-fos levels were also observed in the FSAP/ mice. Furthermore, FSAP deﬁciency increased phospho-IjBa, indicating a greater
inﬂammatory response in FSAP/ mice as compared with WT after
stroke (Fig. 4). Thus, multiple approaches show that the poor outcome after stroke in FSAP/ mice was associated with increased
inﬂammation and decreased cell survival.

A

B

FSAP protects mouse primary cortical neurons from
excitotoxic cell death and apoptosis

Fig. 4. Altered expression of signaling proteins associated with Akt survival
and NFjB pathway in brains of WT and FSAP/ mice. (A) Western blot
analysis was performed in lysates from brains 24 h after infarction; contralateral (CL) hemispheres were compared with stroked/ipsilateral (IL) hemispheres. pAkt, total Akt, Bcl-2, p53, phospho p38, total p38, c-fos, phospho
IjBa, total IjBa and GAPDH were analysed. (B) Intensity of pAkt, phospho
p38 and phospho IjBa signal was normalized to total Akt, total p38 and
total IjBa, respectively, and the intensity of Bcl-2, p53 and c-fos was normalized to GAPDH. Data are given as fold change compared with WT-CL
samples, mean  SD (n = 6 mice). One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
multiple comparison test. *P < 0.05. Only signiﬁcant differences between
WT-IL and FSAP/-IL or WT-CL and WT-IL are indicated.

2011). To compare the activation of microglia in FSAP/ mice, we
performed immunohistochemistry using anti-CD68 as a marker for
phagocytotic microglia and macrophages. The total number of
CD68-positive macrophages/microglia increased to a signiﬁcantly
greater extent in the ischemic core of FSAP/ mice compared with
WT mice (Fig. 3A and B). Ischemia followed by reperfusion causes
cell death and apoptosis in the infarcted region and therefore we
measured these using TUNEL labeling. The number of TUNELpositive cells was markedly increased in FSAP/ mice as compared
with WT mice (Fig. 3C and D).
To further consolidate these observations we also measured
intracellular signaling pathways associated with cell survival and

We hypothesized that FSAP may inﬂuence some aspect of neuronal or
astrocyte function in the context of stroke. As these cells did not
express any endogenous FSAP we subjected these cells to deleterious
conditions mimicking stroke in the presence of exogenously added
FSAP protein. These included excitotoxic as well as ischemia-reperfusioninjury. The effect of FSAP on survival of neurons in a model of
excitotoxicity induced by exposure of neurons to NMDA (12.5 lM) in
the presence of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) (20 lg/mL) was
tested as described before (Roussel et al., 2011). NMDA and tPA produced acute cell swelling followed by cell death, as measured by the
release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in the supernatant. The concomitant presence of FSAP (50–100 nM) prevented neuronal death by
56% as measured by LDH release (Fig. 5A and C). We also performed cell viability assays based on a mitochondrial function test and
found that FSAP improved cell viability 1.8-fold under these conditions (Fig. 5B and D). The effect of FSAP was concentration-dependent (Fig. 5C and D) and the enzymatic activity of FSAP was
required for this effect (data not shown). Next, we checked if the
increased survival of the cells was related to the process of apoptosis
by measuring the enzymatic activity of caspase-3/7 as well as TUNEL
staining. The presence of FSAP blocked the tPA/NMDA-mediated
activation of caspase-3/7 (Fig. 5E) as well as reducing TUNEL-positive apoptotic cells (Figs 5G and 5F). Thus, using different methods
to detect apoptosis and cell death we could conﬁrm a cyto-protective
effect of FSAP on neurons.
In view of the differences in Akt phosphorylation in vivo, we
also tested whether FSAP can modulate this pathway in the in vitro model system. Inhibition of phosphorylation of Akt on Ser473
in neurons after tPA/NMDA challenge (Fig. 6A and B) was
reversed by FSAP, indicating that FSAP is able to activate the
Akt signaling pathway. As it has been previously reported that
tPA/NMDA induces p53 activation (Liu et al., 2004), we investigated if FSAP had any effect on p53 induction. FSAP reduced
p53 levels in excitotoxic neurons (Fig. 6A and C). FSAP treatment also increased Bcl-2 protein expression (Fig. 6A and D)
indicating a pro-survival signaling pathway comprising Akt/p53/
Bcl-2.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

FSAP and ischemic stroke 971
A

C

B

D

E

F

G

Fig. 5. Effect of FSAP on neurons subjected to tPA/NMDA-mediated excitotoxicity. Mouse neurons were treated with NMDA (12.5 lM) and/or tPA (20 lg/
mL) for 24 h in the presence or absence of FSAP (100 nM) and cell death was measured by determining LDH release (A) and viability as measured by a mitochondrial function (MTT) test (B). Concentration- dependent effect of FSAP as quantiﬁed by LDH assay (C) and MTT reduction assay (D). LDH activity and
MTT reduction were expressed as a percentage of control of untreated cells. (E) Caspase-3 activity in cells 12 h after tPA/NMDA in the presence or absence of
FSAP. (F) The percentage of TUNEL-positive cells in the absence or presence of FSAP. (G) Representative ﬂuorescent TUNEL (green)/DAPI (blue) staining in
neurons 24 h after tPA/NMDA treatment in the presence or absence of FSAP (scale bar, 50 lm). In all experiments FSAP was added simultaneously with tPA
and/or NMDA. Mean  SD, n = 5 independent cultures performed in duplicate. One-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test. *P < 0.05
**P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 indicate statistically signiﬁcant differences.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

972 A. U. Joshi et al.
A

C

tested if PAR-1 was involved in the FSAP-mediated neuroprotection. SCH 79797, a selective non-peptide PAR-1 receptor antagonist,
blocked FSAP-mediated neuroprotection as measured by LDH
release and MTT assay (Fig. 6F and H, respectively). Akt phosphorylation in the presence of FSAP was also inhibited by PI3K- and
PAR-1-inhibitor (data not shown). A similar pattern was also seen
when neurons were subjected to OGD/reoxygenation injury (data
not shown), further conﬁrming the validity of these observations.

B

D

FSAP decreases cell death and apoptosis after OGD/
reoxygenation in astrocytes

E

G

Astrocytes play an important role in maintaining neuronal function
and survival in the event of a stroke (Desagher et al., 1996; Chen &
Swanson, 2003; Pastor et al., 2009) and thus we also tested the
effect of FSAP on their survival and apoptosis. Mouse primary cortical astrocytes in culture were exposed to OGD (6 h) followed by
24 h of reoxygenation. Treatment with FSAP prevented cell death
in in this model as measured by LDH release (Fig. 7A) and mitochondrial function assay (Fig. 7B) in a concentration-dependent
manner. FSAP was also able to activate the PI3K/Akt signaling
pathway (Fig. 7C and F). The PI3K inhibitors LY294002 and wortmannin blocked FSAP-mediated phosphorylation of Akt as well as
FSAP-mediated cell survival (Fig. 7G and H). FSAP reduced p53
expression (Fig. 7D and F) and increased Bcl-2 protein (Fig. 7E and
F) in astrocytes exposed to OGD/reoxygenation. A PAR-1 receptor
antagonist was able to block the FSAP-mediated effect, as measured
by LDH release and MTT assay (Fig. 7I and J).Thus, FSAP could
prevent cell death by activating the PI3K/Akt pathway in a PAR-1dependent manner. The anti-apoptotic effect of FSAP was dependent
on its proteolytic activity, given that it was inhibited by the serine
protease inhibitors PPACK and aprotinin (data not shown). Thus,
astrocyte survival was also promoted by FSAP in a speciﬁc manner.

F

H

Discussion
Fig. 6. FSAP protects neurons from tPA/NMDA excitotoxicity via the Akt
pathway. Mouse neurons were treated with NMDA (12.5 lM) and/or tPA
(20 lg/mL) for 2 h in the presence or absence of FSAP (100 nM) and Western blots for pAkt (Ser473), total Akt, p53, Bcl-2 and b-actin were performed. Intensity of pAkt signal was normalized to total Akt (B). Intensity of
p53 (C) and Bcl-2 (D) was normalized to b-actin. Data are presented as fold
change over untreated controls. Survival of neurons 24 h after tPA/NMDA
exposure in the presence or absence of FSAP (100 nM), LY294002 (LY,
10 lM) and Wortmannin (WO, 0.5 lM) was measured using (E) an LDH
release assay and (G) an MTT reduction assay. LY294002 and Wortmannin
were added to the culture 1 h before tPA/NMDA treatment. Survival of neurons 24 h after tPA/NMDA exposure in the presence or absence of FSAP
and SCH 79797 (5 lM) was measured using (F) an LDH release assay and
(H) an MTT reduction assay. SCH 79797 was added to the culture 20 min
before tPA/NMDA treatment. LDH activity and MTT reduction were
expressed as a percentage of control of untreated cells. Mean  SD, n = 4
independent cultures performed in duplicate. One-way ANOVA and post-hoc
Tukey’s multiple comparison test. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 indicate
statistically signiﬁcant differences.

To further reinforce these ﬁnding we tested the effect of speciﬁc
PI3K inhibitors LY294002 and Wortmannin. These inhibitors
blocked FSAP-mediated neuronal survival after tPA/NMDA exposure as measured by LDH release (Fig. 6E) and an MTT reduction
assay (Fig. 6G). These data suggest that FSAP’s protective effects
are modulated through the PI3K/Akt pathway. Furthermore, because
it had been previously reported that FSAP could signal through the
PAR-1 receptor on endothelial cells (Mambetsariev et al., 2010), we

The MI-SNP of the FSAP encoding gene leads to low proteolytic
activity in the resulting protein and it has been shown to be a risk
factor for carotid stenosis (Willeit et al., 2003) and stroke (Trompet
et al., 2011). To further advance this ﬁeld of research, we now provide corroborating in vivo evidence as well as more mechanistic
insight into the role of FSAP in stroke. In a mouse model of stroke
the lack of endogenous FSAP led to a poor outcome and this was
associated with higher inﬂammation and lower cell survival. At a
cellular level, astrocyte and neuronal cell survival was promoted by
FSAP in a PAR-1/PI3K/AKT-dependent manner.
Because the lack of endogenous FSAP protects against thrombosis (Subramaniam et al., 2014), any model of stroke that relies on
the initiation of coagulation in situ would have a confounding effect
on the results. To bypass the inﬂuence of FSAP on stroke via
modulating thrombosis and hemostasis we used a model of stroke
that would be less inﬂuenced by this pathway. The direct application
of thrombin into the artery would disrupt the blood–brain barrier via
PAR-1 (Cheng et al., 2014), activate platelets and initiate coagulation directly independently of the extrinsic initiation pathway. Thus,
coagulation is initiated downstream of FVII and TFPI where FSAP
is thought to be involved. In this model there is no secondary
micro-thrombosis and the ﬁbrin-rich clot is spontaneously lysed by
the endogenous ﬁbrinolytic system (Orset et al., 2007). At 24 h the
perfusion of brains in WT and FSAP/ mice showed no differences, indirectly indicating that ﬁbrinolysis was similar in both
strains of mice. Also, in this model the main evolution of lesion

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

FSAP and ischemic stroke 973
A

G

B

H
C

D

I

E

J
F

Fig. 7. FSAP reduces cell death in astrocytes after OGD/reoxygenation via the PI3K/AKT pathway. LDH release (A) and MTT reduction (B) were quantiﬁed
in astrocytes subjected to OGD and treated with FSAP (0–100 nM) for 24 h during the re-oxygenation phase. LDH activity and MTT reduction were expressed
as a percentage of control of untreated cells. A similar experiment was performed except that after 2 h reoxygenation, in the presence or absence of FSAP, cell
extracts were prepared and subjected to Western blot analysis for pAkt, total Akt, p53, Bcl-2 and b-actin (C). The intensity of the pAkt signal was measured by
densitometry and normalized to total Akt and represented as a fold change over untreated cells. The intensity of p53 (D) and Bcl-2 (E) signal was normalized
to b-actin and fold change was calculated as described above. (F) Representative Western blots. Survival of astrocytes 24 h after OGD/reoxygenation in the
presence or absence of FSAP (100 nM), LY294002 (10 lM) or Wortmannin (0.5 lM) was measured using an LDH release assay (G) and MTT reduction assay
(H). LY294002 (LY) and Wortmannin (WO) were added to the culture supernatant 1 h before OGD (black bars). Survival of mouse cortical astrocytes 24 h
after reoxygenation in the presence or absence of FSAP (100 nM) and SCH 79797 (5 lM) was measured using an LDH release assay (I) and MTT reduction
assay (J). Mean  SD, n = 5 independent cultures performed in duplicate. LDH activity and MTT reduction was expressed as a percentage of control of
untreated cells. One-way ANOVA and post-hoc Tukey’s multiple comparison test. **P < 0.01 and ***P < 0.001 indicate statistically signiﬁcant differences.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

974 A. U. Joshi et al.
occurs during the ﬁrst 6 h and maximum lesion size is attained at
24 h (Montagne et al., 2012). We observed that FSAP/ mice had
larger infarctions compared with WT mice 24 h after stroke and this
correlated signiﬁcantly with worsened neurological deﬁcit. Thus, a
lack of FSAP in a mouse model worsens the outcome of stroke.
Future studies are needed to characterize the time course of the
changes in ﬁbrinolysis, lesion formation and functional recovery in
more detail.
It has been reported that circulating levels of nucleosomes and
plasma DNA correlate with stroke severity (Rainer et al., 2003; Geiger et al., 2006). As the zymogen form of FSAP is activated by
these factors, we analysed the plasma from WT and FSAP/ mice
for FSAP activity. Signiﬁcantly elevated levels of FSAP antigen and
activity were observed in the circulation of WT mice 24 h after
stroke although the ratio of activity to antigen remained constant.
These results correlated well with the clinical observations wherein
FSAP antigen and activity levels were elevated after ischemic stroke
(Hanson et al., 2012). Presumably, stroke is associated with a signal
that leads to higher FSAP expression in the liver, its main production site.
It has been well established that plasma proteins can enter the
extravascular space in the brain after stroke due to altered permeability of the blood–brain barrier (Ito et al., 1979). FSAP immunostaining was detected in the infarcted regions of WT mouse brains
but not in FSAP/ mice. However, no mRNA for FSAP could be
measured, suggesting that FSAP is not produced locally by any of
the cell types present at these sites but is rather taken up by cells or
bound to cells. We have shown previously that the cellular uptake
of FSAP is more effective if FSAP forms complexes with serine
protease inhibitors (Muhl et al., 2007; Wygrecka et al., 2007). Thus,
it is plausible that stroke-mediated alteration in permeability allows
the passage of FSAP into extravascular space.
Increased presence of CD68-positive cells and higher phosphorylation of IjBa in the brains of FSAP/ mice imply that FSAP is a
negative regulator of inﬂammation. This is similar to our ﬁnding in
these mice in the context of liver ﬁbrosis, where we also found a
higher inﬁltration of inﬂammatory cells in FSAP/ mice. Furthermore, in human liver ﬁbrosis we found that FSAP expression correlated inversely with the expression of many chemokines and
chemokine receptors that govern recruitment of monocytes, T cells
and B cells (Borkham-Kamphorst et al., 2013). In contrast, the in
vitro data suggest that FSAP is a proinﬂammatory factor as it activates the NFjB pathway in macrophages (Parahuleva et al., 2013)
and releases the anaphylatoxins C5a and C3a (Kanse et al., 2012b).
It is possible that the in vitro data do not recapitulate the complex
pathways operating in vivo with regard to FSAP. This discrepancy,
and also the mechanism of the anti-inﬂammatory effects in vivo,
needs to be addressed in future studies.
Commitment of cells to apoptosis is the result of the integration
of various stress signals and survival pathways. Akt is a serine/threonine kinase that plays a critical role in the modulation of cell
development, growth and survival, and its expression in the brain
increases in response to cellular stress or injury. Phosphorylation at
residues Ser473 and Thr308 by PI3K leads to the activation of Akt
(Datta et al., 1999) which in turn inactivates components of the
apoptotic machinery, including BAD and Caspase 9, as well as upregulates Bcl-2 levels (Datta et al., 1999). The p53 tumor suppressor
protein is an essential component of signaling pathways responding
to various forms of cellular stress, such as DNA damage, deregulated oncogene expression and hypoxia. Decreased phospho-Akt,
increased p53 and decreased Bcl-2 in the infarcted region of
FSAP/ mice suggest that this pathway is inﬂuenced by endoge-

nous FSAP in vivo. These ﬁndings could be recapitulated in vitro in
cultured astrocytes and neurons. Overstimulation of neurons with
NMDA and tPA caused acute excitotoxic trauma and increased
apoptosis, consistent with the previous reports (Guo et al., 2011). In
vitro, FSAP prevented these changes by phosphorylating Akt, reducing p53 levels and increasing Bcl-2, which leads to cellular protection. Use of PI3K and PAR-1 inhibitors conﬁrmed that this pathway
was activated by FSAP. Similarly, FSAP was also able to protect astrocytes against OGD/reoxygenation injury, which further strengthens the validity of these observations.
With respect to its functional proﬁle, FSAP has some similarities to
activated protein C (APC), which is an anticoagulant serine protease
and also activates a cytoprotective pathway in the brain via PAR-1.
Through detailed structure–function studies, mutants of APC have
been generated that do not exhibit anti-coagulant functions but are cytoprotective (Guo et al., 2009). Although research on FSAP is in its
infancy and application of exogenous FSAP may cause thrombosisrelated complications, in the future it may be possible to engineer
mutants of FSAP with enhanced cytoprotective effects.
Based on the current state of knowledge we suggest that stroke
causes tissue damage that leads to the release of intranuclear molecules such as histones, nucleosomes and nucleic acids. These then
activate FSAP that has crossed the blood–brain barrier as a result of
a loss of barrier function. Upon conversion into an active protease,
FSAP can inhibit inﬂammation and it can stimulate a protective
pathway in neurons and astrocytes and thus limit the extent of cell
damage. This is a direct cellular effect of FSAP and is independent
of its effects on the coagulation and ﬁbrinolysis pathways. As
MI-SNP carriers have low FSAP activity, the tendency to have a
stroke with more severe consequences may be increased. This
concept needs to be further consolidated by using MI-SNP
FSAP-expressing mice as well as by over-expressing FSAP in
FSAP-deﬁcient mice to reverse the phenotype.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG) and grants from the Excellence Cluster in Cardiopulmonary Sciences
(ECCPS), Behring R€
ontgen Stiftung (BRS) and Helse Sør-Øst (to S.M.K.).
We thank Drs Karin Hersemeyer and Lienhard Schmitz for their expert assistance.

Abbreviations
AKT, protein kinase B; APC, activated protein C; FSAP, factor VII activating protease; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MCA, middle cerebral artery;
MTT, 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide; NeuN,
neuronal nuclei; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartate; OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation; PAR, protease activated receptor; PI3K, phosphoinositide 3-kinase;
PPACK, D-phenylalanyl-L-prolyl-L-arginine chloromethyl ketone; tPA, tissue
plasminogen activator; TUNEL, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP
nick end labeling.

References
Borkham-Kamphorst, E., Zimmermann, H.W., Gassler, N., Bissels, U., Bosio, A., Tacke, F., Weiskirchen, R. & Kanse, S.M. (2013) Factor VII activating protease (FSAP) exerts anti-inﬂammatory and anti-ﬁbrotic effects in
liver ﬁbrosis in mice and men. J. Hepatol., 58, 104–111.
Chen, Y. & Swanson, R.A. (2003) Astrocytes and brain injury. J. Cerebr.
Blood F. Met., 23, 137–149.
Cheng, Y., Xi, G., Jin, H., Keep, R.F., Feng, J. & Hua, Y. (2014) Thrombin-induced cerebral hemorrhage: role of protease-activated receptor-1.
Transl. Stroke Res., 5, 472–475.
Datta, S.R., Brunet, A. & Greenberg, M.E. (1999) Cellular survival: a play
in three Akts. Gene. Dev., 13, 2905–2927.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

FSAP and ischemic stroke 975
Desagher, S., Glowinski, J. & Premont, J. (1996) Astrocytes protect neurons
from hydrogen peroxide toxicity. J. Neurosci., 16, 2553–2562.
Enzmann, G., Mysiorek, C., Gorina, R., Cheng, Y.J., Ghavampour, S., Hannocks, M.J., Prinz, V., Dirnagl, U., Endres, M., Prinz, M., Beschorner, R.,
Harter, P.N., Mittelbronn, M., Engelhardt, B. & Sorokin, L. (2013) The
neurovascular unit as a selective barrier to polymorphonuclear granulocyte
(PMN) inﬁltration into the brain after ischemic injury. Acta Neuropathol.,
125, 395–412.
Gauberti, M., Martinez de Lizarrondo, S., Orset, C. & Vivien, D. (2014)
Lack of secondary microthrombosis after thrombin-induced stroke in mice
and non-human primates. J. Thromb. Haemost., 12, 409–414.
Geiger, S., Holdenrieder, S., Stieber, P., Hamann, G.F., Bruening, R., Ma, J.,
Nagel, D. & Seidel, D. (2006) Nucleosomes in serum of patients with
early cerebral stroke. Cerebrovasc. Dis., 21, 32–37.
Gerriets, T., Stolz, E., Walberer, M., Muller, C., Kluge, A., Bachmann, A.,
Fisher, M., Kaps, M. & Bachmann, G. (2004) Noninvasive quantiﬁcation
of brain edema and the space-occupying effect in rat stroke models using
magnetic resonance imaging. Stroke, 35, 566–571.
Guo, H., Singh, I., Wang, Y., Deane, R., Barrett, T., Fernandez, J.A., Chow,
N., Grifﬁn, J.H. & Zlokovic, B.V. (2009) Neuroprotective activities of
activated protein C mutant with reduced anticoagulant activity. Eur. J.
Neurosci., 29, 1119–1130.
Guo, H., Barrett, T.M., Zhong, Z., Fernandez, J.A., Grifﬁn, J.H., Freeman,
R.S. & Zlokovic, B.V. (2011) Protein S blocks the extrinsic apoptotic
cascade in tissue plasminogen activator/N-methyl D-aspartate-treated neurons via Tyro3-Akt-FKHRL1 signaling pathway. Mol. Neurodegener., 6,
13.
Hanson, E., Kanse, S.M., Joshi, A., Jood, K., Nilsson, S., Blomstrand, C. &
Jern, C. (2012) Plasma factor VII-activating protease antigen levels and
activity are increased in ischemic stroke. J. Thromb. Haemost., 10, 848–
856.
Iadecola, C. & Anrather, J. (2011) The immunology of stroke: from mechanisms to translation. Nat. Med., 17, 796–808.
Ito, U., Ohno, K., Nakamura, R., Suganuma, F. & Inaba, Y. (1979) Brain
edema during ischemia and after restoration of blood ﬂow. Measurement
of water, sodium, potassium content and plasma protein permeability.
Stroke, 10, 542–547.
Kanse, S.M. & Etscheid, M. (2011) Factor VII activating protease. Single
nucleotide polymorphisms light the way. Hamostaseologie, 31, 174–176,
177–178.
Kanse, S.M., Declerck, P.J., Ruf, W., Broze, G. & Etscheid, M. (2012a) Factor VII-activating protease promotes the proteolysis and inhibition of tissue
factor pathway inhibitor. Arterioscl. Throm. Vas., 32, 427–433.
Kanse, S.M., Gallenmueller, A., Zeerleder, S., Stephan, F., Rannou, O.,
Denk, S., Etscheid, M., Lochnit, G., Krueger, M. & Huber-Lang, M.
(2012b) Factor VII-activating protease is activated in multiple trauma
patients and generates anaphylatoxin C5a. J. Immunol., 188, 2858–2865.
Liu, D., Cheng, T., Guo, H., Fernandez, J.A., Grifﬁn, J.H., Song, X. &
Zlokovic, B.V. (2004) Tissue plasminogen activator neurovascular toxicity
is controlled by activated protein C. Nat. Med., 10, 1379–1383.
Mambetsariev, N., Mirzapoiazova, T., Mambetsariev, B., Sammani, S., Lennon,
F.E., Garcia, J.G. & Singleton, P.A. (2010) Hyaluronic acid binding protein 2
is a novel regulator of vascular integrity. Arterioscl. Throm. Vas., 30, 483–490.
Manwani, B., Friedler, B., Verma, R., Venna, V.R., McCullough, L.D. &
Liu, F. (2014) Perfusion of ischemic brain in young and aged animals: a
laser speckle ﬂowmetry study. Stroke, 45, 571–578.
Masada, T., Hua, Y., Xi, G., Ennis, S.R. & Keep, R.F. (2001) Attenuation of
ischemic brain edema and cerebrovascular injury after ischemic preconditioning in the rat. J. Cerebr. Blood F. Met., 21, 22–33.
Montagne, A., Hebert, M., Jullienne, A., Lesept, F., Le Behot, A., Louessard, M.,
Gauberti, M., Orset, C., Ali, C., Agin, V., Maubert, E. & Vivien, D. (2012)
Memantine improves safety of thrombolysis for stroke. Stroke, 43, 2774–2781.
Muhl, L., Nykjaer, A., Wygrecka, M., Monard, D., Preissner, K.T. & Kanse,
S.M. (2007) Inhibition of PDGF-BB by factor VII-activating protease

(FSAP) is neutralized by protease nexin-1, and the FSAP-inhibitor complexes are internalized via LRP. Biochem. J., 404, 191–196.
Orset, C., Macrez, R., Young, A.R., Panthou, D., Angles-Cano, E., Maubert,
E., Agin, V. & Vivien, D. (2007) Mouse model of in situ thromboembolic
stroke and reperfusion. Stroke, 38, 2771–2778.
Parahuleva, M.S., Kanse, S.M., Parviz, B., Barth, A., Tillmanns, H., Bohle,
R.M., Sedding, D.G. & Holschermann, H. (2008) Factor seven activating
protease (FSAP) expression in human monocytes and accumulation in
unstable coronary atherosclerotic plaques. Atherosclerosis, 196, 164–171.
Parahuleva, M.S., Maj, R., Holschermann, H., Parviz, B., Abdallah, Y., Erdogan, A., Tillmanns, H. & Kanse, S.M. (2013) Regulation of monocyte/
macrophage function by factor VII activating protease (FSAP). Atherosclerosis, 230, 365–372.
Pastor, M.D., Garcia-Yebenes, I., Fradejas, N., Perez-Ortiz, J.M., Mora-Lee,
S., Tranque, P., Moro, M.A., Pende, M. & Calvo, S. (2009) mTOR/S6
kinase pathway contributes to astrocyte survival during ischemia. J. Biol.
Chem., 284, 22067–22078.
Rainer, T.H., Wong, L.K., Lam, W., Yuen, E., Lam, N.Y., Metreweli, C. &
Lo, Y.M. (2003) Prognostic use of circulating plasma nucleic acid concentrations in patients with acute stroke. Clin. Chem., 49, 562–569.
Roedel, E.K., Schwarz, E. & Kanse, S.M. (2013) The factor VII-activating
protease (FSAP) enhances the activity of bone morphogenetic protein-2
(BMP-2). J. Biol. Chem., 288, 7193–7203.
Romisch, J. (2002) Factor VII activating protease (FSAP): a novel protease
in hemostasis. Biol. Chem., 383, 1119–1124.
Roussel, B.D., Mysiorek, C., Rouhiainen, A., Jullienne, A., Parcq, J.,
Hommet, Y., Culot, M., Berezowski, V., Cecchelli, R., Rauvala, H.,
Vivien, D. & Ali, C. (2011) HMGB-1 promotes ﬁbrinolysis and reduces
neurotoxicity mediated by tissue plasminogen activator. J. Cell Sci.,
124, 2070–2076.
Sedding, D., Daniel, J.M., Muhl, L., Hersemeyer, K., Brunsch, H., KemkesMatthes, B., Braun-Dullaeus, R.C., Tillmanns, H., Weimer, T., Preissner,
K.T. & Kanse, S.M. (2006) The G534E polymorphism of the gene encoding the factor VII-activating protease is associated with cardiovascular risk
due to increased neointima formation. J. Exp. Med., 203, 2801–2807.
Stephan, F., Hazelzet, J.A., Bulder, I., Boermeester, M.A., van Till, J.O., van
der Poll, T., Wuillemin, W.A., Aarden, L.A. & Zeerleder, S. (2011) Activation of factor VII-activating protease in human inﬂammation: a sensor
for cell death. Crit. Care, 15, R110.
Subramaniam, S., Thielmann, I., Morowski, M., Pragst, I., Sandset, P.M.,
Nieswandt, B., Etscheid, M. & Kanse, S.M. (2014) Defective thrombus
formation in mice lacking endogenous factor VII activating protease
(FSAP). Thromb. Haemostasis, 113. [Epub ahead of print].
Trompet, S., Pons, D., Kanse, S.M., de Craen, A.J., Ikram, M.A., Verschuren, J.J., Zwinderman, A.H., Doevendans, P.A., Tio, R.A., de Winter, R.J.,
Slagboom, P.E., Westendorp, R.G. & Jukema, J.W. (2011) Factor VII activating protease polymorphism (G534E) is associated with increased risk
for stroke and mortality. Stroke Res. Treat., 2011, 424759.
Vaseva, A.V., Marchenko, N.D., Ji, K., Tsirka, S.E., Holzmann, S. & Moll,
U.M. (2012) p53 opens the mitochondrial permeability transition pore to
trigger necrosis. Cell, 149, 1536–1548.
Willeit, J., Kiechl, S., Weimer, T., Mair, A., Santer, P., Wiedermann, C.J. &
Roemisch, J. (2003) Marburg I polymorphism of factor VII-activating protease: a prominent risk predictor of carotid stenosis. Circulation, 107,
667–670.
Wygrecka, M., Morty, R.E., Markart, P., Kanse, S.M., Andreasen,
P.A., Wind, T., Guenther, A. & Preissner, K.T. (2007) Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 is an inhibitor of factor VII-activating protease in patients
with acute respiratory distress syndrome. J. Biol. Chem., 282, 21671–
21682.
Yamamichi, S., Fujiwara, Y., Kikuchi, T., Nishitani, M., Matsushita, Y. &
Hasumi, K. (2011) Extracellular histone induces plasma hyaluronan-binding protein (factor VII activating protease) activation in vivo. Biochem.
Bioph. Res. Co., 409, 483–488.

© 2015 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd
European Journal of Neuroscience, 41, 965–975

