The Journal of Neuroscience, March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3851

Neurobiology of Disease

Impaired Leptomeningeal Collateral Flow Contributes to the
Poor Outcome following Experimental Stroke in the Type 2
Diabetic Mice
Yosuke Akamatsu,1,2,3 Yasuo Nishijima,1,2,3 Chih Cheng Lee,1,2 Shih Yen Yang,1,2 Lei Shi,4 Lin An,4 Ruikang K. Wang,4
Teiji Tominaga,3 and Jialing Liu1,2
1Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California at San Francisco and 2San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco,
California 94121, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan, and 4Departments of
Bioengineering and Ophthalmology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195

Collateral status is an independent predictor of stroke outcome. However, the spatiotemporal manner in which collateral flow
maintains cerebral perfusion during cerebral ischemia is poorly understood. Diabetes exacerbates ischemic brain damage, although the impact of diabetes on collateral dynamics remains to be established. Using Doppler optical coherent tomography, a
robust recruitment of leptomeningeal collateral flow was detected immediately after middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion in
C57BL/6 mice, and it continued to grow over the course of 1 week. In contrast, an impairment of collateral recruitment was evident
in the Type 2 diabetic db/db mice, which coincided with a worse stroke outcome compared with their normoglycemic counterpart
db/⫹, despite their equally well-collateralized leptomeningeal anastomoses. Similar to the wild-type mice, both db/⫹ and db/db
mice underwent collateral growth 7 d after MCA stroke, although db/db mice still exhibited significantly reduced retrograde flow
into the MCA territory chronically. Acutely induced hyperglycemia in the db/⫹ mice did not impair collateral flow after stroke,
suggesting that the state of hyperglycemia alone was not sufficient to impact collateral flow. Human albumin was efficacious in
improving collateral flow and outcome after stroke in the db/db mice, enabling perfusion to proximal MCA territory that was
usually not reached by retrograde flow from anterior cerebral artery without treatment. Our results suggest that the impaired
collateral status contributes to the exacerbated ischemic injury in mice with Type 2 diabetes, and modulation of collateral flow has
beneficial effects on stroke outcome among these subjects.
Key words: anastomosis; arteriogenesis; Doppler OCT; MCAO; metabolic syndrome; vascular remodeling

Introduction
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a major risk factor of ischemic stroke (Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration et al., 2010)
and associated with an increased risk of long-term functional
deficits after stroke (Megherbi et al., 2003). However, the mechanisms that are responsible for the worse stroke outcome in this
population are incompletely understood. Hyperglycemia exists
in 30%– 40% of patients with acute ischemic stroke and is independently associated with a poor outcome (Parsons et al., 2002;
Received Sept. 11, 2014; revised Oct. 6, 2014; accepted Jan. 21, 2015.
Author contributions: J.L. designed research; Y.A., Y.N., C.C.L., S.Y.Y., L.S., and J.L. performed research; L.A.,
R.K.W., T.T., and J.L. contributed unpublished reagents/analytic tools; Y.A., Y.N., C.C.L., S.Y.Y., L.A., and J.L. analyzed
data; Y.A. and J.L. wrote the paper.
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 NS071050 to J.L., Veterans Administration
Merit Award I01RX000655 to J.L., American Heart Hospital Association EIA 0940065N to J.L., and NIH R01HL093140
to R.K.W. We thank Dr. Philip Weinstein (University of California at San Francisco) for helpful discussion and Ilona
Garner (University of California at San Francisco) for editorial assistance.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to Dr. Jialing Liu, Department of Neurological Surgery (112C), University of
California at San Francisco and Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1700 Owens Street, San Francisco, CA
94158. E-mail: jialing.liu@ucsf.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3838-14.2015
Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/353851-15$15.00/0

Martini and Kent, 2007; Fuentes et al., 2009), even among those
who have not been diagnosed with diabetes. Hyperglycemia increases oxidative stress during cerebral ischemia (Won et al.,
2011), yet it is unclear whether acute hyperglycemia per se or
other underlying vascular pathology contributes to this increased
morbidity.
A confluence of clinical evidences suggests that the collateral
status is an independent predictor of outcome and response to
thrombolytic therapies in patients with ischemic stroke, and a
good collateral status can lower the rate of hemorrhagic transformation after thrombolytic and endovascular therapies
(Liebeskind, 2003, 2013; Shuaib et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2014).
Furthermore, patients with metabolic syndromes are associated
with poor anatomical collateral status during acute ischemic
stroke (Menon et al., 2013). It remains to be established whether
impaired cerebral collateral flow regulation occurs during stroke
in subjects with T2DM and whether the impairment is related to
hyperglycemia.
Human albumin, a potent neuroprotective agent proven in
preclinical and clinical stroke studies (Belayev et al., 2002; Hill et
al., 2011), of which the treatment effects can be partially attributed to its hemodynamic and intravascular effects that improve

3852 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

blood flow (Nimmagadda et al., 2008).
However, it remains unclear whether albumin enhances leptomeningeal collateral flow in middle cerebral artery (MCA)
stroke and whether it can also be effective
in diabetic subjects who often do not respond to vascular interventions.
Doppler optical coherence tomography (DOCT) has emerged as a new technique to assess dynamic cerebral blood
flow with excellent spatial resolution and
sensitivity in quantifying velocity (Wang
and An, 2009). The main advantages of
DOCT over other available optical imaging methods include the capability of
quantifying blood flow across many individual vessels simultaneously at a relatively high speed in the presence of an
intact cranium (Wang and An, 2009;
Srinivasan et al., 2011), as well as providing absolute blood perfusion values in
repeated measurement (Santisakultarm Figure 1. The schematic of DOCT system for quantitative microangiography. During imaging, the sample beam was rapidly
and Schaffer, 2011). In the current study, scanning over the mouse brain with a scanner (x-y dimension) while the infrared line-scan camera in the spectrometer was
we examined the spatial and temporal continuously recording the optical microangiography signals formed by the interference of the reference and the sampling lights.
The signals collected were transferred to a computer for data processing.
changes of the leptomeningeal collateral
flow following MCA stroke in normal and
DOCT. To evaluate changes in blood vessel diameter and flow velocity
diabetic mice for the first time using DOCT. Our results indicate
during ischemic stroke and reperfusion, we used DOCT (Wang and An,
that the impaired collateral flow dynamics in T2DM mice after
2009), a noninvasive high-resolution 3D optical imaging technique for
MCA stroke is not attributed to acute hyperglycemia, and it can
microangiography. The system configuration of DOCT of our custom
be improved by human albumin that enhances retrograde collatdesign is shown in Figure 1. The superluminescent diode illuminated
eral flow deep into the proximal MCA territory.
broadband infrared light with the center wavelength of 1310 nm at the

Materials and Methods
Animals and housing. This study was conducted in accordance with the
animal care guidelines issued by the National Institutes of Health and by
the San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical Center Animal Use
and Care Committee. Male C57BL/6J, db/db, and db/⫹ mice (16 –20
weeks old, The Jackson Laboratory) were housed 4 per cage on a 12 h
dark/light cycle with access to food and water ad libitum.
Middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Stroke was induced unilaterally in mice for 90 min using the distal MCAO method with modifications (Sun et al., 2013). Because a permanent distal ligation of the MCA
does not give reproducible infarct in most mouse strains, we combined it
with a unilateral common carotid artery (CCA) occlusion. Anesthesia
was induced with 3% isoflurane in a closed chamber and maintained
with 2% isoflurane in 30% O2 and 70% N2O with a facemask. Core
temperature was maintained at 37 ⫾ 0.5°C with a heating blanket and
rectal thermistor servo-loop. Systemic blood pressure was monitored
using the volume-pressure recording technology to detect changes in tail
volume that correspond to systolic and diastolic blood pressure (CODA
noninvasive blood pressure system, Kent Scientific). With the mouse in a
prone position fixed in a head holder (Stoelting), the scalp was cut meticulously with a surgical knife to expose the thin skull (calvaria) over the
bilateral cerebral and cerebellar hemispheres without causing brain
trauma. The left CCA was isolated from the adjacent vagus nerve, dissected out of the carotid sheath, and a 7-0 nylon suture noose was placed
across the CCA from the bottom, ready for temporary ligation. The
mouse was then placed in a lateral position. A straight skin incision was
made along the sagittal suture, and scalp was retracted to inferior. A
1.5-mm-diameter burr hole 1.2 mm rostral to the anterior junction of the
zygoma and temporalis bone was made with a dental drill. Immediately
after the opening of the dura with a fine needle, the MCA was permanently occluded and cut at the distal to lenticulostriate artery with a
microbipolar electrocoagulator at minimal power, followed by an immediate temporary ligation of the ipsilateral CCA for 90 min. Shamoperated mice did not receive occlusion of either the MCA or CCA.

mouse brain via the sample arm. The backscattered signal interfered with
the counterpart from the reference arm was entered into a high-speed
spectrometer and recorded by a line-scan infrared camera. The 2D transverse scanning as well as Fourier transformation of the spectral data
yielded 3D imaging data that were composed of 512 ⫻ 5000 ⫻ 300
(depth ⫻ fast axis ⫻ slow axis) voxel cube, covering 2.3 ⫻ 2.2 ⫻ 2.2 mm 3
of brain tissue. Flow data were collected from a total of 6 voxel cubes (3 ⫻
2 in horizontal and vertical dimension) per animal with a motorized
stage (ThorLabs). Doppler velocity signals were extracted from the imaging data by processing their phase differences between adjacent fastaxis scans. The backscattered red light and the brain microscopy were
recorded together in an area-scan visible-light camera to monitor the
scanning position on the brain. The full-width half-maximum of the
system point spread function was measured at 7 ␮m (z, or axial resolution) and 8 ␮m (x-y, or lateral resolution), respectively. Thus, the system
resolution is approximately in the size of average capillary vessels in the
brain. In addition to system resolution, the sensitivity of DOCT is also
related to the minimal velocity of a vessel.
DOCT imaging was conducted under isoflurane anesthesia through
an intact skull at baseline, during MCAO, at various time points after
occlusion or reperfusion, and following hyperglycemia induction or
drug treatment as indicated in each experiment. Each imaging session
lasted ⬃30 – 40 min. During acquisition, the axis speed was set at 57 kHz
or 19 kHz with axial velocity in the range of ⫺13.8 to 13.8 or ⫺4.6 to 4.6
mm/s for baseline or postocclusion imaging, respectively. All the data
processing was performed in customized MATLAB (MathWorks) programs and was visualized in the 3D software AMIRA (Visual Imaging).
The vessel diameter was measured in en-face projection images of the
Doppler data. The absolute blood flow was calculated by integrating the
axial velocity signals. Five boxes along the region of interest were selected
and averaged to obtain the data. As red blood cell velocity and lumen
diameter can change independently of each other, we also determined
the volume flux in each vessel (Schaffer et al., 2006) as flux ⫽ v␲R 2,
where v is the average flow velocity over the cross-sectional area of the
vessel lumen and R is the lumen radius.

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3853

Figure 2. Spatiotemporal flow dynamics in flow velocity, flux, and arterial diameter following MCAO in C57BL/6 mice. Representative DOCT images before (A), during (B), and after MCAO (C,D)
from the same mouse. White- and black-filled arrows indicate MCA and ACA branches, respectively. The direction of blood flow is color-coded, with the blood flowing toward the scanning probe
beam coded designated as red, and the opposite direction as green. Dotted white line indicates the divide between MCA and ACA territory shown in B. The anatomic orientation of the brain is
indicated with arrows pointing to the lateral (L) and posterior (P) directions in C. Arterial tree 1 at baseline (E) and during MCAO (F ) showing the direction of flow and flow velocity at various points.
At baseline, MCA velocity decreased progressively in the downstream branches. During MCAO, the velocity of retrograde flow also decreased progressively toward proximal MCA. G, Classification of
MCA branches according to the proximity to MCA-ACA anastomoses (black dots) with the most distal MCA braches assigned as segment 1 (Seg 1) and the most proximal ones as segment 3 (Seg 3).
In general, flow velocity and flux decreased after MCAO in all segments, whereas the diameters of vessels investigated displayed relatively small changes. Specifically, flow velocity (H ) of Seg 3 has
progressively increased over time after MCAO. The diameter of Seg 1 was enlarged at 7 d after MCAO relative to that at baseline and during MCAO, indicating the growth of collateral vessels after
stroke (I ). Flux also showed a significant increase at 7 d after MCAO in Seg 3 (J ). Scale bar, 1 mm. *p ⬍ 0.05. **p ⬍ 0.01. ***p ⬍ 0.005. ****p ⬍ 0.001. N ⫽ 5–12.

Table 1. db/db mice are significantly obese and hyperglycemic compared with
db/⫹ mice at ⬃16 –20 weeks of age, as evidenced by their greater body weight
and high fasting blood glucose level (N ⴝ 7–9/group)
Body weight (g)
Blood glucose (mg/dl)
*p ⬍ 0.01; **p ⬍ 0.001.

db/⫹

db/db

25.8 ⫾ 0.5
156.4 ⫾ 12.9

40.3 ⫾ 0.9*
382.6 ⫾ 54.0**

To assess the change in flow velocity, diameter, and flux after saline or
albumin treatment, we subtracted the pretreatment value from the posttreatment value in each parameter within the same subject and averaged the relative change within one treatment group, an approach
used in a previous study in assessing cerebral blood flow (Belayev et
al., 2002).
Induced hyperglycemia. db/⫹ mice were rendered hyperglycemic by
intraperitoneal injections of 5.0 ml/kg of 25% dextrose at 15 min before
baseline DOCT imaging, corresponding to 60 min before the onset of
MCAO. A booster dose of dextrose (1.5 ml/kg) was injected at 90 min
after the first injection. The vehicle control mice received equal volume of
saline during the same time points. Blood glucose was quantified from

3854 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

tail vein blood by a glucose monitor (NIPRO)
at various time points as indicated.
Albumin treatment. Following the completion of the first DOCT imaging at 60 min after
reperfusion, mice were injected with either
1.25 g/kg 25% human albumin (Baxter) (Belayev et al., 2001) or an equivalent volume of
isotonic (0.9%) saline solution via the jugular
vein over a period of 3 min.
Arterial labeling and scoring. Cerebral arteries were labeled in vivo as described previously
with modifications (Li et al., 2008). In brief,
mice were perfused with 4% PFA at a rate of 2
ml/min for 3 min followed with 0.2% lipophilic carbocyanine fluorescent dye, DiI (Invitrogen) at 5 ml/min for 5 min. A montage image
was created by stitching individual images
taken at 100⫻ (Axioskop 2, Carl Zeiss) using
the Virtue Tissue 3D module (StereoInvestigator, MBF Bioscience). The patency of the posterior communicating arteries (PcomA), the
distance between midline and the line of anterial cerebral artery (ACA) and MCA anastomoses, and the number of connecting collaterals
between ACA and MCA were assessed. Collaterals refer to arterial anastomoses in our paper,
and additional etymology of collateral circulation is as described previously (Faber et al.,
2014). The development of left and right
PcomA was evaluated using following criteria:
0, no anastomosis; 1, anastomosis in the capillary phase; 2, small truncal PcomA; and 3,
truncal PcomA.
Assessment of neurobehavioral outcomes. A
separate group of mice were used for neurobehavioral outcome and infarct size assessment from those underwent DOCT imaging,
to minimize confound due to isoflurane exposure during repeated imaging. Stroke outcome evaluation was conducted in a blinded
fashion. Following MCAO and sham surgery, subjects were randomly assigned to intended treatment groups and given a new ID
by a person that was not involved in surgery,
4

Figure 3. Impairment of collateral flow recruitment after MCAO in the diabetic db/db mice. A, Representative DOCT images of
db/⫹ and db/db mice at baseline, during MCAO, during reperfusion, and at 24 h after reperfusion. The direction of blood flow is
color-coded, with the blood flowing toward the scanning probe beam or toward ACA territory coded as red, and the retrograde flow
toward proximal MCA as green. White- and black-filled arrows indicate MCA and ACA branches, respectively. Dotted white lines
indicate the divide between MCA and ACA territory The anatomic orientation of the brain is indicated with arrows pointing to the
lateral (L) and anterior (A) directions. Arrowheads indicate the tortuous anastomoses between MCA and ACA. Line graphs of time

course for flow velocity, vascular diameter, and flux of db/⫹
and db/db mice representing each segment are shown as B
(segment 1), C (segment 2), and D (segment 3). At baseline,
there was no significant difference in flow velocity, vascular
diameter, or flux between db/db and db/⫹ mice. However,
following MCAO, there was a significant decrease in the retrograde flow in the db/db mice compared with db/⫹ mice, particularly at segments proximal to MCA, leading to a
significantly reduced flux in Seg3 in db/db mice. N ⫽ 9 –11/
group. E, Representative DOCT images of db/⫹ and db/db
mice at baseline, during reperfusion, and at 7 d after stroke.
Arrow indicate significant collateral remodeling in both strains
of mice. Changes in velocity, diameter, and flux in segment 1
(F), segment 2 (G), and segment 3 (H) between reperfusion
and 7 d after MCAO were plotted in line graphs (N ⫽ 3 or
4/group). Although there was an overall improvement of perfusion following reperfusion in both strains of mice, db/db
mice continued to display deficit in collateral perfusion. At 7 d
after MCAO, flow velocity was significantly reduced in all segments of MCA branches of db/db mice compared with that of
db/⫹ mice. *p ⬍ 0.05. **p ⬍ 0.01. Scale bar, 1 mm. Base,
baseline; Occ, occlusion; Rep, reperfusion.

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3855

ladder was videotaped and the percentages of
footfalls (slipping through the bars) with the
affected forelimb were scored and averaged in 3
trials (Sun et al., 2013).
Corner test. A mouse was placed halfway to
the corner between two boards each with dimension of 30 ⫻ 20 ⫻ 1 cm 3 at a 30° angle,
arranged with a small opening along the joint
between the boards to encourage exploration
into the corner. When entering deep into the
corner, both sides of the vibrissae approached the wall. The mouse soon reared
forward and upward, then turned back to
face the open end. The nonischemic mouse
turned left or right with equal frequency, but
mouse with unilateral ischemic injury preferentially turned toward the nonimpaired,
ipsilateral side (left in our model). The number of turns in each direction was summed
from 10 trials. Turning movements that were
not a part of a rearing movement were not
scored (Zhang et al., 2002).
Infarct volume assessment. Seven days after
stroke, 40-␮m-thick coronal sections were
collected serially with a periodicity of 6 after
transcardiac perfusion with 4% PFA as described previously (Raber et al., 2004). Infarct volume was measured by subtracting the
volume of intact tissue in the ipsilateral hemisphere from that in the contralateral hemisphere on Nissl-stained serial sections (240 ␮m
apart) by ImageJ (Version 1.3, National Institutes of Health) (Sun et al., 2013). Percentage
infarction was determined by dividing infarct
volume with total brain volume.
Statistical analysis. Data were expressed as
mean ⫾ SEM and analyzed by one-way, twoway ANOVA, or RANOVA using Statview 4.01
(SAS Institute) with Bonferroni corrections for
multiple comparisons when appropriate. p values ⬍0.05 were considered significant.

Results

Figure 3.

Continued.

drug injection, or later evaluation (histological and behavioral
assessment).
Horizontal ladder test. Mice were trained to cross a 2-foot-long inclined ladder with variable spacing between bars ranging from 1 to 4 cm
that placed at a 15° angle for 3 consecutive trials. The performance on

Temporal progression and growth of
leptomeningeal collateral flow
following ischemic stroke
Using DOCT, a reversal of MCA flow direction was observed, which is referred to
as retrograde flow, contrary to the anterograde flow direction at baseline (Fig.
2 A, B). Tortuous collateral anastomoses
connecting the distal MCAs and ACAs became apparent after MCAO (Fig. 2B). At
baseline, a decreasing gradient in flow velocity and flux was detected from proximal to distal MCAs (Fig. 2 A, E, H, J ),
whereas the diameter remained constant
(Fig. 2I ). After MCAO, there was a general
reduction in flow velocity and flux (Fig.
2 B, F, H, J ).
To increase the accuracy of comparison, MCA branches downstream of the
occlusion point were categorized according to branching order, in which segment 1 (Seg 1) is most proximal to ACA while
most distal to MCA; Seg 3 is the proximal MCA branch relative
to Seg 2 and most distal to ACA (Fig. 2G). During MCAO, Seg

3856 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864

1, Seg 2, and Seg 3 slowed down to 56%, 31%, and 13% of their
baseline velocities, respectively. Thereafter, flow velocity in
Seg 3 was significantly increased at 24 h and 7 d after MCAO
( p ⬍ 0.05 and p ⬍ 0.005, respectively) (Fig. 2C, D, H ). There
was also a concurrent increase in MCA diameter of Seg 1 at 7 d
after MCAO relative to baseline or during MCAO ( p ⬍ 0.05
and p ⬍ 0.01, respectively), although it did not change significantly at the other acute time point (Fig. 2I ). Similar to flow
velocity, flux decreased during MCAO but increased at 7 d
after MCAO in Seg 3 ( p ⬍ 0.001) (Fig. 2J ).
db/db mice exhibit impaired recruitment of leptomeningeal
collateral flow and a more severe stroke outcome
Baseline physiological assessment showed that the concentration
of blood glucose and body weight were significantly greater in
db/db mice than their normoglycemic, age-matched counterparts, db/⫹ mice (Table 1), consistent with the effect of insulin
tolerance. Consistent with previous findings (Li et al., 2013),
db/db mice exhibited slightly higher blood pressure during
MCAO (db/db: 92.5 ⫾ 6.5 mmHg; db/⫹: 81.8 ⫾ 3.4 mmHg; p ⬍
0.05). Baseline flow velocity, diameter, and flux did not differ
between the two genotypes (Fig. 3A–D). However, retrograde
filling of MCA from ACA was much reduced in db/db compared
with db/⫹ mice during MCA occlusion, with significantly slower
flow velocity in all segments quantified (Fig. 3A–D). There was no
significant difference in diameter between groups in each segment
during acute stages after MCAO. Similar to flow velocity, flux in Seg
3 was also significantly reduced in db/db mice during and after
MCAO (p ⬍ 0.05), suggesting that the collateral flow recruitment
was impaired in db/db strain, particularly at proximal MCA
branches. The collateral flow impairment observed in the db/db mice
appears to persist chronically as shown in a subsequent study during
chronic stroke (Fig. 3E–H). Despite the growth of collateral flow and
vessels at 7 d after MCAO in both strains of mice, the flow velocity of
all segments was significantly reduced in the db/db mice compared
with db/⫹ mice (Fig. 3E–H). Relative to db/⫹ mice, the retrograde
flow of db/db mice in segment 3 after MCAO was significantly diminished at all time points examined (Fig. 3).
The impaired collateral status was correlated with significantly worse stroke outcomes in infarct size ( p ⬍ 0.01; Fig. 4A),
and motor function (horizontal ladder test: p ⬍ 0.01; Fig. 4B;
corner test: p ⬍ 0.05; Fig. 4C) assessed 7 d after MCAO in the
db/db mice compared with db/⫹ mice. The worse stroke outcome
in diabetic mice is consistent with the larger lesion size and worse
National Institutes of Health stroke scale or modified Rankin
scale seen in human stroke patients with hyperglycemia (Parsons
et al., 2002).
To rule out the potential contribution of genetic variation in
cerebrovasculature (Majid et al., 2000; Liu et al., 2014), we performed DiI arterial labeling in db/⫹ and db/db mice as described
previously (Li et al., 2008). No significant difference was observed
in the number of collaterals interconnecting ACA and MCA (Fig.
5 A, B), distance of ACA and MCA anastomoses to midline (Fig.
5C), or patency of the PcomA (Fig. 5D). Moreover, to determine
the delayed effect of stroke on collateral interconnectivity, we
quantified the number of MCAs perfused retrogradely via the
ACA in the ipsilateral hemisphere 7 d after MCAO. Compared
with db/db mice, the db/⫹ mice developed significantly more
dilated tortuous collateral anastomoses around the border
zone between ACA and MCA in the ipsilateral hemisphere
(Fig. 5A, arrowhead), a sign of reduced axial tension due to
increased blood flow and associated elastin degradation (Do-

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

brin et al., 1988; Hoi et al., 2008). In contrast to db/⫹ mice,
db/db mice had fewer perfused leptomeningeal collaterals between MCA and ACA at 1 week following MCAO (Fig. 5 A, B)
( p ⬍ 0.05).
Acute hyperglycemia alone is insufficient to cause
impairment in collateral flow recruitment
To determine whether the impaired collateral recruitment observed in the T2DM stroke mice is attributable to hyperglycemia
per se, we infused dextrose solution 60 min before the induction
of stroke in db/⫹ mice, who shared a great deal of genetic similarity in cerebrovasculature and collateral anatomy with the
db/db strain. The dose-titration study determined the optimal
amount of dextrose to be 1.25 g/kg (5 ml/kg of 25% solution), to
match the blood glucose level of the db/db mice at ⬃380 mg/dl
(Fig. 6A). There was no significant difference in glucose metabolism after intraperitoneal injection of dextrose solution at the
chosen dose between db/⫹ and wild-type mice (RANOVA: F(1,32)
⫽ 0.17, p ⬎ 0.68) (Fig. 6B), suggesting that db/⫹ mice are indeed
an appropriate strain for study of acute hyperglycemia. Time
course study showed that blood glucose level of the inducedhyperglycemic db/⫹ was maintained at comparable levels during stroke and imaging relative to the db/db mice (Fig. 6C).
There was a tendency for the blood glucose to increase after
MCAO in all groups, although there were no significant differences when compared with respective pre-MCAO glucose
levels (Fig. 6C). Blood glucose level returned to the normal
range at 24 h after MCAO in the db/⫹ mice. Despite that db/db
mice experienced a temporary reduction in blood glucose level
at 24 h after MCAO possibly due to reduced food intake, they
have gradually resumed their hyperglycemic state 2 d later
(Fig. 6C).
Similar to C57BL/6 mice, MCA flow direction in the db/⫹
mice was reversed in all measured MCA segments in both normoglycemic and hyperglycemic groups (Fig. 7A). There were no
significant differences in flow velocity, vessel diameter, and flux
between groups during baseline or MCAO (Fig. 7A–D), suggesting that temporarily induced hyperglycemia was not sufficient to
impact collateral flow dynamics.
Human albumin augments collateral perfusion and reduces
infarct size in db/db mice
To determine the effect of albumin on collateral flow following
ischemic stroke, albumin or saline was infused intravenously at
150 min after MCAO, or 60 min after CCA reperfusion. Collateral flow was imaged before and after treatment, corresponding
to 30 and 90 min after ischemic reperfusion, respectively (Fig.
8A). Before treatment, flow velocity and flux in the db/db group
were significantly slower in each segment compared with that in
the db/⫹ group (velocity: Seg 1/Seg 2/Seg 3: p ⬍ 0.05/p ⬍ 0.01/
p ⬍ 0.01; flux: Seg 1/Seg 2/Seg 3: p ⬍ 0.05/p ⬍ 0.05/p ⬍ 0.05) (Fig.
8 B, C,E). However, there was no significant difference in the diameter in any segment between groups (Fig. 8D).
Albumin significantly improved collateral flow recruitment in
the diabetic mice (Seg 1 and ⫺3: p ⬍ 0.05, Seg 2: p ⬍ 0.01,
respectively), particularly in proximal MCAs (Fig. 8F ). There was
no significant difference in relative diameter change between saline and albumin treatments, although MCA diameter in all segments had a tendency to decrease slightly at 30 min after saline or
albumin treatment in db/db mice (Fig. 8G). There were also significant relative flux improvement following albumin compared
with saline treatment in Seg 2 and Seg 3 (Seg 2: p ⬍ 0.005; Seg 3:
p ⬍ 0.05) (Fig. 8H ). The relatively greater improvement in veloc-

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3857

sound collateral recruitment in the absence of treatment in the
latter strain. Relative diameter change also did not differ significantly between treatments in the db/⫹ mice. However, saline
significantly reduced the MCA diameter in db/db mice compared
with db/⫹ mice (Fig. 8G). There was no significant difference in
relative flux change between two treatment groups in the db/⫹
mice due to a minor improvement in flux after either treatment
(Fig. 8H ). These results suggest that albumin was effective in
improving leptomeningeal collateral flow after MCA stroke in
the db/db mice, with the retrograde flow reaching proximal to the
occlusion point in the MCA territory.
At 7 d after stroke, db/db mice receiving albumin treatment
exhibited significantly smaller infarct volume compared with
those receiving saline (albumin vs saline: 3.4 ⫾ 0.4% vs 5.0 ⫾
0.4%, p ⬍ 0.05). Despite a significant overall effect of albumin on
neuroprotection (two-way ANOVA, albumin effect: F(1,18) ⫽ 9.2,
p ⬍ 0.01), albumin did not effectively reduce stroke size in the
db/⫹ mice (1.9 ⫾ 0.4% vs 3.0 ⫾ 0.5%, not significant), suggesting a ceiling effect (Fig. 8I ).

Discussion

Figure 4. Effect of MCAO on stroke outcome in db/⫹ and db/db mice. Infarct volume (A) and
neurobehavioral outcome (B, C) in db/db mice were compared with db/⫹ mice at 7 d after
stroke. A, db/db mice sustained a significantly larger stroke size compared with db/⫹ mice. B,
db/db mice slipped through the bars more frequently when traversing an elevated horizontal
ladder compared with db/⫹ mice at 7 d after stroke. C, db/db mice also made significantly more
ipsilateral turns in the corner test compared with db/⫹ mice, reflecting a more pronounced
functional impairment in sensorimotor asymmetry. At 7 d after stroke, db/⫹ mice showed
considerable recovery in motor function with the distal occlusion model of stroke. *p ⬍ 0.05.
N ⫽ 5 or 6/group.

ity and flux in the proximal MCA branches suggests that retrograde flow from ACA was able to reach a longer distance following
albumin treatment. Surprisingly, the relative flow velocity increase
in db/⫹ mice following albumin treatment was less pronounced
and insignificant relative to saline treatment. Besides, unlike the
db/db mice, there was no preferential increase of relative velocity
in the segments distal to ACA in the db/⫹ mice, due to an already

We demonstrated that the leptomeningeal collateral anastomoses provided rapid and persistent perfusion to ischemic territories
following MCAO. Furthermore, the collateral blood flow continued to increase over 7 d after MCAO with a considerable degree of
vascular remodeling as evidenced by the increased diameter of
collateral vessels in wild-type mice. In contrast, db/db mice had
impaired collateral flow recruitment after MCAO compared with
db/⫹, particularly at proximal MCA where the retrograde flow
failed to reach, despite the similarity in baseline flow velocity and
vascular anatomy between the two genotypes. The slower flow
velocity from ACA to proximal MCA observed in db/db mice
following stroke likely contributed to the inadequate retrograde
filling of the MCA closest to the site of occlusion, where it was
needed most. Consistent with this finding, db/db mice sustained a
larger stroke size and poorer neurological outcome 7 d after
MCAO. Despite the chronic collateral remodeling in both strains
of mice, db/db mice still exhibited significantly reduced flow velocity
in all segments at 7 d after stroke compared with db/⫹ mice. However, temporarily induced hyperglycemia in the genetically related
strain db/⫹ did not have an adverse effect on collateral flow recruitment before and after stroke, suggesting that chronic pathological
modification of the cerebrovasculature in the diabetic mice
rather than acute hyperglycemia alone might have contributed to
the observed impairment of collateral flow in the db/db mice.
Moreover, albumin treatment significantly improved retrograde
filling particularly at proximal MCA after stroke and reduced
infarct volume in the db/db mice. The beneficial effect of albumin
was less prominent in the db/⫹ mice in which a robust collateral
status already existed.
As DOCT is best suited to measure blood flow within the top
150 ␮m of the brain in relatively larger vessels, it not only is an
ideal imaging modality for studying dynamic flow changes in
leptomeningeal anastomoses in rodents after MCA stroke or
chronic hypoperfusion but also provides a great improvement
over previous methodologies for visualizing spatiotemporal
blood perfusion in the cortex following stroke. Our result using
DOCT demonstrated, for the first time, that the collateral recruitment was immediate via anastomotic connections between ACA
and MCA, complementing previous studies using other optical
imaging techniques (Shih et al., 2009; Armitage et al., 2010). Contrary to the dilation of cerebral arteries found during acute stroke in
some studies (Armitage et al., 2010), the average arterial diameter

3858 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

Figure 5. db/db mice share a similar extent of leptomeningeal anastomoses between MCA and ACA, size of MCA territory, and the patency of posterior communicating arteries (Pcom) with db/⫹
mice. A, Arteriograms of db/⫹ and db/db mice at the dorsal view via DiI labeling. Enlarged views of the yellow insets revealed the connecting points between MCA and ACA vascular networks. At
7 d after MCAO, the diameter of the collateral vessels in the db/⫹ mice increased to accommodate more collateral flow with increased tortuosity (yellow arrowheads). B, The number of connecting collaterals
between MCA and ACA was quantified following DiI perfusion at baseline and 7 d after MCAO. db/db mice had a similar number of perfused collaterals at baseline, but a lower number of perfused collaterals at
7 d after MCAO compared with db/⫹ mice, suggesting a functional impairment of collateral recruitment rather than a structural deficiency in the collateral circulation. C, There was no significant difference
between two groups of mice at baseline in the distance between midline and the line of anastomoses between the ACA and MCA as determined by the DiI arterial labeling. D, There was also no significant
difference in the PcomA patency between groups, suggesting that both strains of mice shared a similar degree of primary collateral circulation. *p ⬍ 0.05. Scale bar, 1 mm. N ⫽ 5 or 6/group.

remained constant in our study. One possible explanation for this
apparent discrepancy may be due to the relatively large arteries (diameter: 50 – 60 ␮m) evaluated in our study, supported by a previous
finding that vasodilation occurred in small penetrating and surface
arterioles (⬍23 ␮m) during focal cerebral ischemia, but not in large
surface arteries (23– 60 ␮m) (Shih et al., 2009). However, we found
that arteries at distal MCA segments increased in diameter and flow
velocity during chronic reperfusion, suggesting the presence of vasodilation and/or vascular remodeling. Consistent with this notion,

a previous study reported that db/db mice exhibited hypertension,
greater stroke size, worse neurological outcome after MCAO, impaired vascular reactivity, and reduced eNOS phosphorylation, and
that phosphomimetic eNOS SD knock-in mutation corrected the
above impairment (Li et al., 2013).
Albeit nonperfusion mechanisms were reported to underlie
the worse ischemic brain damage among diabetic subjects (Chen
et al., 2011; Kumari et al., 2011), our data clearly indicated that
collateral flow recruitment was impaired specifically at proximal

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3859

MCA in db/db compared with db/⫹
strain, despite their similar baseline flow
value and anatomical collateralization. As
the contributing factors leading to the impaired collateral flow recruitment in the
db/db mice remain uncertain, vascular effects, including eNOS-dependent vasodilation, may not be the sole basis for the
impaired collateral flow dynamics in this
model. Given the fact that the plasma concentration and activity of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), a potent
endogenous tPA inhibitor, are heightened
in T2DM, which might lead to increased
formation of occlusive thrombi after vascular injury and thus could in part contribute to the impaired collateral status
seen in the db/db mice during stroke
(Alessi and Juhan-Vague, 2006; Trost et
al., 2006; Grant, 2007). This is also consistent with the fact that collateral flow was
impaired specifically at proximal MCA in
db/db mice because the reduced endogenous thrombolytic activity associated
with diabetes failed prematurely along
the way in the retrograde flow, leading
to unsuccessful perfusion of MCA
branches distal to the anastomosis point
(Caplan and Hennerici, 1998). Furthermore, the advanced glycation end products, which play an important role in
diabetic vascular complications, are implicated in the upregulation of PAI-1 in
vascular endothelial cells through the interaction with the receptor for advanced
glycation end products (Sangle et al.,
2010). It has also been shown in patients
with cardiovascular disease and diabetes
that pathological increases of platelet hyperreactivity, plasma viscosity, fibrinogen concentration, PAI concentration, as well as red
blood cell aggregation are of major rele4

Figure 6. Induction of hyperglycemia by glucose in the db/⫹ mice. A, There was a dose-dependent rise of blood glucose
following intraperitoneal injection of 25% dextrose solution at various doses. The 1.25 g/kg dose produced a blood concentration
of glucose in the db/⫹ mice similar to age-matched db/db mice. B, Comparison of blood glucose metabolism between db/⫹ and

wild-type littermates during the course of 90 min after glucose
administration at 1.25 g/kg. There was an identical rise of
blood glucose at 15 min and a similar fall of blood glucose over
the course of 90 min after injection between two strains of
mice. Apart from the similarity in collateral anatomy between
db/⫹ and db/db mice, the normal glucose metabolism observed in the db/⫹ mice further supports the appropriateness
of this strain as the candidate in studying the role of hyperglycemia in collateral flow recruitment during stroke. C, Blood
glucose level before, during, and after MCAO in db/db, hyperglycemic, and control db/⫹ mice. Despite a more severed
ischemic injury following MCAO in the db/db mice, there was
no significant difference in blood glucose level between db/db
and the hyperglycemic db/⫹ mice. Furthermore, blood glucose concentration in the hyperglycemic db/⫹ mice returned
to the normal level at 24 h after stroke, similar to that of control
db/⫹ mice. The db/db mice gradually resumed their hyperglycemic state after a temporary reduction of blood glucose
level at 24 h after stroke. ***p ⬍ 0.005. ****p ⬍ 0.001. N ⫽
6 or 7/group.

3860 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

Figure 7. Acutely induced hyperglycemia does not impair leptomeningeal collateral recruitment during stroke in the db/⫹ mice. Hyperglycemia was induced by glucose injection at 60 min
before the onset of MCAO and maintained by a booster injection at 30 min after MCAO. A, Representative DOCT images of hyperglycemic and normoglycemic control mice at baseline and during
MCAO. Dotted white lines indicate the divide between MCA and ACA territory The anatomic orientation of the brain is indicated with arrows pointing to the lateral (L) and anterior (A) directions.
Arrows indicate the robust retrograde flow (green) reached at proximal MCA branches during MCAO in both control and hyperglycemic db/⫹ mice. Corresponding positions at baseline were labeled
with arrows for comparison. Arrowheads indicate the tortuous collateral vessels recruited during MCAO. Quantitative data of flow velocity (B), diameter (C), and flux (D) suggest that there was no
significant difference in the flow dynamics and functional arterial diameter between hyperglycemic and control db/⫹ mice at baseline and during MCAO. Scale bar, 1 mm. N ⫽ 6 or 7/group.

vance for the short-term incidence of ischemic events due to the procoagulant and prothrombotic states (Thompson et al., 1995).
Contrary to the similar number of leptomeningeal connecting
collaterals found between db/db and db/⫹ mice in our study, the

collaterals between MCA and ACA or PCA were significantly
increased in 10-week-old GK rats, a lean model of spontaneous
Type 2 diabetes (Goto et al., 1976) with moderately elevated glucose levels, compared with control (Li et al., 2010). The increased

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3861

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

3862 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864

Figure 8. Continued.

4
Figure 8. Human albumin significantly enhances retrograde collateral flow to proximal MCA
branches after ischemic reperfusion in db/db mice. A, Timelines of stroke, imaging, and treatment. B, Representative DOCT images at 30 and 90 min after reperfusion, respectively. Albumin
or saline was infused at 60 min after reperfusion following the completion of the first DOCT scan.
Dotted white lines indicate the divide between MCA and ACA territory. The anatomic orientation of the brain is indicated with arrows pointing to the medial (M) and anterior (A) directions.
Compared with db/⫹ mice, the impaired collateral flow status in db/db mice persisted during
reperfusion (C, E), whereas the diameter of MCA segments remained unchanged (D). Following
saline administration, there was a significant reduction in the vessel diameter of all segments
(G) compared with db/⫹ mice. The relative increases in velocity in all segments were evident in
db/db mice comparing albumin- and saline-treated groups (F). In particular, the relative increase in velocity was significantly greater in Seg2 and Seg3 in db/db mice compared with db/⫹
mice (white arrows). Similarly, the relative flux increase was observed in Seg2 and Seg3 in
albumin-treated compared with saline-treated db/db mice (H). There was also a reduction in
the relative flux following saline treatment in Seg2 in the db/db compared with db/⫹ groups
(H). There was a significant reduction of infarct volume at 7 d after stroke following albumin
compared with saline treatment in the db/db mice (I). Although albumin significantly improved
the disparity in lesion size between db/⫹ and db/db mice compared with that with saline
treatment, db/db mice in general still have a larger stroke size (two-way ANOVA: diabetic effect,
F(1,18) ⫽ 15.7, p ⬍ 0.001). *p ⬍ 0.05. **p ⬍ 0.01. ***p ⬍ 0.005. ****p ⬍ 0.001. Scale bar,
1 mm. N ⫽ 5– 8/group.

collaterals in GK rats are consistent with the restoration of
cerebral perfusion at 24 h after permanent MCAO, as well as
reduced infarct size and Bederson score, despite the fact that
GK rats have increased edema, vascular permeability, MMP2,
and MMP9 levels compared with control. Interestingly, the
increased collaterals were found in 10-week-old but not in
younger 5-week-old GK rats before the onset of diabetes, suggesting that the increase might be related to hyperglycemia or
other changes associated with diabetes. The potential factors
contributing to the discrepancy in collaterals and stroke outcome between GK rats and db/db mice are unknown, except
that they are distinct models for T2DM. It would be of interest
to learn whether the GK rats maintain the phenotype of increased collaterals at an older age as aging is associated with
rarefaction of leptomeningeal anastomoses (Faber et al., 2011;
Hecht et al., 2012).
The pathophysiological interaction between hyperglycemia and
ischemic stroke is complex. Hyperglycemia not only exacerbates
infarct growth as a consequence of lactic acidosis-related reduction of penumbra survival but also induces higher intracranial
bleeding risk after thrombolytic treatment (Parsons et al., 2002;
Wahlgren et al., 2008), although the association between hyper-

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke

glycemia and poor outcome after stroke is mainly relevant to
patients with large-vessel infarction, not to those with lacuna
stroke (Bruno et al., 1999; Uyttenboogaart et al., 2007), suggesting that hyperglycemia per se may not be the major cause of poor
stroke outcome in T2DM patients. The effect of hyperglycemia
on ischemic damage also remains controversial in experimental
studies in which hyperglycemia had a protective, detrimental or
no effect on ischemic injury in models of cerebral ischemia (Martini and Kent, 2007; MacDougall and Muir, 2011). It is not entirely clear whether the discrepancy could be attributed solely to
differences in the level or model of hyperglycemia, animal species, or models of ischemia. Similarly, the findings in how hyperglycemia affects the regulation of cerebral blood flow after
ischemia are also mixed (Martini and Kent, 2007; MacDougall
and Muir, 2011; Tennant and Brown, 2013). In our study, we did
not detect collateral flow impairment either at baseline or during
MCAO when db/⫹ mice were rendered temporarily hyperglycemic, indicating that hyperglycemia alone is not sufficient in causing collateral flow impairment. This suggests that other chronic
vascular pathological mechanisms may underlie the observed impairment in collateral status in the diabetic animals with stroke.
Human albumin has emerged as a potent neuroprotective
agent in experimental stroke due to its multiple salutary actions,
including its beneficial hemodynamic and flow-enhancing effects
(Keaney et al., 1993; Belayev et al., 2002; Nimmagadda et al.,
2008). In the present study, albumin treatment significantly improved relative flow velocity and flux at the proximal MCA segment compared with saline treatment in the db/db mice after
ischemic reperfusion, whereas the benefits at the distal MCA segment were not apparent, possibly because of its proximity to ACA
and a greater chance of receiving spontaneous restoration of collateral flow. In contrast to db/db mice, albumin treatment showed
less benefit in improving collateral flow and in reducing infarct
size in the db/⫹ mice. This is in line with the findings of a recent
study that albumin had no flow-enhancing effect at distal MCAs
in wild-type CD-1 mice who had relatively robust brain collateralization, compared with the more frank augmentation of collateral circulation in the poorly collateralized BALB/C strain
(Defazio et al., 2012). Based on the above results and our data,
albumin may be less effective to augment collateral flow in nonpathological and well-collateralized animals that already have a
robust collateral compensation. Thus, albumin may have a more
favorable effect on collateral augmentation in those with functionally or anatomically impaired collateral vessels. Furthermore,
several mechanisms have been proposed to underlie albuminmediated intravascular effects, including intravascular volume
expansion, hemodilution (Belayev et al., 1998), decreased red
blood cell sedimentation under low-flow conditions (Defazio et
al., 2012), and reduced platelet aggregation (Gresele et al., 1984;
Nimmagadda et al., 2008). The latter studies may support our
data showing that albumin improved the flux more efficiently in
db/db mice, albeit predisposed to increased platelet accumulation
and thrombi formation (Obrenovitch and Hallenbeck, 1985;
Braaten et al., 1993; Granger et al., 2010). The ability of albumin
in inhibiting platelet aggregation by sequestering arachidonic
acid released into extracellular space (Porcellati et al., 1995) cannot be substituted by the simple dilution effect of saline.
In conclusion, we found that T2DM mice exhibited impaired
leptomeningeal collateral flow recruitment during stroke that
was not attributable to acute hyperglycemia. Albumin treatment
reduced collateral flow impairment and infarction volume by
augmenting collateral flow, particularly at proximal MCAs. The
failure of collaterization in T2DM mice via both primary and

J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864 • 3863

secondary collateral pathways during chronic hypoperfusion
may contribute to hemodynamic compromise that increases the
risk for ischemic stroke.

References
Alessi MC, Juhan-Vague I (2006) PAI-1 and the metabolic syndrome: links,
causes, and consequences. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 26:2200 –2207.
CrossRef Medline
Armitage GA, Todd KG, Shuaib A, Winship IR (2010) Laser speckle contrast imaging of collateral blood flow during acute ischemic stroke.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 30:1432–1436. CrossRef Medline
Belayev L, Zhao W, Pattany PM, Weaver RG, Huh PW, Lin B, Busto R,
Ginsberg MD (1998) Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging
confirms marked neuroprotective efficacy of albumin therapy in focal
cerebral ischemia. Stroke 29:2587–2599. CrossRef Medline
Belayev L, Liu Y, Zhao W, Busto R, Ginsberg MD (2001) Human albumin
therapy of acute ischemic stroke: marked neuroprotective efficacy at
moderate doses and with a broad therapeutic window. Stroke 32:553–560.
CrossRef Medline
Belayev L, Pinard E, Nallet H, Seylaz J, Liu Y, Riyamongkol P, Zhao W, Busto
R, Ginsberg MD (2002) Albumin therapy of transient focal cerebral
ischemia: in vivo analysis of dynamic microvascular responses. Stroke
33:1077–1084. CrossRef Medline
Braaten JV, Handt S, Jerome WG, Kirkpatrick J, Lewis JC, Hantgan RR
(1993) Regulation of fibrinolysis by platelet-released plasminogen activator inhibitor 1: light scattering and ultrastructural examination of lysis
of a model platelet-fibrin thrombus. Blood 81:1290 –1299. Medline
Bruno A, Biller J, Adams HP Jr, Clarke WR, Woolson RF, Williams LS, Hansen MD (1999) Acute blood glucose level and outcome from ischemic
stroke: Trial of ORG 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) Investigators. Neurology 52:280 –284. CrossRef Medline
Caplan LR, Hennerici M (1998) Impaired clearance of emboli (washout) is
an important link between hypoperfusion, embolism, and ischemic
stroke. Arch Neurol 55:1475–1482. CrossRef Medline
Chen J, Cui X, Zacharek A, Cui Y, Roberts C, Chopp M (2011) White matter
damage and the effect of matrix metalloproteinases in type 2 diabetic mice
after stroke. Stroke 42:445– 452. CrossRef Medline
Defazio RA, Zhao W, Deng X, Obenaus A, Ginsberg MD (2012) Albumin
therapy enhances collateral perfusion after laser-induced middle cerebral
artery branch occlusion: a laser speckle contrast flow study. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 32:2012–2022. CrossRef Medline
Dobrin PB, Schwarcz TH, Baker WH (1988) Mechanisms of arterial and
aneurysmal tortuosity. Surgery 104:568 –571. Medline
Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration, Sarwar N, Gao P, Seshasai SR, Gobin R,
Kaptoge S, Di Angelantonio E, Ingelsson E, Lawlor DA, Selvin E, Stampfer
M, Stehouwer CD, Lewington S, Pennells L, Thompson A, Sattar N,
White IR, Ray KK, Danesh J (2010) Diabetes mellitus, fasting blood glucose concentration, and risk of vascular disease: a collaborative metaanalysis of 102 prospective studies. Lancet 375:2215–2222. CrossRef
Medline
Faber JE, Zhang H, Lassance-Soares RM, Prabhakar P, Najafi AH, Burnett
MS, Epstein SE (2011) Aging causes collateral rarefaction and increased
severity of ischemic injury in multiple tissues. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 31:1748 –1756. CrossRef Medline
Faber JE, Chilian WM, Deindl E, van Royen N, Simons M (2014) A brief
etymology of the collateral circulation. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol
34:1854 –1859. CrossRef Medline
Fuentes B, Castillo J, San José B, Leira R, Serena J, Vivancos J, Dávalos A,
Nuñez AG, Egido J, Díez-Tejedor E, Díez-Tejedor E (2009) The prognostic value of capillary glucose levels in acute stroke: the GLycemia in
Acute Stroke (GLIAS) study. Stroke 40:562–568. CrossRef Medline
Goto Y, Kakizaki M, Masaki N (1976) Production of spontaneous diabetic
rats by repetition of selective breeding. Tohoku J Exp Med 119:85–90.
CrossRef Medline
Granger DN, Rodrigues SF, Yildirim A, Senchenkova EY (2010) Microvascular responses to cardiovascular risk factors. Microcirculation 17:192–
205. CrossRef Medline
Grant PJ (2007) Diabetes mellitus as a prothrombotic condition. J Intern
Med 262:157–172. CrossRef Medline
Gresele P, Deckmyn H, Huybrechts E, Vermylen J (1984) Serum albumin
enhances the impairment of platelet aggregation with thromboxane syn-

3864 • J. Neurosci., March 4, 2015 • 35(9):3851–3864
thase inhibition by increasing the formation of prostaglandin D2.
Biochem Pharmacol 33:2083–2088. CrossRef Medline
Hecht N, He J, Kremenetskaia I, Nieminen M, Vajkoczy P, Woitzik J (2012)
Cerebral hemodynamic reserve and vascular remodeling in C57BL/6 mice
are influenced by age. Stroke 43:3052–3062. CrossRef Medline
Hill MD, Martin RH, Palesch YY, Tamariz D, Waldman BD, Ryckborst KJ,
Moy CS, Barsan WG, Ginsberg MD (2011) The Albumin in Acute
Stroke Part 1 Trial: an exploratory efficacy analysis. Stroke 42:1621–1625.
CrossRef Medline
Hoi Y, Gao L, Tremmel M, Paluch RA, Siddiqui AH, Meng H, Mocco J
(2008) In vivo assessment of rapid cerebrovascular morphological adaptation following acute blood flow increase. J Neurosurg 109:1141–1147.
CrossRef Medline
Keaney JF Jr, Simon DI, Stamler JS, Jaraki O, Scharfstein J, Vita JA, Loscalzo J (1993)
NO forms an adduct with serum albumin that has endothelium-derived relaxing
factor-like properties. J Clin Invest 91:1582–1589. CrossRef Medline
Kumari R, Willing LB, Patel SD, Baskerville KA, Simpson IA (2011) Increased cerebral matrix metalloprotease-9 activity is associated with compromised recovery in the diabetic db/db mouse following a stroke.
J Neurochem 119:1029 –1040. CrossRef Medline
Li Q, Atochin D, Kashiwagi S, Earle J, Wang A, Mandeville E, Hayakawa K,
d’Uscio LV, Lo EH, Katusic Z, Sessa W, Huang PL (2013) Deficient
eNOS phosphorylation is a mechanism for diabetic vascular dysfunction
contributing to increased stroke size. Stroke 44:3183–3188. CrossRef
Medline
Li W, Prakash R, Kelly-Cobbs AI, Ogbi S, Kozak A, El-Remessy AB,
Schreihofer DA, Fagan SC, Ergul A (2010) Adaptive cerebral neovascularization in a model of type 2 diabetes: relevance to focal cerebral ischemia. Diabetes 59:228 –235. CrossRef Medline
Li Y, Song Y, Zhao L, Gaidosh G, Laties AM, Wen R (2008) Direct labeling
and visualization of blood vessels with lipophilic carbocyanine dye DiI.
Nat Protoc 3:1703–1708. CrossRef Medline
Liebeskind DS (2003) Collateral circulation. Stroke 34:2279 –2284. CrossRef
Medline
Liebeskind DS (2013) Trials of endovascular therapies or collaterals? Int J
Stroke 8:258 –259. CrossRef Medline
Liu J, Wang Y, Akamatsu Y, Lee CC, Stetler RA, Lawton MT, Yang GY (2013)
Vascular remodeling after ischemic stroke: mechanisms and therapeutic
potentials. Prog Neurobiol 115:138 –156. CrossRef Medline
MacDougall NJ, Muir KW (2011) Hyperglycaemia and infarct size in animal models of middle cerebral artery occlusion: systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31:807– 818. CrossRef Medline
Majid A, He YY, Gidday JM, Kaplan SS, Gonzales ER, Park TS, Fenstermacher
JD, Wei L, Choi DW, Hsu CY (2000) Differences in vulnerability to
permanent focal cerebral ischemia among 3 common mouse strains.
Stroke 31:2707–2714. CrossRef Medline
Martini SR, Kent TA (2007) Hyperglycemia in acute ischemic stroke: a vascular perspective. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 27:435– 451. CrossRef
Medline
Megherbi SE, Milan C, Minier D, Couvreur G, Osseby GV, Tilling K, Di Carlo
A, Inzitari D, Wolfe CD, Moreau T, Giroud M (2003) Association between diabetes and stroke subtype on survival and functional outcome 3
months after stroke: data from the European BIOMED Stroke Project.
Stroke 34:688 – 694. CrossRef Medline
Menon BK, Smith EE, Coutts SB, Welsh DG, Faber JE, Goyal M, Hill MD,
Demchuk AM, Damani Z, Cho KH, Chang HW, Hong JH, Sohn SI
(2013) Leptomeningeal collaterals are associated with modifiable metabolic risk factors. Ann Neurol 74:241–248. Medline
Nimmagadda A, Park HP, Prado R, Ginsberg MD (2008) Albumin therapy
improves local vascular dynamics in a rat model of primary microvascular
thrombosis: a two-photon laser-scanning microscopy study. Stroke 39:
198 –204. CrossRef Medline
Obrenovitch TP, Hallenbeck JM (1985) Platelet accumulation in regions of
low blood flow during the postischemic period. Stroke 16:224 –234.
CrossRef Medline
Parsons MW, Barber PA, Desmond PM, Baird TA, Darby DG, Byrnes G, Tress

Akamatsu et al. • Impaired Collateral Flow in Diabetics with Stroke
BM, Davis SM (2002) Acute hyperglycemia adversely affects stroke outcome: a magnetic resonance imaging and spectroscopy study. Ann Neurol
52:20 –28. CrossRef Medline
Porcellati S, Gresele P, Stasi M, Buratta S, Horrocks LA, De Franceschi S,
Nenci GG, Goracci G (1995) Albumin prevents TxB, formation from
thrombin-stimulated human platelets by sequestering the liberated arachidonic acid in the extracellular space. Platelets 6:381–387. CrossRef
Medline
Raber J, Fan Y, Matsumori Y, Liu Z, Weinstein PR, Fike JR, Liu J (2004)
Irradiation attenuates neurogenesis and exacerbates ischemia-induced
deficits. Ann Neurol 55:381–389. CrossRef Medline
Sangle GV, Zhao R, Mizuno TM, Shen GX (2010) Involvement of RAGE,
NADPH oxidase, and Ras/Raf-1 pathway in glycated LDL-induced expression of heat shock factor-1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 in
vascular endothelial cells. Endocrinology 151:4455– 4466. CrossRef
Medline
Santisakultarm TP, Schaffer CB (2011) Optically quantified cerebral blood
flow. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31:1337–1338. CrossRef Medline
Schaffer CB, Friedman B, Nishimura N, Schroeder LF, Tsai PS, Ebner FF,
Lyden PD, Kleinfeld D (2006) Two-photon imaging of cortical surface
microvessels reveals a robust redistribution in blood flow after vascular
occlusion. PLoS Biol 4:e22. CrossRef Medline
Shih AY, Friedman B, Drew PJ, Tsai PS, Lyden PD, Kleinfeld D (2009) Active
dilation of penetrating arterioles restores red blood cell flux to penumbral
neocortex after focal stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 29:738 –751. CrossRef
Medline
Shuaib A, Butcher K, Mohammad AA, Saqqur M, Liebeskind DS (2011)
Collateral blood vessels in acute ischaemic stroke: a potential therapeutic
target. Lancet Neurol 10:909 –921. CrossRef Medline
Srinivasan VJ, Atochin DN, Radhakrishnan H, Jiang JY, Ruvinskaya S, Wu W,
Barry S, Cable AE, Ayata C, Huang PL, Boas DA (2011) Optical coherence tomography for the quantitative study of cerebrovascular physiology. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 31:1339 –1345. CrossRef Medline
Sun C, Sun H, Wu S, Lee CC, Akamatsu Y, Wang RK, Kernie SG, Liu J (2013)
Conditional ablation of neuroprogenitor cells in adult mice impedes recovery of poststroke cognitive function and reduces synaptic connectivity
in the perforant pathway. J Neurosci 33:17314 –17325. CrossRef Medline
Tennant KA, Brown CE (2013) Diabetes augments in vivo microvascular
blood flow dynamics after stroke. J Neurosci 33:19194 –19204. CrossRef
Medline
Thompson SG, Kienast J, Pyke SD, Haverkate F, van de Loo JC (1995) Hemostatic factors and the risk of myocardial infarction or sudden death in
patients with angina pectoris: European Concerted Action on Thrombosis and Disabilities Angina Pectoris Study Group. N Engl J Med 332:635–
641. CrossRef Medline
Trost S, Pratley R, Sobel B (2006) Impaired fibrinolysis and risk for cardiovascular disease in the metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. Curr Diab
Rep 6:47–54. CrossRef Medline
Uyttenboogaart M, Koch MW, Stewart RE, Vroomen PC, Luijckx GJ, De
Keyser J (2007) Moderate hyperglycaemia is associated with favourable
outcome in acute lacunar stroke. Brain 130:1626 –1630. CrossRef Medline
Wahlgren N, Ahmed N, Dávalos A, Hacke W, Millán M, Muir K, Roine RO,
Toni D, Lees KR (2008) Thrombolysis with alteplase 3– 4.5 h after acute
ischaemic stroke (SITS-ISTR): an observational study. Lancet 372:1303–
1309. CrossRef Medline
Wang RK, An L (2009) Doppler optical micro-angiography for volumetric
imaging of vascular perfusion in vivo. Opt Express 17:8926 – 8940.
CrossRef Medline
Won SJ, Tang XN, Suh SW, Yenari MA, Swanson RA (2011) Hyperglycemia
promotes tissue plasminogen activator-induced hemorrhage by increasing superoxide production. Ann Neurol 70:583–590. CrossRef Medline
Zhang L, Schallert T, Zhang ZG, Jiang Q, Arniego P, Li Q, Lu M, Chopp M
(2002) A test for detecting long-term sensorimotor dysfunction in the
mouse after focal cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Methods 117:207–214.
CrossRef Medline

