bs_bs_banner

Copyright © 2014 International Center for Artificial Organs and Transplantation and Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Real-Time Trafficking of PEGylated Liposomes in the
Rodent Focal Brain Ischemia Analyzed by Positron
Emission Tomography
*Tatsuya Fukuta, *Takayuki Ishii, *Tomohiro Asai,*Genki Nakamura,
*Yoshihito Takeuchi, *Akihiko Sato, *Yurika Agato, *Kosuke Shimizu, †Shuji Akai,
‡Dai Fukumoto, ‡Norihiro Harada, ‡Hideo Tsukada, §Akira T. Kawaguchi,
and *Naoto Oku
*Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka; †Department
of Synthetic Medicinal Chemistry, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka; ‡Central
Research Laboratory, Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Hamamatsu; and §Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan

Abstract: A liposomal drug delivery system was previously
applied to ischemic brain model rats for the treatment
of brain ischemia, and we observed that 100-nm-sized
liposomes could extravasate and accumulate in the ischemic brain region even when cerebral blood flow was
markedly reduced in permanent middle cerebral artery
occlusion (p-MCAO) model rats. In the present study,
we investigated the real-time cerebral distribution of
polyethylene glycol (PEG)-modified liposomes (PEGliposomes) labeled with 1-[18F]fluoro-3,6-dioxatetracosane
in p-MCAO rats by positron emission tomography (PET).
[18F]-Labeled PEG-liposomes were intravenously injected
into p-MCAO rats 1 h after the onset of occlusion, and

then a PET scan was performed for 2 h. The PET scan
showed that the signal intensity of [18F] gradually increased
in the ischemic region despite the drastic reduction in
cerebral perfusion, suggesting that PEG-liposomes had
accumulated in and around the ischemic region. Therefore,
drug delivery to the ischemic region by use of liposomes
would be possible under ischemic conditions, and a
liposomal drug delivery system could be a promising strategy for protecting the ischemic brain from damage before
recovery from ischemia. Key Words: Liposome—Positron emission tomography—Ischemic stroke—Drug delivery system—Permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion.

Ischemic stroke is a disease with high mortality and
the leading cause of adult disability in the world (1).
Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) is the only
therapeutic agent approved worldwide for the treatment of ischemic stroke (2). However, due to the
narrow therapeutic time window and safety concerns
about t-PA, the number of patients treatable by this
agent is very limited (3). Therefore, more widely

applicable and effective therapy is urgently needed,
as few drugs for the treatment of brain injury due to
stroke have been approved because most candidate
drugs have shown insufficient efficacy and/or adverse
side effects in clinical trials (4). As a strategy to
overcome these problems by using selective drug
delivery to the lesioned area, we previously demonstrated the usefulness of the liposomal drug delivery
system (DDS) for the treatment of cerebral ischemia/
reperfusion (I/R) injury, which is a secondary injury
occurring after the start of reperfusion following
an ischemic stroke (5,6). This approach is based
on the increased vascular permeability of the blood–
brain barrier (BBB) after cerebral ischemia and
reperfusion. Moreover, 100-nm liposomes accumulate in the ischemic core and penumbra region when
they are intravenously injected into permanent
middle cerebral artery occlusion (p-MCAO) model

doi:10.1111/aor.12350
Received October 2013; revised April 2014.
Address correspondence and reprint requests to Prof. Naoto
Oku, Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Suruga-ku,
Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan. E-mail: oku@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp
Presented in part at the 4th International Symposium on Artificial Oxygen Carriers, held September 28, 2013 in Yokohama,
Japan.
Artificial Organs 2014, 38(8):662–666

REAL-TIME TRAFFICKING OF PEGYLATED LIPOSOMES
rats 1 or 2 h after occlusion, despite the dramatic
reduction in cerebral blood flow caused by filament
insertion into the middle cerebral artery (MCA) (7).
However, the actual in vivo behavior of liposomes in
the brain during the ischemic state remains unclear.
Positron emission tomography (PET), which uses
positron-emitting nuclides, is one of the useful technologies for determining the real-time distribution of
materials noninvasively in vivo. For this purpose,
liposomes are labeled with an amphiphilic probe,
1-[18F]fluoro-3,6-dioxatetracosane (SteP2), inserted
into the liposomal membrane by a solid-phase transition (SophT) method (8). Using this method, we
previously observed the distribution of liposomesencapsulating hemoglobin in the penumbra region of
the ischemic brain of ischemia model rats (9). We
also demonstrated the usefulness of liposomal DDS
for PET imaging of brain cancer (10). In the present
study, we investigated the cerebral distribution of
[18F]-labeled PEG-liposomes in p-MCAO rats by
using PET to demonstrate whether liposomes could
enter the ischemic brain region and to determine
whether liposomal DDS could potentially be a therapeutic strategy for ischemic stroke.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
Male Wistar rats (180–220 g) were purchased from
Japan SLC, Inc. (Shizuoka, Japan). The animals were
cared for according to the Animal Facility Guidelines
of the University of Shizuoka. All animal procedures
were approved by the Animal and Ethics Review
Committee of the University of Shizuoka.
p-MCAO rats
p-MCAO rats were prepared as described previously (11). In brief, rats were anesthetized with 3%
isoflurane and maintained with 1.5% isoflurane
during the surgery (17 ± 2.2 min). Rectal temperature was maintained at 37°C with a heating pad.
After a median incision of the neck skin had been
made, the right common carotid artery, external
carotid artery, and internal carotid artery (ICA)
were isolated. A 4-0 nylon filament was coated with
silicon and inserted into the right ICA and advanced
to the origin of the MCA to occlude it. Silk thread
was used for ligation to keep the filament at the site
of insertion into the MCA. After the operation, the
neck was closed and anesthesia was discontinued.
Success of the surgery was judged by the appearance
of both hemiparesis and an increase in body temperature to over 38.0°C at 40 min after occlusion.

663

For the PET study, eight rats were subjected to the
MCAO surgery, and the successful three rats were
used.
Preparation of PEG-liposomes
PEG-liposomes composed of distearoylphosphatidylcholine (DSPC), cholesterol, and distearoylphosphatidylethanolamine-PEG (20:10:1 as a molar
ratio; molecular weight of PEG was 2000) were prepared as follows: lipids dissolved in chloroform were
evaporated to form a thin lipid film using a rotary
evaporator. The lipid film was desiccated for at least
1 h under reduced pressure. The dried lipid film was
then hydrated with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS;
pH 7.4). The liposomal solution was freeze–thawed
for three cycles with liquid nitrogen and sonicated
for 10 min at 65°C with a bath-type sonicator.
Finally, the particle size of the PEG-liposomes
was adjusted by extrusion of the particles through
polycarbonate membrane filters having 100-nm pores
(Nuclepore, Cambridge, MA, USA), and then the
particle size and ζ-potential of liposomes were
measured with a Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK).
Preparation of positron emitter-labeled
PEG-liposomes
Synthesis of [18F]SteP2 and positron labeling
of PEG-liposomes by the SophT method were
performed as described previously (8,9). About
100 MBq of [18F]SteP2 in ethanol solution was transferred to a glass test tube, and the solvent was
removed completely at 90°C under a flow of helium
gas. The liposomal solution was then added to the
tube coated with [18F]SteP2, and incubated for 15 min
at 65°C with 5-s mixing by use of a vortex mixer every
3 min. After the incubation, the liposomal solution
was washed by centrifugation at 100 000 × g for
15 min (Beckman, Fullerton, CA, USA) for removing any noninserted [18F]SteP2, if present. Then, the
pellet was resuspended and diluted in PBS to prepare
a 22 MBq/mL solution. Finally, the radioactivity in
the liposomal solution was measured with a Curie
meter (IGC-3, Aloka, Japan).
PET imaging and autoradiography
After judgment of success of the surgery,
p-MCAO rats were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of chloral hydrate at 400 mg/kg,
followed by continuous intravenous infusion at a rate
of 100 mg/kg/h throughout the PET experiment.
Before the PET analysis, the rats were placed in a
small animal computed tomography (CT) scanner
(Clairvivo CT; Shimadzu, Japan) to obtain CT
Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

664

T. FUKUTA ET AL.

images. At 1 hafter the onset of occlusion, the rats
were injected intravenously with [18F]-labeled PEGliposomes (10 MBq/rat). The PET scan was started
immediately after the injection of the liposomes and
performed for 120 min with a small animal PET
instrument (Clairvivo PET; Shimadzu, Japan). After
the PET scan, the rats were sacrificed and the brain
was sliced into 2-mm sections and set on an imaging
plate. Autoradiograms were obtained using a
bioimaging analyzer system (BAS2000, Fuji Film,
Tokyo, Japan). For obtaining time-activity curves of
[18F], the signal intensity of [18F] in the images from
the PET scan was calculated using an image-analysis
system (NIH Image J, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA). The signal intensity of [18F] in
the region of interest was determined.
Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired
Student’s t-test.

RESULTS
Cerebral distribution of [18F]-labeled
PEG-liposomes in the ischemic core region
The particle size and ζ-potential of PEGliposomes for PET scanning were 99.1 ± 8.9 nm and
−2.9 ± 1.4 mV, respectively, before incubation with
[18F]SteP2. We previously confirmed that these biochemical properties of liposomes were not affected
by use of the SophT method (8). PEG-liposomes that
had been labeled with [18F]SteP2 were intravenously
administered into p-MCAO rats 1 h after the onset of
occlusion, and the PET scan was performed immediately after that for 2 h. Each single image for every
10-min period was obtained by integration of the
total photon numbers during this period (Fig. 1A).
An anatomical image of the brain area corresponding
to the PET image was obtained by CT scanning
(Fig. 1B). In an early phase after the injection of the
liposomes, the [18F] signal intensity was rather low

A

0-10 min

10-20

20-30

30-40

40-50

50-60

60-70

70-80

80-90

90-100

100-110

110-120

B

FIG. 1. PET imaging of [18F]-labeled
PEG-liposomes in the ischemic region of
p-MCAO rats. p-MCAO rats were injected
intravenously with [18F]-labeled PEGliposomes (10 MBq/rat) at 1 h after the
onset of occlusion. (A) The distribution of
[18F]SteP2 was determined for 2 h with the
Clairvivo PET system. The original data
were reconstructed, and 10-min data were
integrated to give each single image. The
arrow indicates the ischemic region, and
the right hemisphere of these images
shows the ischemic side. (B) CT image in
the same region as PET images. (C)
Bioimaging analyzer system image of a rat
brain slice around the ischemic core
region. The figure is a representative
image from three independent experiments, all of which demonstrated similar
results.

C
H

L

Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

REAL-TIME TRAFFICKING OF PEGYLATED LIPOSOMES
around the ischemic core region, due to suppressed
blood flow. However, it gradually increased during
2 h in this region on the ischemic side, indicating that
the PEG-liposomes had accumulated around the
ischemic core region time-dependently, as the blood
flow would be lower than that on the nonischemic
side (left hemisphere of the brain). An autoradiogram of the brain obtained after 2 h of PET scanning
also showed higher [18F] radioactivity in the ischemic
hemisphere (Fig. 1C).
Time-activity curves of [18F]SteP2 during the
PET scan
Time-activity curves of [18F] in the p-MCAO
rats were obtained by determining signal intensity
at each time point (Fig. 2). As shown in the figure,
a gradual accumulation of [18F] on the ischemic side was observed. However, that on the
nonischemic side changed only slightly after early
increase until 30 min, indicating that the most of the
signal intensity represented PEG-liposomes circulating in the bloodstream. In fact, increase in
relative signal intensity during 30–120 min was 7555
for ischemic side and 1776 for nonischemic side,
respectively.

35000

30000

Signal intensity

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

Ischemic side
Nonischemic side

0

FIG. 2. Time-activity curves of [18F] signal intensity determined
from the 2-h PET scanning of the brains of p-MCAO rats indicating the signal intensity in the ischemic and nonischemic
brain hemisphere. Data are presented as the mean ± standard
deviation (n = 3).

665

DISCUSSION
To clarify the in vivo distribution of materials,
including DDS carriers, a noninvasive method is
useful for evaluating topological aspects of the materials. Although the method was invasive, we previously observed the extravasation of liposomes and
their accumulation in the ischemic core and penumbra region of excised and sliced p-MCAO rat brains
even when the cerebral blood flow had been greatly
reduced (7). In the present study, we sought to reveal
the PET-detected cerebral distribution of 100-nmsized PEG-liposomes in p-MCAO rats that had been
injected under ischemic conditions to demonstrate
the possibility of liposomal DDS for the treatment of
ischemic stroke. The PET results indicated that the
signal intensity of [18F]SteP2-labeled PEG-liposomes
gradually increased in the ischemic region after the
start of the PET scan, suggesting that the PEGliposomes had accumulated in the ischemic core
and penumbra region time-dependently in these
p-MCAO rats, although the effect of isoflurane anesthesia during MCAO surgery in this study is not completely clear. Nanoparticles, such as liposomes, are
known to accumulate in tumors due to the enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect (12). Concerning the BBB, it was earlier reported that a reduction in the content of tight-junction proteins in the
BBB occurs at an early stage of cerebral ischemia
and that the integrity of the tight-junctions is thus
disrupted (5,13). Considering these findings, the
present results of PET scanning showing that the
[18F] intensity gradually increased in the ischemic
hemisphere of the brain suggest that the PEGliposomes had passed through the spaces between
cerebrovascular endothelial cells and accumulated in
the ischemic core and the penumbra region by the
EPR effect despite the cerebral perfusion being
reduced in the ipsilateral hemisphere. In addition,
there was little signal intensity found on the ischemic
side for a while after administration of the positronlabeled PEG-liposomes, indicating that the cerebral
blood flow in the right hemisphere of the p-MCAO
rats had certainly been reduced by the MCAO
surgery.
Cerebral I/R injury, which occurs after the restoration of blood flow, is one of the main causes of the poor
outcome for ischemic stroke patients. We previously
reported that the intravenous administration of
liposomal asialo-erythropoietin to rats immediately
after reperfusion following 1 h of occlusion significantly suppressed the brain damage and improved
motor functional deficits caused by the ischemia
and reperfusion (6,14). In light of the present and
Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

666

T. FUKUTA ET AL.

previous studies, the delivery of neuroprotective
agents into the ischemic area by using liposomal DDS
before reperfusion would be expected to potentially
protect against brain damage selectively and effectively during the ischemic state. For patients with a
cerebral infarction, an adequate treatment for salvage
of the penumbra is needed for a good clinical outcome
(15). Therefore, diagnostic technology for detecting
the ischemic penumbra is also desired. PET is used not
only as a real-time imaging technology using positron
emitter-labeled compounds in vivo but also as a diagnostic tool in clinical settings. The present results
indicate the difficulty of diagnosis by use of positron
emitter-labeled PEG-liposomes and PET, because
increased accumulation of liposomes in the ischemic
region was canceled by the decreased flow of blood
containing the circulating liposomes. PEG-liposomes
accumulated in the ischemic region by only passive
targeting due to, we assume, the EPR effect. In contrast, one of the advantages of the application of DDS
technology is the possible modification of carriers
with some active targeting probes for increasing the
interaction between the liposomes and their targets.
Regarding the diagnosis of the penumbra region by
liposomal DDS, it may be expected that modification
of liposomes with some targeting molecules specific
for neuronal cells in the penumbra may make it possible to detect this region specifically by PET.
CONCLUSIONS
The real-time distribution of 100-nm PEGliposomes in the brains of permanent middle cerebral
artery occlusion rats was investigated by the use of
positron emission tomography. Although the signal
intensity of [18F] was low on the ischemic side at an
early phase after the injection, the PEG-liposomes
gradually accumulated in the ischemic core and penumbra region time-dependently even though the
blood perfusion was drastically reduced. This observation indicates that drug delivery to the ischemic
region by using liposomes may be possible during
the ischemic state and suggests that liposomal DDS
has the potential as a therapeutic strategy for
neuroprotection before thrombolytic therapy for
ischemic stroke.

Artif Organs, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2014

Acknowledgment: This research was supported
by a grant-in-aid for scientific research from the
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

REFERENCES
1. Lloyd-Jones D, Adams RJ, Brown TM, et al. Heart disease
and stroke statistics—2010 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation 2010;121:e46–215.
2. Iadecola C, Anrather J. Stroke research at a crossroad: asking
the brain for directions. Nat Neurosci 2011;14:1363–8.
3. Adeoye O, Hornung R, Katri P, Kleindorfer D. Recombinant
tissue-type plasminogen activator use for ischemic stroke in
the United States: a doubling of treatment rates over the
course of 5 years. Stroke 2011;42:1952–5.
4. Ginsberg MD. Neuroprotection for ischemic stroke: past,
present and future. Neuropharmacology 2008;55:363–89.
5. Latour LL, Kang DW, Ezzeddine MA, Chalela JA, Warach S.
Early blood-brain disruption in human focal brain ischemia.
Ann Neurol 2004;56:468–77.
6. Ishii T, Asai T, Oyama D, et al. Amelioration of cerebral
ischemia-reperfusion injury based on liposomal drug delivery system with asialo-erythropoietin. J Control Release
2012;160:81–7.
7. Ishii T, Fukuta T, Agato Y, et al. Nanoparticles accumulate in
ischemic core and penumbra region even when cerebral
perfusion is reduced. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
2013;430:1201–5.
8. Urakami T, Akai S, Katayama Y, Harada N, Tsukada H,
Oku N. Novel amphiphilic probes for [18F]-radiolabeling
preformed liposomes and determination of liposomal trafficking by positron emission tomography. J Med Chem
2007;50:6454–7.
9. Urakami T, Kawaguchi AT, Akai S, et al. In vivo distribution
of liposome-encapsulated hemoglobin determined by positron
emission tomography. Artif Organs 2009;33:164–8.
10. Oku N, Yamashita M, Katayama Y, et al. PET imaging of
brain cancer with positron emitter-labeled liposomes. Int J
Pharm 2011;403:170–7.
11. Nagasawa H, Kogure K. Correlation between cerebral blood
flow and histologic changes in a new rat model of middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Stroke 1989;20:1037–43.
12. Maeda H, Wu J, Sawa T, Matsumura Y, Hori K. Tumor
vascular permeability and the EPR effect in macromolecular therapeutics: a review. J Control Release 2000;65:271–
84.
13. Zehendner CM, Librizzi L, de Curtis M, Kuhlmann CR,
Luhmann HJ. Caspase-3 contributes to ZO-1 and CL-5
tight-junction disruption in rapid anoxic neurovascular unit
damage. PLoS ONE 2011;6:e16760.
14. Ishii T, Asai T, Fukuta T, et al. A single injection of liposomal
asialo-erythropoietin improves motor functional deficit caused
by cerebral ischemia/reperfuision. Int J Pharm 2012;439:269–
74.
15. Lo EH. A new penumbra: transitioning from injury into repair
after stroke. Nat Med 2008;14:497–500.

