Published November 16, 2015

This article has original data in the JCB Data Viewer

JCB: Article

http://jcb-dataviewer.rupress.org/jcb/browse/11652

Oxidative stress–dependent phosphorylation activates
ZNRF1 to induce neuronal/axonal degeneration
Shuji Wakatsuki,1 Akiko Furuno,1 Makiko Ohshima,2 and Toshiyuki Araki1
1Department

of Peripheral Nervous System Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan
of Regenerative Medicine and Tissue Engineering, National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center Research Institute, Suita, Osaka 565-8565, Japan

Oxidative stress is a well-known inducer of neuronal apoptosis and axonal degeneration. We previously showed that
the E3 ubiquitin ligase ZNRF1 promotes Wallerian degeneration by degrading AKT to induce GSK3B activation. We
now demonstrate that oxidative stress serves as an activator of the ubiquitin ligase activity of ZNRF1 by inducing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)–mediated phosphorylation at the 103rd tyrosine residue and that the up-regulation
of ZNRF1 activity by oxidative stress leads to neuronal apoptosis and Wallerian degeneration. We also show that nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate–reduced oxidase activity is required for the EGFR-dependent phosphorylationinduced activation of ZNRF1 and resultant AKT degradation via the ubiquitin proteasome system to induce Wallerian
degeneration. These results indicate the pathophysiological significance of the EGFR–ZNRF1 pathway induced by oxidative stress in the regulation of neuronal apoptosis and Wallerian degeneration. A deeper understanding of the regulatory mechanism for ZNRF1 catalytic activity via phosphorylation will provide a potential therapeutic avenue for
neurodegeneration.

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY

2Department

Introduction
Neurodegeneration, which is observed in various disorders and
injuries in the nervous system, consists of neuronal cell death
and the degeneration of neuronal processes, which precedes the
death of cell bodies in most cases (Coleman and Freeman, 2010;
Wang et al., 2012). We previously reported that the ZNRF1–
AKT–GSK3B–CRMP2 pathway promotes axonal degeneration. The E3 ubiquitin ligase zinc and ring finger 1 (ZNRF1)
is constitutively expressed in most neurons in the peripheral
and central nervous systems (Araki and Milbrandt, 2003). We
showed that upon the initiation of axonal degeneration, ZNRF1
targets AKT for degradation via the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). Glycogen synthase kinase 3B (GSK3B) is activated
by the loss of AKT-mediated phosphorylation, phosphorylates
collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2) at the 514th
threonine residue (T514), and thereby inactivates CRMP2 to
induce its degradation. CRMP2 degradation leads to loss of
cytoskeletal integrity, which promotes Wallerian degeneration
(Wakatsuki et al., 2011).
Previous studies have shown that subcellular signaling,
which promotes axonal degeneration, occurs independently of
the typical cell death signal (Finn et al., 2000; Raff et al., 2002;
Whitmore et al., 2003). However, axonal protection mechanisms
Correspondence to Toshiyuki Araki: taraki@ncnp.go.jp
Abbreviations used in this paper: 6-CFDA, 6-carboxyfluorescein diacetate;
6OHDA, 6-hydroxydopamine; ANO​VA, analysis of variance; DPI, diphenylene
iodonium; DRG, dorsal root ganglion; DTAF, 5-(4,6-dichlorotriazinyl) aminofluorescein; EGFR, EGF receptor; fmk, fluoromethyl ketone; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MCAo, middle cerebral artery occlusion; RIPA, radioimmunoprecipitation
assay; SN, substantia nigra; Tg, transgenic mice; TH, tyrosine hydroxylase; TTC,
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride; UPS, ubiquitin proteasome system; WT,
wild type.

The Rockefeller University Press  $30.00
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 211 No. 4  881–896
www.jcb.org/cgi/doi/10.1083/jcb.201506102

may protect axons and cell bodies against some types of insults. For example, naturally occurring wlds mutant mice, characterized by significantly delayed Wallerian degeneration, are
protected against neuronal cell death observed in some disease
models (Coleman, 2005; Coleman and Freeman, 2010; Wang et
al., 2012). These findings suggest that some types of diseaseassociated neuronal insults elicit signaling that promotes axonal
degeneration and neuronal cell death. Previous studies reported
the phosphorylation of CRMP2, including that at T514 in dying
neuronal cell bodies in animal models of, and patients with,
brain ischemia, as well as in other neurodegenerative diseases
including Alzheimer’s disease (Ryan and Pimplikar, 2005; Cole
et al., 2007; Hou et al., 2009; Williamson et al., 2011). This
finding prompted us to examine the significance of the activation of the ZNRF1–AKT–GSK3B–CRMP2 pathway in oxidative stress–induced pathology in the nervous system because
oxidative stress has been implicated in other noted disorders.
We herein demonstrated that ZNRF1 promotes oxidative
stress–induced neuronal apoptosis by degrading AKT via the
UPS. We found that oxidative stress induces the phosphorylation of ZNRF1 at the 103rd tyrosine residue (Y103) and,
thus, increases the activity of its ubiquitin ligase to target the
AKT protein in neurons. The overexpression of the phosphorylation-resistant mutant ZNRF1 Y103F protects neurons from
6-hydroxydopamine (6OHDA)–induced apoptosis to an extent
© 2015 Wakatsuki et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the
publication date (see http​://www​.rupress​.org​/terms). After six months it is available under a
Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 3.0 Unported license,
as described at http​://creativecommons​.org​/licenses​/by​-nc​-sa​/3​.0​/).
Supplemental Material can be found at:
/content/suppl/2015/11/04/jcb.201506102.DC1.html
Original image data can be found at:
http://jcb-dataviewer.rupress.org/jcb/browse/11652
JCB

881

Published November 16, 2015

similar to that of the dominant-negative mutant ZNRF1 C184A.
We found that the oxidative stress–induced activation of
ZNRF1 by EGF receptor (EGFR)–dependent phosphorylation
is also involved in the promotion of Wallerian degeneration. We
also showed that 6OHDA-induced neurotoxicity is attenuated
in transgenic mice (Tg) expressing ZNRF1 C184A. Collectively, these results provide evidence for ZNRF1 functioning as
a critical mediator of two major neurodegenerative pathways,
neuronal apoptosis and Wallerian degeneration, by translating
oxidative stress into subcellular signaling within neurons.

Results
ZNRF1 ubiquitin ligase is activated by
oxidative stress in neurons

882

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

ZNRF1 is activated by EGFR-mediated
phosphorylation at Y103

ZNRF1 is widely and constitutively expressed in neurons in the
central nervous system and peripheral nervous system during
development and throughout adulthood (Araki and Milbrandt,
2003). Although we previously demonstrated that ZNRF1–
AKT–GSK3B–CRMP2 signaling promotes Wallerian degeneration, the expression of ZNRF1 is not sufficient to induce
Wallerian degeneration (Wakatsuki et al., 2011). Previous studies reported that some E3 ligases are not constitutively active;
they are subject to regulation by their posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation (Zhong et al., 2005; Gallagher
et al., 2006). We hypothesized that subcellular signaling involving the phosphorylation of ZNRF1 regulates ZNRF1 activity.
Based on this hypothesis, we examined changes in ZNRF1
phosphorylation in 6OHDA-treated SHSY5Y neuroblastoma
cells overexpressing ZNRF1. We found that ZNRF1 was significantly phosphorylated at tyrosine residues in SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells treated with 6OHDA (Fig. S1 C). To identify
the specific tyrosine residues phosphorylated on ZNRF1 in response to oxidative stress, we used a web-based program that
predicts the potential tyrosine phosphorylation sites of ZNRF1
and cognate kinases (NetPhos and NetPhosK, respectively).
The findings suggest that Y103 is phosphorylated by receptor
tyrosine kinases, including EGFR tyrosine kinase. In an attempt
to determine whether ZNRF1 is phosphorylated at Y103, we
raised antiserum against a synthetic phosphotyrosine peptide
corresponding to amino acids 88–116 of ZNRF1 and examined
the status of ZNRF1 phosphorylation at Y103 (ZNRF1 pY103)
in 6OHDA-treated cultured cortical neurons by an immunoblot
analysis using this antiserum (Fig. 2, A–D; and Fig. S1, D and E).
We found that ZNRF1 pY103 was induced by the 6OHDA treatment in cultured cortical neurons in dose- and time-dependent
manners (Fig. 2, A–D) and that the ZNRF1 Y103F mutant was
resistant to phosphorylation in response to 6OHDA (Fig. S1, D
and E). We then used a mouse model of 6OHDA-induced brain
lesions and the MCAo model to establish whether this phenomenon also occurs in vivo and examined the expression levels of
ZNRF1 pY103 in each model. We found that ZNRF1 pY103
was detected in brain lysates prepared from 6OHDA-lesioned
mice (Fig. S1, F and G). The expression of ZNRF1 pY103
was also detected in brain lysates using immunoblotting and
observed in neurons by immunohistochemistry in the ischemic
penumbra 4  h after MCAo (Fig.  2, E–G). The distribution of
ZNRF1 pY103 immunoreactivity in MCAo model brain tissue
was similar to that of CRMP2 pT514 (Fig. 1 A). These results
indicate that ZNRF1 is specifically phosphorylated at Y103 in
neurons in response to 6OHDA.
We examined AKT ubiquitination in 6OHDA-treated
cultured cortical neurons overexpressing WT ZNRF1 or the
ZNRF1 Y103F mutant to show that ZNRF1 pY103 is linked
to its ubiquitin ligase activity. We found that AKT expression

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

We previously reported that ZNRF1 promotes Wallerian degeneration by degrading AKT to induce GSK3B-dependent
CRMP2 phosphorylation at T514 (CRMP2 pT514; Wakatsuki
et al., 2011). CRMP2 degradation, induced by phosphorylation,
leads to microtubule destabilization, which promotes Wallerian
degeneration. Therefore, CRMP2 pT514 may be an indicator
for the activation of ZNRF1-mediated signaling in neurons.
CRMP2 pT514 is often observed in the neurons of animal models of, and patients with, brain ischemia or neurodegenerative
diseases (Ryan and Pimplikar, 2005; Cole et al., 2007; Hou et
al., 2009; Williamson et al., 2011). Oxidative stress is known to
be involved in the pathogenic mechanisms of these neurological
disorders (Barnham et al., 2004; Gandhi and Abramov, 2012).
To demonstrate that ZNRF1-mediated signaling is activated in
neurons under oxidative stress, we used a focal cerebral ischemia model. Focal ischemia is known to cause different types of
cell death. Neurons in the ischemic core undergo necrotic cell
death, whereas neurons in the ischemic penumbra surrounding the ischemic core mostly show delayed neuronal apoptosis, with oxidative stress being strongly implicated in the latter
(Ueda and Fujita, 2004; Broughton et al., 2009). We generated
a middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAo) model in adult male
mice (Fig. S1, A and B; Taguchi et al., 2010) and examined
CRMP2 pT514 in neurons in the cerebral cortex 4 h after MCAo
using immunohistochemistry. We selected this time point based
on previous findings demonstrating neuronal apoptosis in the
penumbra in the MCAo model (Guégan et al., 1998; Tsuchiya
et al., 2003; Zille et al., 2012). We found increased CRMP2
pT514 immunoreactivity in neurons in the ischemic penumbra,
but not in the infarct core (Fig. 1 A). These results indicate that
ZNRF1-mediated AKT degradation is involved in the regulation of oxidative stress–induced neuronal apoptosis.
The application of 6OHDA has frequently been used as
an inducer of oxidative stress in cultured neurons as well as in
animal tissues (Grünblatt et al., 2000; Blandini and Armentero,
2012). To determine whether oxidative stress induces ZNRF1mediated AKT degradation, we assessed the expression levels
of AKT in 6OHDA-treated primary cultured cortical neurons
overexpressing wild-type (WT) ZNRF1, ZNRF1 bearing a
C184A mutation, which serves as a dominant-negative form of
ZNRF1 (Fig. 1, B and C; Araki and Milbrandt, 2003; Wakatsuki
et al., 2011), or under RNAi-mediated ZNRF1 down-regulation
conditions (Fig. 1, D–I). We found that the degradation of AKT
was induced in 6OHDA-treated neurons. Importantly, this was
prevented by the overexpression of ZNRF1 C184A to an extent
similar to that by the treatment with the proteasome inhibitor

MG132, but was not affected by the overexpression of WT
ZNRF1 (Fig. 1, B and C). AKT expression levels were maintained in neurons expressing shRNA for ZNRF1 (Fig. 1, D–F).
AKT ubiquitination was also weaker than that observed under
nontargeting siRNA–transfected conditions (labeled as siControl), and the expression of siRNA-resistant ZNRF1 rescued
AKT ubiquitination in 6OHDA-treated neurons (Fig. 1, G–I).
These results suggest that the ubiquitin ligase activity of ZNRF1
that degrades AKT is induced by oxidative stress in neurons.

Published November 16, 2015

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

Figure 1.  ZNRF1 ubiquitin ligase activity to target AKT is induced by oxidative stress in neurons. (A) CRMP2 pT514 expression in neurons in the MCAo
model. In each set of sham and MCAo panels, the top right is an enlargement of the boxed area in the top left image, and high-power images (bottom)
show the boxed area in the top right image. The region with a reduced number of NeuN-positive neurons in the MCAo cortex was considered to be the
infarct core (indicated by asterisks). Dashed lines indicate the border between the ischemic penumbra and infarct core. Bars: (top) 1 mm; (bottom) 50 µm.
(B and C) ZNRF1 promotes UPS-mediated AKT degradation in 6OHDA-treated primary cultured cortical neurons. Representative immunoblots (B) and
quantified levels for AKT normalized to β-actin relative to the control (C) are shown. (D–F) ZNRF1 down-regulation results in decreased AKT degradation.
Representative immunoblots (D) and quantified levels for ZNRF1 (E) and AKT (F) normalized to β-actin relative to the control are shown. (G–I) ZNRF1
down-regulation decreases AKT ubiquitination in response to 6OHDA. Shown are representative immunoblots (G), immunoprecipitation using an anti-AKT
antibody analyzed by immunoblotting (H), and quantified levels for polyubiquitinated AKT normalized to β-actin relative to the control (I). Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. n = 5. Significant differences from the control (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01) were determined by a one-way ANO​VA with Tukey’s
post-hoc test. AU, arbitrary units; IgG H, IgG heavy chain; IgG L, IgG light chain; IP, immunoprecipitate; nd, no significant difference; Ub, ubiquitin.
ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

883

Published November 16, 2015

levels were significantly decreased in 6OHDA-treated neurons
expressing WT ZNRF1, but not those expressing the ZNRF1
Y103F mutant (Fig. 3, A and B). However, AKT ubiquitination
was enhanced in WT ZNRF1-expressing cells, but not in those
expressing the ZNRF1 Y103F mutant (Fig. 3, C and D). These
results suggest that ZNRF1 pY103 results in the induction of
ubiquitin ligase activity. To determine whether EGFR is involved
in the phosphorylation-dependent activation of ZNRF1, we examined the effects of compound 56 (C56), a potent inhibitor of
EGFR (Fig. S1, H–J), or RNAi-mediated EGFR down-regulation (Fig. 3, E–G) on ZNRF1 pY103 and ZNRF1-dependent increases in AKT ubiquitination in 6OHDA-treated neurons. We
found that C56 and EGFR down-regulation by specific siRNAs
significantly suppressed ZNRF1 phosphorylation and AKT
ubiquitination. AKT expression in 6OHDA-treated neurons
without the application of MG132 was significantly reduced,
and this reduction was reversed in neurons transfected with the
884

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

siRNAs for EGFR. These results confirm that the 6OHDA-induced EGFR-dependent phosphorylation of ZNRF1 leads to an
increase in ZNRF1-dependent AKT degradation via UPS. To
demonstrate that this mechanism is generally activated in response to oxidative stress, we used hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
as an alternative oxidant and obtained essentially the same results as those with 6OHDA (Fig. 3, H–J); we found that AKT
expression levels were significantly decreased in H2O2-treated
neurons, and this decrease was suppressed by specific siRNAs
for EGFR, but not by nontarget control siRNA. In accordance
with these results, we also found that AKT ubiquitination, induced by H2O2, was suppressed by siRNAs for EGFR. These
results suggest that ZNRF1 signaling is generally activated in response to oxidative stress. To show that ZNRF1 is a substrate of
phosphorylation by EGFR, we incubated recombinant ZNRF1
with EGFR and separated the resultant proteins by phosphateaffinity PAGE (Phos-Tag PAGE) in which phosphorylated

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

Figure 2.  ZNRF1 is phosphorylated at Y103
in response to oxidative stress. (A and B)
ZNRF1 pY103 in primary cultured cortical neurons is dose-dependently induced by 6OHDA.
Shown are representative immunoblots (A)
and quantified expression levels for ZNRF1
pY103 normalized to total ZNRF1 relative to
the control (B; labeled as 0; n = 5). (C and
D) Time-dependent increases in ZNRF1 pY103
in 6OHDA-treated neurons. Shown are representative immunoblots (C) and quantified expression levels for ZNRF1 pY103 normalized
to ZNRF1 relative to the control (D; labeled as
0). n = 5.  (E) ZNRF1 pY103 immunoreactivity in neurons in the MCAo model. The region
with a reduced number of NeuN-positive neurons in the MCAo cortex was considered to
be the infarct core (indicated by asterisks).
Dashed lines indicate the border between the
ischemic penumbra and infarct core. Bar, 50
µm. (F and G) ZNRF1 pY103 immunoreactivity
in the MCAo brain lysate. Cell lysates were
prepared from serial sections of MCAo (+) or
sham control (−) and subjected to an immunoblot analysis. Each lane represents brain tissue
samples from different animals (F). Quantified
levels of ZNRF1 pY103 normalized to ZNRF1
relative to the sham control are shown (G; n =
3 in each group). Data are presented as the
mean ± SEM. Significant differences from the
control (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01) were determined by a one-way ANO​VA with Tukey’s
post-hoc test in B and D or two-tailed Student’s
t test in G. AU, arbitrary units.

Published November 16, 2015

ZNRF1 is distinguishable from the nonphosphorylated form as
a slower migrating band (Kinoshita et al., 2006). We found that
ZNRF1 was significantly phosphorylated at Y103 in the presence of recombinant active EGFR (Fig. 4, A–C). The mobility
shift of ZNRF1 in Phos-Tag PAGE in the presence of recombinant active EGFR was abolished by the treatment with lambda
protein phosphatase (λPP), confirming that this shift was caused
by EGFR-dependent phosphorylation. In an effort to show that
ZNRF1 phosphorylation increases the ubiquitin ligase activity of ZNRF1, we performed an in vitro ubiquitination assay
(Wakatsuki et al., 2011; Kazlauskaite et al., 2014) to demonstrate that EGFR-dependent ZNRF1 phosphorylation leads to
an increase in AKT ubiquitination (Fig. 4, D and E). Increases
in AKT ubiquitination were significantly greater in the presence
of phosphorylated ZNRF1 than unphosphorylated ZNRF1.
Collectively, these results suggest that oxidative stress–induced
ZNRF1 pY103 is mediated by EGFR and leads to an increase in
ZNRF1-dependent AKT ubiquitination.
Oxidative stress–induced ZNRF1 activation
by EGFR-dependent phosphorylation leads
primary cultured neurons to apoptosis

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

To determine whether the activation of ZNRF1 by phosphorylation at Y103 in response to oxidative stress in neurons leads
to apoptosis, we examined the expression of markers for apoptosis and the effects of inhibitors of apoptosis on 6OHDAtreated cultured cortical neurons overexpressing ZNRF1
C184A or ZNRF1 Y103F (Fig. 5). We used the expression of
cleaved caspase 3 and annexin V labeling as markers for activation of the prototypical apoptosis pathway (Elmore, 2007).
We found that the numbers of cleaved caspase 3–positive cells
(Fig. 5, A and B), cells with nuclei exhibiting highly fluorescent
and condensed chromatin (Fig.  5, A and C), and annexin V–
positive cells (Fig. S2, A and B) were lower in neurons overexpressing both ZNRF1 mutants than in control (expressing GFP
only) neurons. We used lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release
as a cell death marker to confirm that the type of cell death
mediated by ZNRF1 is apoptosis and compared the effects of
the application of the caspase inhibitor z-VAD fluoromethyl
ketone (fmk) or the overexpression of BCL2 with that of the
siRNA-mediated down-regulation of EGFR or expression of
ZNRF1 C184A or ZNRF1 Y103F (Fig.  5  D). We found that
the suppression of 6OHDA-induced neuronal cell death by the
application of z-VAD fmk or overexpression of BCL2 was similar to that by the expression of ZNRF1 mutants. These results
suggest that the activation of ZNRF1 in neurons by 6OHDA
enhanced apoptosis signaling.
To confirm that 6OHDA-induced ZNRF1 phosphorylation
leading to neuronal apoptosis is mediated by oxidative stress–
induced EGFR activation, we examined the effects of C56 or
antioxidants, including N-acetyl-l-cysteine and curcumin, on
6OHDA-induced ZNRF1 phosphorylation and apoptosis in cultured cortical neurons. We found that these compounds also prevented ZNRF1 phosphorylation and apoptosis in neurons (Fig.
S2, C–G). We also investigated the effects of the RNAi-mediated down-regulation of EGFR expression on 6OHDA-induced
ZNRF1 phosphorylation and neuronal apoptosis to confirm the
involvement of EGFR (Fig. S3). The results of an immunoblot
analysis revealed that 6OHDA-induced ZNRF1 phosphorylation
was inhibited by the down-regulation of EGFR. We also found,
by using the expression of cleaved caspase 3, annexin V labeling, as well as decreased 6-carboxyfluorescein (6-CF) staining

as markers of apoptosis, that the down-regulation of EGFR
inhibits neuronal apoptosis. Collectively, these results suggest
that oxidative stress–induced ZNRF1 activation by EGFRdependent phosphorylation leads to apoptosis in neurons.
To analyze subcellular signaling downstream of ZNRF1,
we examined the expression of cleaved caspase 3 in 6OHDAtreated cultured cortical neurons overexpressing a myristoylated form of AKT (myrAKT; a constitutively active form of
AKT) or GSK3B K85M (a kinase-dead form of GSK3B). We
found that the expression of myrAKT and GSK3B K85M prevented 6OHDA-induced apoptosis to an extent similar to that of
ZNRF1C184A or ZNRF1 Y103F (Fig. 5). These results suggest
that the AKT–GSK3B kinase cascade is involved in ZNRF1
activation–induced neuronal apoptosis signaling. In an attempt
to establish whether this signaling mechanism exists in multiple types of neurons, we performed a parallel series of studies
on SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cells and ventral mesencephalic
neuron cultures, which are known to be rich in dopaminergic
neurons (Li et al., 2009), and obtained similar results to those
from primary cultured cortical neurons (unpublished data).
These results suggest that oxidative stress–induced ZNRF1
phosphorylation by EGFR in neurons results in apoptosis via
the ZNRF1-dependent proteasomal degradation of AKT and resultant activation of GSK3B.
Traumatic injury to axons increases
oxidative stress in neurons by NAD​PH
oxidase and induces EGFR-dependent
phosphorylation of ZNRF1 to promote
Wallerian degeneration

We herein extended our previous identification of the role of
ZNRF1 and showed that oxidative stress activates ZNRF1 via
phosphorylation by EGFR and turns on the downstream kinase
cascade of AKT–GSK3B to cause neuronal apoptosis. Because
our previous results showed that the ZNRF1-induced proteasomal degradation of AKT promotes Wallerian degeneration,
we determined whether the oxidative stress–induced activation
of ZNRF1 by EGFR-dependent phosphorylation also plays a
role in promoting Wallerian degeneration. We generated an in
vitro Wallerian degeneration model using primary cultured dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons, as described in our previous
study (Wakatsuki et al., 2011), and examined ZNRF1 pY103
in neurites before and after the induction of Wallerian degeneration (Fig.  6). We found that ZNRF1 pY103 was strongly
induced by the initiation of Wallerian degeneration (Fig. 6, A
and B). To establish whether ZNRF1 pY103 is necessary for
Wallerian degeneration, we used DRG neurons overexpressing
the ZNRF1 Y103F mutant in the in vitro Wallerian degeneration model. We found that the expression of ZNRF1 Y103F
prevented the progression of Wallerian degeneration to an extent similar to that by the expression of ZNRF1 C184A (Fig. 6,
C and D) or prevention of the ZNRF1 signaling pathway at
each step, as reported previously (Wakatsuki et al., 2011).
We examined the effects of C56 (Fig. S4, A–D) as well as the
RNAi-mediated down-regulation of EGFR (Fig.  6, E–I) on
Wallerian degeneration in vitro to demonstrate the involvement
of EGFR in the phosphorylation of ZNRF1 during Wallerian
degeneration. We found that the application of C56 and downregulation of EGFR significantly inhibited ZNRF1 phosphorylation as well as Wallerian degeneration. These results suggest
that ZNRF1 phosphorylation by EGFR affects subcellular signaling to promote Wallerian degeneration and apoptosis.

ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

885

Published November 16, 2015

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016
Figure 3.  Phosphorylation of ZNRF1 at Y103 by EGFR in response to oxidants induces its ubiquitin ligase activity to degrade the AKT protein.
(A–D) ZNRF1 pY103 in response to 6OHDA results in the induction of ubiquitin ligase activity in cultured cortical neurons. Representative immunoblots (A)
and quantified levels for AKT normalized to β-actin relative to the control (B) are shown. The immunoprecipitates using antibodies against AKT (C, top) or
FLAG (C, bottom) analyzed by immunoblotting and quantified levels for polyubiquitinated AKT normalized to β-actin relative to the control (D) are shown.
(E–G) EGFR down-regulation in 6OHDA-treated cultured cortical neurons results in reduced ZNRF1 pY103 levels and resultant reductions in its ubiquitin
ligase activity. Shown are representative immunoblots (E), immunoprecipitates using an anti-AKT antibody analyzed by immunoblotting (F), and quantified
levels for polyubiquitinated AKT normalized to β-actin relative to the control (G; labeled as +siControl/+MG132/−6OHDA). (H–J) EGFR down-regulation
in H2O2-treated cultured cortical neurons results in reduced ZNRF1 pY103 levels and resultant reductions in its ubiquitin ligase activity. Shown are representative immunoblots (H). Immunoprecipitates using an anti-AKT antibody analyzed by immunoblotting (I) and quantified levels for polyubiquitinated AKT
normalized to β-actin relative to the control (J; labeled as +siControl/+MG132/−H2O2) are also shown. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. n = 5. 
Significant differences from the control (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01) were determined by a one-way ANO​VA with Tukey’s post-hoc test. IgG H, IgG heavy
chain; IgG L, IgG light chain; IP, immunoprecipitate; Ub, ubiquitin.
886

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

Published November 16, 2015

Figure 4.  ZNRF1 is directly phosphorylated
by EGFR in vitro. (A and B) The His-ZNRF1
protein was incubated in the presence or absence of a recombinant active EGFR protein in
vitro. The mixtures were subjected to Phos-Tag
PAGE and analyzed by immunoblotting using
an anti-His antibody (A). Quantified levels
for phosphorylated ZNRF1 (pZNRF1) relative
to total ZNRF1 are shown (B). (C–E) EGFRdependent ZNRF1 pY103 leads to increased
ZNRF1 activity to ubiquitinate AKT in vitro.
In vitro ubiquitination assays of GST or GSTAKT were performed using His-ZNRF1 or
His-pZNRF1 together with E1, E2, and ubiquitin. Representative immunoblots (C and D)
and quantified levels for polyubiquitinated
AKT with pZNRF1 relative to the control with
ZNRF1 (E) are shown. Data are presented as
the mean ± SEM. n = 5. Significant differences
from the control (**, P < 0.01) were determined by two-tailed Student’s t test. nd, no
significant difference; Ub, ubiquitin.

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

EGFR-dependent ZNRF1 phosphorylation during Wallerian degeneration suggests that oxidative stress is involved in
the induction of Wallerian degeneration. To investigate whether
oxidative stress is generated in our Wallerian degeneration
model in vitro, we visualized oxidative stress in neurites using a
cell-permeable fluorogenic probe that emits a strong fluorescent
signal in response to oxidation (Calixto et al., 2012). We found
significant increases in fluorescent intensity in neurites 3 h after
transection (Fig. 7, A and B). This result indicates that oxidative
stress is induced in degenerating neurites.
Among the possible generators of oxidative stress in neurons, we hypothesized that NAD​PH oxidases may be involved
in the generation of oxidative stress in degenerating neurites
because ZNRF1 is myristoylated and, thus, close to the subcellular location of NAD​PH oxidases. We initially examined
the effects of a series of inhibitors of NAD​PH oxidases on the
generation of oxidative stress in transected neurites to demonstrate that NAD​PH oxidase activity is involved in the generation of oxidative stress in degenerating neurites. We found
that these inhibitors prevented increases in oxidative stress–
sensitive fluorescent dye staining in transected neurites (Fig. 7,
A and B). C56 did not significantly affect increases in fluorescent intensity in transected neurites (Fig. 7, A and B), suggesting
that the NAD​PH oxidase–induced increase in oxidative stress in
transected neurites is upstream of the activation of EGFR. We
also determined the effects of antioxidants and NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors on Wallerian degeneration and found that these
compounds prevented neurite degeneration as well as the phosphorylation of ZNRF1 (Fig. S4). We subsequently expressed
shRNA for each gene of the rodent NAD​PH oxidase catalytic
subunits (Bedard and Krause, 2007) in cultured DRG neurons
and induced Wallerian degeneration in vitro (Fig. 7, C–F; and
Fig. S5) to validate the results shown in Fig. S4. We found that

down-regulating the expression of the NAD​PH oxidases NOX2,
3, 4, and DUOX2 prevented the phosphorylation of ZNRF1 and
delayed neurite degeneration to an extent similar to that demonstrated previously by the down-regulation of ZNRF1 expression
(Wakatsuki et al., 2011). To confirm the up-regulation of EGFR
kinase activity in response to the generation of oxidative stress
in neurites after transection, we directly measured kinase activity using immunopurified EGFR proteins from neurites 3 h
after transection. We selected this time point because EGFRmediated ZNRF1 phosphorylation was detected in neurites 3 h
after transection (Fig. 7 G). We found that EGFR kinase activity
was increased in neurites after transection. Importantly, the upregulation of EGFR kinase activity was significantly suppressed
in the presence of the NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors apocynin and
diphenylene iodonium (DPI; Fig. 7 G). Collectively, these results suggest that NAD​PH oxidases are involved in the induction of Wallerian degeneration by generating oxidative stress
in response to traumatic injury in neurites to activate EGFRdependent ZNRF1 phosphorylation.
Previous studies reported robust axonal protection by
the expression of the Wlds protein, which is responsible for
the delayed axonal degeneration phenotype observed in naturally occurring wlds mutant mice (Araki et al., 2004), and inhibition of SARM1-elicited signaling (Osterloh et al., 2012).
In an attempt to characterize ZNRF1 inhibition–mediated
axonal protection in more detail through direct comparisons
with Wlds- or SARM1-mediated axonal protection, we examined the progression of Wallerian degeneration in vitro
with these different axonal protection mechanisms under the
same experimental conditions (Fig. S4, E and F). We found
that expression of the Wlds protein or the shRNA-mediated
down-regulation of SARM1 protected axons for up to 72  h
after the initiation of degeneration, whereas the inhibition

ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

887

Published November 16, 2015

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016
Figure 5.  Inhibition of ZNRF1 ubiquitin ligase activity protects primary cultured cortical neurons from 6OHDA-induced apoptosis. (A–F) Cleaved caspase
3 expression was assessed in cultured cortical neurons overexpressing AKT, GSK3B, ZNRF1, or their indicated mutants by immunofluorescence. The
contribution of apoptosis to ZNRF1-elicited signaling-mediated cell death was assessed by an LDH assay in D. An immunoblot analysis for caspase 3
and cleaved caspase 3 was also performed (E and F). (A) Representative photomicrographs for cleaved caspase 3 immunostaining are shown. Cellular
nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. The arrowhead indicates one of the apoptotic nuclei exhibiting highly fluorescent condensed chromatin. Bar, 100
μm. Note that all cells in the photomicrographs labeled as “no 6OHDA GFP” expressed GFP, suggesting that transfection efficiency was ∼100%. (B) The
ratios of the cleaved caspase 3–positive cell number to the total number of GFP-positive cells (i.e., the number of transgene-expressing cells) for each
condition are shown relative to the ratio under the GFP-only expressing condition. (C) The ratios of cell numbers with apoptotic nuclei to the total number
of GFP-positive cells for each condition are shown relative to the ratio under the GFP-only expressing condition. (D) The protective effects of the inhibition
of ZNRF1 signaling against neuronal cell death by 6OHDA were quantitatively assessed by an LDH release assay using primary cultured cortical neurons.
Quantified levels for LDH activity in culture media from each condition relative to the no treatment control are shown. Note that the inhibition of ZNRF1
signaling exerted protective effects against neuronal cell death, similar to that caused by the inhibition of apoptosis with the overexpression of BCL2 or the
z-VAD fmk treatment, suggesting that the inhibition of ZNRF1-elicited signaling protects 6OHDA-treated neurons from apoptosis. (E and F) Representative
immunoblots (E) and quantified expression levels for caspase 3 normalized to β-actin relative to the no infection control without the 6OHDA treatment (F)
are shown. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. n = 5. Significant differences from the control (**, P < 0.01) were determined by a one-way ANO​VA
with Tukey’s post-hoc test. AU, arbitrary units.
888

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

Published November 16, 2015

of ZNRF1 signaling by the expression of ZNRF1 C184A or
ZNRF Y103F protected axons for up to 48  h.  These results
suggest that the axonal protection afforded by the inhibition
of ZNRF1 is more modest than that by expression of the Wlds
protein or loss of SARM1.
Inhibition of ZNRF1 activation protects
dopaminergic neurons from oxidative
stress–induced cell death and axonal
degeneration in vivo

To assess whether the oxidative stress–induced activation of
ZNRF1 in neurons also results in apoptosis and axonal degen-

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

Figure 6.  Phosphorylation of ZNRF1 at Y103
by EGFR is involved in the progression of
Wallerian degeneration. (A and B) ZNRF1 is
phosphorylated at Y103 in neurites from cultured DRG explant neurons during Wallerian
degeneration in vitro. The Wallerian degeneration of neurites was induced by removing
cell bodies at 10–14 d in vitro using a pipette
tip. Representative images of immunoblots at
the indicated time points (A) and quantified
expression levels for ZNRF1 pY103 normalized to ZNRF1 relative to the control level
(before injury) are shown (B). n = 3.  (C and
D) The neurite protective effects induced by
ZNRF1–AKT–GSK3B pathway molecules were
assessed using an in vitro Wallerian degeneration model with neurites overexpressing
the indicated proteins. (C) Representative
photomicrographs of degenerating neurites
expressing the indicated proteins 24  h after
neurite transection are shown. Bar, 25 µm.
(D) Neurite degeneration index values calculated for each condition at 24  h are shown.
n = 5. (E–I) EGFR down-regulation decreases
ZNRF1 pY103 levels and inhibits Wallerian
degeneration. ZNRF1 pY103 expression levels with shRNA-mediated EGFR down-regulation were assessed by an immunoblot analysis.
Representative immunoblots (E), efficiency of
shRNA-mediated EGFR down-regulation (F;
normalized by β-actin, relative to the no infection condition), and quantified expression
levels of ZNRF1 pY103 (G; normalized by
ZNRF1 relative to the no infection condition)
are shown. Representative photomicrographs
for the β-tubulin immunostaining of neurites are
shown in H. Bar, 50 µm. Neurite degeneration
index values calculated for each condition at
24 h are shown in I. Data are presented as the
mean ± SEM. Significant differences from the
control (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01) were determined by a one-way ANO​VA with Tukey’s
post-hoc test. AU, arbitrary units.

eration in vivo, we examined 6OHDA-induced apoptosis in Tg
overexpressing ZNRF1 C184A. We generated two independent
Tg lines (lines 474 and 492) bearing ZNRF1 C184A–IRES–GFP
cDNA, the expression of which is inducible by the Cre-mediated
excision of the loxP-flanked cassette. Using these Tg lines, we
performed an intranigral injection of adenoviruses expressing
Cre recombinase and induced transgene expression in the ipsilateral striatum or substantia nigra (SN), as confirmed by immunoblotting or a fluorescent microscopic analysis (Fig. 8, A and B).
Intrastriatal injections of 6OHDA have been shown to produce
the degeneration of dopamine neurons in the SN and damage
their nerve endings in the striatum (Grünblatt et al., 2000; Cheng

ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

889

Published November 16, 2015

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016
Figure 7.  Inhibition of NAD​PH oxidases prevents ZNRF1 phosphorylation and delays Wallerian degeneration in vitro. (A and B) NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors, but
not C56, an EGFR inhibitor, prevent the generation of oxidative stress in degenerating neurites of cultured DRG neurons. Oxidative stress in the transected neurites
of cultured DRG neurons with or without the indicated inhibitors was visualized using the fluorogenic probe CellROX deep red. The green fluorescent reagent DTAF
was used for neurite staining. (A) Representative photomicrographs of the fluorescent signal in transected neurites are shown. Bar, 25 µm. (B) Quantified levels of
fluorescent intensities for CellROX normalized to DTAF relative to the level in the control (labeled as “no addition, neurite transection”) are shown. Note that the
generation of oxidative stress in the transected neurites in cultured DRG neurons was blocked by the NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors DPI and apocynin, but not the
EGFR inhibitor C56. (C–F) Effects of the down-regulation of the catalytic subunits of the NAD​PH oxidases NOX2, 3, 4, DUOX1, and 2 were assessed using an in
vitro Wallerian degeneration model with cultured DRG neurons. Representative immunoblots for ZNRF1 pY103 and ZNRF1 (C) and quantified expression levels
for ZNRF1 pY103 normalized to ZNRF1 relative to the control (D; nontarget control shRNA–expressing, neurite-transected condition) are shown. (E) Representative
photomicrographs for the β-tubulin immunostaining of neurites are shown. Bar, 50 µm. (F) Neurite degeneration index values calculated for each condition at 24 h
are shown. (G) Up-regulation of EGFR kinase activity in neurites after transection. Immunopurified EGFR protein samples from the neurites of cultured DRG explant
neurons 3 h after transection in the presence or absence of the NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors, apocynin and DPI, were subjected to the kinase assay. Quantified EGFR
kinase activity levels in each condition relative to the control (labeled as “−transection/no addition“) are shown. Note that EGFR activity increases in neurites after
injury are dependent on oxidative stress generated by NAD​PH oxidase activity. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. n = 5. Significant differences from the
control (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01) were determined by a one-way ANO​VA with Tukey’s post-hoc test. nd, no significant difference.
890

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

Published November 16, 2015

Figure 8.  Inhibition of ZNRF1 ubiquitin ligase activity preserves dopaminergic neurons in an in vivo 6OHDA-lesioned
model. (A and B) A unilateral intranigral injection of the
Cre-expressing adenoviral vector was performed to induce
ZNRF1 C184A expression in the two independent Tg lines
(lines 474 and 492) bearing ZNRF1 C184A–IRES–GFP
cDNA, the expression of which is induced by the Cre-mediated
excision of the loxP-flanked cassette. Transgene expression
levels in the striatum (A, left) or SN (B) were confirmed by
immunostaining using anti-GFP and anti-MYC antibodies. An
immunoblot analysis against cell lysates from the ipsilateral
(+) or contralateral (−) striatum 5 d after the adenovirus injection was also performed (A, right). Bars: (A) 500 µm; (B, top)
250 µm; (B, bottom) 25 µm. (C–F) The neuroprotective effects
of ZNRF1 C184A expression were assessed by TH immunoreactivity 7 d after the 6OHDA injection into the striatum (C
and D) and SN (E and F). Representative photomicrographs
for the immunostaining of TH on coronal sections are shown
in C. Bar, 500 µm. Relative immunofluorescent intensities in
the ipsilateral to contralateral striatum for each condition are
shown in D.  Representative photomicrographs of the immunostaining of TH in the SN are shown in E.  Bar, 250 µm.
Ratios of the number of TH-positive neurons in the ipsilateral to
contralateral SN for each condition are shown in F. Data are
presented as the mean ± SEM. n = 3. Significant differences
from the no infection condition (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01)
were determined by the two-tailed Student’s t test.

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

et al., 2011; Blandini and Armentero, 2012). After an injection of
6OHDA within the striatum, the viability of ipsilateral neurons
was determined by immunostaining against the marker for dopaminergic neurons, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), and compared
with that of the uninfected control. The quantification of TH immunoreactivity at axon terminals within the striatum (Fig. 8, C
and D) and counting the number of TH-positive neurons within
the SN (Fig. 8, E and F) in two independent Tg lines revealed the
protective effects of the expression of ZNRF1 C184A against
6OHDA-induced axonal degeneration and neuronal cell death,
respectively. These results strongly suggest that the inhibition
of ZNRF1 ubiquitin ligase activity protects neurons against
6OHDA-induced apoptosis and Wallerian-like degeneration in
vivo. Collectively, the results of this study indicate that the activa-

tion of ZNRF1 by oxidative stress is sufficient to trigger neuronal
degeneration, whereas the prevention of ZNRF1 activity protects
neurons from apoptosis and Wallerian-like degeneration.

Discussion
We herein demonstrated that the inhibition of ZNRF1-elicited
signaling in neurons prevents oxidative stress–induced neuronal
apoptosis and axonal degeneration in vitro as well as in vivo.
Previous studies showed that the Wlds protein, which is responsible for the delayed axonal degeneration phenotype observed
in naturally occurring wlds mutant mice, provides robust protection against TH-positive fiber loss, but little or no protection

ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

891

Published November 16, 2015

892

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

signaling initiated by the activation of ZNRF1 degrades axons
through the destabilization of the cytoskeletal structure. Multiple signaling pathways are required to regulate the progression
of axonal degeneration, presumably because multiple, different
cellular events need to be targeted with different time frames for
the efficient progression of axonal degeneration.

Materials and methods
Generation of Tg

The coding region of ZNRF1 was amplified by PCR using LA-taq
(Takara Bio Inc.) from an EST-tagged clone (GenBank accession
no. NM_133206) and then cloned into pcDNA3. The MYC-tagged
dominant-negative form of ZNRF1 (ZNRF1-MYC C184A, in which
the cysteine at 184 was converted to alanine) was generated by
PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis (Cormack, 2001; Wakatsuki
et al., 2011). The integrity of each clone was confirmed by sequencing.
Tg were generated by a microinjection of the cDNA encoding chicken
β-actin promoter–loxP–neomycin-resistance gene–loxP–ZNRF1
C184R-MYC–IRES–EGFP–SV40 polyA (i.e., mice harboring the
ZNRF1 C184A transgene in a silent state) into fertilized C57BL/6J
mouse oocytes using the following standard procedure (Conner, 2004).
The genomic integration of transgenes was examined by PCR with
the following primer sets: 5′-CTC​TGCAC​ATCGC​ACCCA​GGTGG​
TTCAGC-3′ and 5′-TCC​TCTTC​AGAGA​TGAGT​TTCTG​CTCG-3′.
The PCR conditions were 94°C for 2 min, 94°C for 30  s, 63°C for
30  s, and 72°C for 30  s, performed for 35 cycles. All animals were
maintained in accordance with the guidelines of the National Center for
Neurology and Psychiatry. The technical protocols for animal experiments in this study were approved by the Committee for Small Animal
Research and Animal Welfare of the National Center for Neurology
and Psychiatry or the Animal Care and Use Committee of the National
Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center.
Antibodies

The antibodies used and their sources are as follows: rabbit anti-ZNRF1
antiserum (Saitoh and Araki, 2010); rabbit anti-AKT antibody (9272;
Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti-CRMP2 antibody (11098;
IBL-America); rabbit anti–phospho-CRMP2 (threonine 514) antibody
(9397; Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti–caspase 3 and rabbit
anti–cleaved caspase 3 antibodies (9662 and 9661; Cell Signaling Technology); mouse anti–β-actin antibody (622101; BioLegend); mouse
antiubiquitin antibodies MMS-258R (Covance) and clone FK2 (Enzo
Life Sciences); mouse anti-HA antibody (MMS-101R; Covance); mouse
anti-MYC tag antibody (clone 9E10; Developmental Studies Hybridoma
Bank); mouse anti-FLAG antibody (clone M2; Sigma-Aldrich); rabbit
anti-TH antibody (AB152; EMD Millipore); rabbit anti-GFP antibody
(598; MBL); mouse anti-NeuN antibody (clone A60; EMD Millipore);
mouse antiphosphotyrosine antibody (clone PY20; Sigma-Aldrich);
mouse antiphosphoserine antibody (clone 4A4; EMD Millipore); mouse
antiphosphothreonine antibody (clone 42H4; Cell Signaling Technology); rabbit anti-NOX2 antibody (BS-3889R; Bioss); rabbit anti-NOX3
antibody (BS-3683R; Bioss); rabbit anti-NOX4 antibody (ABIN702670;
antibodies-online.com); rabbit anti-DUOX1 antibody (ABIN1386159;
antibodies-online.com); rabbit anti-DUOX2 antibody (NB110-61576;
Novus Biologicals); and anti-EGFR antibody (4267; Cell Signaling
Technology). To generate the antiserum for phosphorylated ZNRF1
at Y103, a synthetic phosphotyrosine peptide corresponding to amino
acids 88–116 (GGG​STSDS​TYAHG​NGpYQE​TGGGH​HRDGM​LYL)
of mouse ZNRF1 was used to immunize rabbits following standard
procedures (Scrum). An anti–ZNRF1 pY103 antibody was purified by

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

for dopaminergic neuronal cell bodies in rodent Parkinson’s
disease models induced by 6OHDA or 1-methyl 4-phenyl
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (Sajadi et al., 2004; Press and Milbrandt, 2008). These results suggest that cellular signaling to
induce neuronal cell death is independent of that for axonal
degeneration, and also that Wlds protein-mediated protection
is mainly effective for axons in these models. The present results suggest that ZNRF1 mediates two major neurodegenerative pathways, axonal degeneration and neuronal apoptosis,
by translating oxidative stress into subcellular signaling within
neurons. The identification of effective methods that intervene
in ZNRF1 signaling may lead to the development of therapeutics for neurodegeneration.
The enzymatic activities of some E3 ligases are subject
to regulation by protein phosphorylation. For example, the E3
ligase Itch protein alters its catalytic activity through a conformational change by c-Jun amino-terminal kinase-mediated
phosphorylation, which induces the disruption of an intramolecular inhibitory interaction (Gallagher et al., 2006). The phosphorylation of ZNRF2, another member of the ZNRF protein
family, influences its interaction with the substrate, the 14–
3-3 protein, and its association with intracellular membranes
(Hoxhaj et al., 2012). In this context, the phosphorylation of
ZNRF2 at serine 19, which is located outside the zinc finger
region responsible for substrate binding, releases ZNRF2 from
the plasma membrane to the cytosol, resulting in decreased catalytic activity. In contrast, ZNRF1 pY103, which also occurs
outside the zinc finger domain, leads to the up-regulation of its
catalytic activity. Thus far, we have found that this phosphorylation does not affect its ability to associate with AKT (unpublished data); however, the underlying mechanism regulating
ZNRF1 activity has not yet been elucidated in detail. Further
studies are needed to determine whether ZNRF1 pY103 affects
its intracellular localization and/or other mechanisms to modify
its ubiquitin ligase activity.
When taken together with our previous findings (Wakatsuki et al., 2011), the results of the present study demonstrate
that AKT activity in neurons provides protection against axonal
degeneration by suppressing the activation of GSK3B. This is
consistent with previous studies showing that the activation of
GSK3B is sufficient to promote axonal degeneration (Gerdts
et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2012). Sterile α-motif–containing and
armadillo-motif–containing protein 1 (SARM1), a toll-like receptor adapter family member, was recently found to play an
important role in injury-induced axonal degeneration (Osterloh et al., 2012; Gerdts et al., 2013, 2015). Yang et al. (2015)
showed that the MAPK pathway plays an important role in
intracellular signaling downstream of SARM1 and that AKT
phosphorylates MKK4 at serine 78 in order to inhibit prodegenerative signaling. The apparent difference in the role of AKT between these findings and our results may reflect the complexity
of kinase signaling regulating axonal degeneration. As shown
in this study, the activation of ZNRF1 by increased oxidative
stress in axons is initiated within a few hours of injury and lasts
for >1 d.  However, Yang et al. (2015) reported that the phosphorylation of MKK4 serine 78 increased 1–5 min after injury,
suggesting that axonal injury elicits acute signals to activate
AKT. Although the activation mechanism currently remains unknown, these findings, together with our results, suggest that
AKT activity is affected by multiple different regulatory signals
at different time frames. The Sarm1–MAPK pathway is known
to elicit energy deficits in axons during degeneration, whereas

Published November 16, 2015

chromatography over an affinity column using the antigen peptide. The
specificity of the affinity-purified anti–ZNRF1 pY103 antibody was confirmed by an immunoblot analysis with lysates of Neuro-2a cells expressing WT ZNRF1 or the phosphorylation-resistant mutant ZNRF1 Y103F
maintained with 6OHDA. HRP-conjugated (Vector Laboratories), Alexa
Fluor 565–conjugated, and Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated (Molecular
Probes) antibodies were used as secondary antibodies for detection.

X-100, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 100-mM NaCl, and 20-mM TrisHCl, pH 7.4) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails.
The EGFR protein was eluted with a kinase reaction buffer containing
10-mM 2-mercaptoethanol and incubated with an immobilized tyrosine
kinase substrate at 37°C for 30 min in the presence of ATP. Samples
were washed three times, blocked with blocking solution, and incubated with an antiphosphotyrosine antibody conjugated to HRP. The
absorbance of the phosphorylated substrate was measured at 450 nm.

Cortical neuron culture

DRG explant culture and in vitro Wallerian degeneration

Murine DRG explants dissected from the E13.5 embryos of wlds (Harlan Bioproducts.) or C57BL/6J mice (Japan SLC) were cultured on
poly-l-lysine– and laminin-coated 24-well plates in Neuro medium
containing 10% FBS and 25 ng/ml NGF (Harlan Bioproducts). After
24 h, the culture medium was changed to Neuro medium supplemented
with 2% NeuroBrew-21, 25 ng/ml NGF, 1-mM glutamine, and a mixture of 1-mM 5′-fluoro-2′-deoxyuridine and 1-mM uridine to remove
nonneuronal cells. The in vitro Wallerian degeneration of neurites was
initiated by removing cell bodies at 10–14 d in vitro using a pipette tip.
In experiments using adenoviral vectors, the adenovirus solution (5 µl;
5 × 106–107 pfu) was applied to each DRG explant culture 3 d before
the initiation of Wallerian degeneration.
EGFR kinase assay

EGFR kinase activity was quantified using a Universal Tyrosine Kinase Assay kit (Takara Bio Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The EGFR protein was collected by immunoprecipitation
using an anti-EGFR antibody from the cell lysates prepared from neurites of cultured DRG explant neurons after transection in the presence or absence of the NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors apocynin and DPI.
Immunoprecipitates were washed twice with lysis buffer (1% Triton

Evaluation of oxidative stress

Oxidative stress in the transected neurites of cultured DRG neurons
was evaluated using CellROX deep red according to the manufacturer’s
protocol (Life Technologies). Neurites were also stained with 5-(4,6dichlorotriazinyl) aminofluorescein (DTAF; Life Technologies; Zhou
et al., 2004). Three nonoverlapping images per explant were randomly
collected for analyses, and more than five explants were examined for
each experimental condition. To evaluate oxidative stress in the transected neurites, the fluorescent intensities of each image were measured using ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health). Quantified
levels of fluorescent intensities for CellROX normalized to DTAF were
averaged and compared with those of the control.
LDH release assay

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

Cerebral hemispheres were removed separately from C56BL/6J mice on
embryonic day (E) 14 and dissociated by papain. Cells were seeded at
a density of 2 × 105 cells/well onto 24-well plates coated with poly-llysine (Sigma-Aldrich) and laminin (Sigma-Aldrich) in DMEM containing 10% FBS. From the third day in vitro, cultures were maintained in
Neuro medium (Miltenyi Biotec) containing 2% NeuroBrew-21 (Miltenyi
Biotec) and 1-mM glutamine. To induce neurotoxicity, cells were treated
with various concentrations of 6OHDA (Sigma-Aldrich) for the indicated times. Cells were then washed, cultured in Neuro medium containing 2% NeuroBrew-21 and 1-mM glutamine for 24 h, and used in the
immunoblotting or immunostaining experiments. Staining by 6-CF was
performed by incubating live cells with 500-µM 6-carboxyfluorescein
diacetate (6-CFDA; Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 1 h.
In experiments using adenoviral vectors, the adenovirus solution
(5 µl; 5 × 106–107 pfu) was added to cultures 48 h before the 6OHDA
treatment. To achieve proteasomal inhibition, cells were treated
with 10-µM MG132 for 16 h.
Cells for siRNA transfection were seeded at a density of 106 cells/
well on 6-well plates and cultured as described in the first paragraph
of this subsection. Control or targeting siRNAs for the gene of interest
were transfected into cultured neurons using DharmaFECT1 transfection reagent according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). The siRNA effect was analyzed by immunoblotting 72  h
after transfection. The siRNAs used in this study were purchased from
QIA​GEN (negative control siRNA, 1022076, 5′-AAT​TCTCC​GAACG​
TGTCAC
​ GT-3′; ZNRF1-targeting siRNA #1, SI05382328; and ZNRF1targeting siRNA #2, SI01483097, 5′-AGA​GGATT​TAATA​ATCAC​
AAA-3′) or from Bioneer (EGFR-targeting siRNA #1, SDO-10061353550, 5′-GAC​ATCGT​CCAAA​ACGTCT-3′; and EGFR-targeting
siRNA #2, SDO-1006-1353552, 5′-GAG​GATGT​ACAAC​AACTGT-3′).

The extent of cell death was quantitatively assessed by measuring the release of LDH into the culture media (Lobner, 2000) using the cytotoxicity LDH assay kit (Dojindo) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. In
brief, primary cultured cortical neurons were treated with 20-µM 6OHDA
for 3 h and maintained in fresh media. After 24 h, the culture medium from
each condition was transferred to a 96-well plate for the quantification of
LDH. The absorbance of each sample was read at 490 nm using a microplate reader (SpectraMax M2; Molecular Devices).
Immunoblot and immunoprecipitation

In immunoblot analyses, cultured cells or tissues were homogenized
in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (1% Triton X-100,
0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 150-mM NaCl, and 50-mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) containing phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktails (Nacalai Tesque). Equal amounts of protein were separated by
SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting. Immunoreactivity was visualized using HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies and a chemiluminescent substrate (Wako Pure Chemical Industries). The detection
of phosphoproteins using Phos-Tag was performed according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. In brief, the polyvinylidene fluoride membrane was probed using the complex of Phos-Tag Biotin (Phos-Tag =
1,3-bis[bis(pyridin-2-ylmethyl)amino]propan-2-olato dizinc(II) complex; Wako Pure Chemical Industries) with HRP-conjugated streptavidin, and Phos-Tag–bound phosphoproteins were then detected by using
the chemiluminescent substrate. Chemiluminescent images were captured by LAS4000-mini and quantified using ImageJ software. Scans at
multiple exposures were obtained to ensure that the results fell within
the linear range of the instrument.
Regarding immunoprecipitation, cells or tissues were lysed in
TNE buffer (1% Triton X-100, 100-mM NaCl, and 20-mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.5) containing protease inhibitor cocktail. After centrifugation at
15,000 g for 30 min, the supernatant was incubated at 4°C overnight with
the primary antibody. After being incubated with protein A–coupled
Dynabeads, proteins were eluted by boiling for 5 min in Laemmli sample buffer and analyzed by immunoblotting.
In vitro phosphorylation and ubiquitination assays

The AKT protein or ZNRF1 protein was generated in Escherichia
coli as a GST fusion or His-tagged protein, respectively. Recombinant

ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

893

Published November 16, 2015

Viral vectors and infection

The pAxCAL​NLwtit2 cosmid vector (Takara Bio Inc.) was used in
all experiments involving adenovirus-mediated gene expression for
the Cre recombinase–mediated activation of the genes of interest and
EGFP to visualize transgene activation in live cells by way of an internal ribosome entry site. A recombinant adenovirus was generated
using an adenovirus expression kit (Takara Bio Inc.) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The design of cDNAs used in this study
involved the generation of the FLAG-tagged phosphorylation-resistant
form of ZNRF1 (ZNRF1-FLAG Y103F, in which tyrosine at 103 was
converted to phenylalanine) using PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis. The coding regions of GSK3B and CRMP2 were amplified by
PCR using LA-taq from corresponding ESTs (GenBank accession nos.
BC006936 for mouse GSK3B and NM_009955 for mouse CRMP2)
and cloned into the pIRES2-EGFP plasmid (Takara Bio. Inc.). The integrity of each clone was confirmed by sequencing. A MYC tag and
HA tag were added to the carboxyl termini of GSK3B and CRMP2,
respectively, for detection. The plasmid expressing AKT was provided
by Y. Gotoh (The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; Masuyama et al.,
2001). The kinase-dead form of AKT (AKT-HA T308A and S473A,
in which these two amino acids were converted to alanines), the constitutively active form of GSK3B (GSK3B-MYC S9A, in which the
serine at 9 was converted to alanine), the kinase-dead form of GSK3B
(GSK3B-MYC K85M, in which the lysine at 85 was converted to methionine), and the dominant-negative form of CRMP2 (CRMP2-HA
T514A, in which the threonine at 514 was converted to alanine) were
generated using PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis (Cormack,
2001). The constitutively active form of AKT (myrAKT-HA) was generated by adding a myristoylation site derived from mouse Src tyrosine
kinase to the amino-terminal end of the AKT-HA construct. The purification and concentration of adenoviral vectors were performed by two
rounds of cesium chloride density gradient centrifugation and centricon
centrifugal filter devices (EMD Millipore), respectively, according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Viral titers in HEK293 cells were determined with a plaque-forming assay.
894

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

In experiments using lentiviral vectors, control and ZNRF1specific shRNAs in the pLKO.1 puromycin-resistant lentiviral vector
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The following clones were used:
EGFR #1, TRC000023479; EGFR #2, TRC000023481; NOX2 #1,
TRC0000435339; NOX2, TRC0000415639; NOX3 #1, TRC000076593;
NOX3 #2, TRC0000415639; NOX4 #1, TRC000076584; NOX4
#2, TCR000076585; DUOX1 #1, TTRC0000252145; DUOX2
#2, TCR0000252147; DUOX2 #1, TTRC000076654; DUOX2
#2, TCR000076655; ZNRF1 #1, TRCN0000040745; ZNRF1 #2,
TRCN0000040747; SARM1, TRCN0000193408; and nontarget control, SHC002. Lentiviral packaging was performed using HEK293T
cells, as previously described (Wakatsuki et al., 2011). pLKO.1 vectors
with each shRNA were transfected with delta 8.9 and vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein plasmids into HEK293FT cells using Lipofectamine 2000. Transfected cells were incubated at 37 °C for 4  h before
changing media to the target cell culture media. Cells were incubated
for 20 h before collecting the viral supernatant. Media were replaced,
and the viral supernatant was collected again 24  h later. All supernatants were filtered using a nylon filter with a pore diameter of 0.45  µm
and stored at −80 °C.
6OHDA lesions and intranigral injection of adenoviral vectors

To induce 6OHDA lesions, mice were anesthetized using an intraperitoneal injection of 0.4 g/kg avertin and placed in a stereotaxic frame
with a mouse adapter. 6OHDA hydrochloride was prepared at 15 µg
(total weight)/1.0 µl in 0.9% NaCl/0.02% ascorbic acid and infused by
a Hamilton syringe at a concentration of 5 µg/µl and rate of 0.5 µl/min
for 8 min at a total dose of 20 µg. The needle of the syringe was inserted
into the right striatum at the coordinates anterior-posterior (AP) 0.09
cm, medial-lateral (ML) 0.22 cm, and dorsal-ventral (DV) −0.25 cm,
relative to the bregma. After 5 min, the needle was withdrawn slowly.
Regarding the intranigral injection of the adenoviral vector, the adenoviral vector solution (1 µl; 5 × 108–109 pfu) was injected using a Hamilton syringe at a rate of 0.5 µl/min over 20 min. The needle of the syringe
was inserted into the right striatum at the coordinates AP −0.34 cm,
ML 0.14 cm, and DV −0.43 cm, relative to the bregma. These coordinates placed the needle tip dorsal to the posterior SN. After 5 min,
the needle was slowly withdrawn. The successful transduction of the
transgene in the dopaminergic neurons of the SN was confirmed histologically by immunostaining or immunoblotting.
Microscopy image acquisition

In immunohistochemical analyses, mice were fixed with 4%
PFA/0.1-M phosphate buffer, pH 7. To analyze TH immunoreactivity
in the striatum and SN, the midbrain and forebrain regions were separated. Coronal sections (20 µm thick) were cut on a cryostat (Microm
HM550; Carl Zeiss). The forebrain ∼3 mm from the bregma was collected, embedded in paraffin, and 5-µm-thick coronal sections were cut
on a microtome for the analysis of brain tissues after MCAo. In the
immunocytochemical analysis of the neurites of cultured DRG neurons
and cortical neurons, cells/neurites were fixed with 4% PFA in PBS
and then permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS. An incubation
with a primary antibody was performed at 4°C overnight, followed by
a secondary antibody at room temperature for 1  h.  Primary antibodies were as follows: mouse anti-TH antibody (diluted 1:1,000), rabbit
anti-GFP antibody (diluted 1:500), rabbit anti–βIII-tubulin antiserum
(diluted 1:1,000), rabbit anti–cleaved caspase 3 antiserum (diluted
1:200), rabbit anti-GFP antiserum (diluted 1:500), rabbit anti-CRMP2
pT514 (diluted 1:100), rabbit anti-ZNRF1 pY103 (diluted 1:100), and
mouse anti-NeuN (diluted 1:100). Secondary antibodies are as follows:
donkey Alexa Fluor 488–labeled mouse IgG (diluted 1:500), donkey
Alexa Fluor 488–labeled anti–rabbit IgG (diluted 1:500), sheep Alexa

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

active EGFR was purchased from GenWay Biotech. Recombinant ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 (Ube1), recombinant human UbcH5c, and
recombinant human ubiquitin were purchased from Enzo Life Sciences.
To achieve in vitro phosphorylation, the His-tagged ZNRF1 protein (0.5 µg) was incubated with or without 0.1 µg of recombinant active
EGFR in a reaction volume of 25 µl (50-mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 0.1-mM
EGTA, 10-mM MgAc, 1% DTT, and 0.1-mM ATP) at 30°C for the
indicated time. The reactions were analyzed by SDS-PAGE using 12%
polyacrylamide gels containing 50-µM Phos-Tag acrylamide (Wako
Pure Chemical Industries) and 100-µM MnCl2 (Kinoshita et al., 2006).
After electrophoresis, Phos-Tag acrylamide gels were washed with gentle shaking in transfer buffer containing 1-mM EDTA for 10 min and
then incubated in transfer buffer without EDTA for 10 min according
to the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins were analyzed using an immunoblot analysis. The direct phosphorylation of ZNRF1 by EGFR was
confirmed by a treatment with λPP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.).
Regarding in vitro ubiquitination, the ubiquitination assay mastermix (25-mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 100-mM NaCl, 1-mM DTT, 1-mM
MgCl2, 100-µM ZnSO4, 2-mM ATP, 1 µg ubiquitin, 100 ng Ube1, 150
ng UbcH5c, and 1 µg GST-AKT) was added to the aforementioned
assays to a final volume of 50 µl for in vitro phosphorylation. Ubiquitination reactions were incubated at 30°C for 2 h. In all assays, reactions were terminated by adding SDS-PAGE sample buffer, boiling
for 10 min, and then separating samples on SDS-PAGE. The E3 ligase
activity of ZNRF1 was assessed by an immunoblot analysis using an
antiubiquitin antibody.

Published November 16, 2015

Fluor 565–labeled anti–mouse IgG (diluted 1:500), and sheep Alexa
Fluor 565–labeled rabbit IgG (diluted 1:500). Cell nuclei were identified with DAPI. Specimens were mounted in Vectashield mounting
medium (Vector Laboratories). Immunofluorescence was analyzed on
an inverted microscope (DMI 6000B; Leica) equipped with a 40× objective (HCX PL FLU​OTAR. L; NA 1.35; Leica) or a confocal microscope (FluoView FV1000 IX81; Olympus) equipped with a 60×
objective (UPlanSApo; NA 1.35; Olympus).
Inverted microscope images were captured by a charge-coupled
device camera (DFC360FX; Leica) and analyzed using LAS AF software
(version 3.2; Leica). Confocal microscope images were obtained and analyzed by FluoView FV10-ASW 3.1 software (Olympus). Images were
taken with a constant exposure time between all the conditions of the
same experiment and were processed using Photoshop software (Adobe).
Quantification of TH immunoreactivity in the striatum or SN

MCAo

Adult male CB-17 mice were purchased from CLEA Japan. Permanent MCAo was produced by a previously described method (Taguchi
et al., 2010). In brief, a skin incision was made between the left eye
and ear under isoflurane anesthesia (4.0% for induction and 1.5–2.0%
for maintenance). The zygoma was dissected to visualize the MCA
through the cranial bone. A hole was made in the temporal bone using
a miniature drill (MIN​ITOR). The left MCA was electrocauterized and
disconnected just distal to its crossing of the olfactory tract. Brain tissues were fixed with 4% PFA at the indicated time after MCAo. In
our MCAo model, the loss of NeuN-positive cells in the ischemic penumbra was observed in coronal sections −3 mm from the bregma. To
prepare brain homogenates, a series of frozen coronal sections in a similar coronal position from sham control and MCAo mice brains (three
independent experiments in each group) were collected, lysed in RIPA
buffer, and subjected to further analyses.
Statistical analysis

Results were expressed as the mean ± SEM. The significance of differences between groups was examined using a one-way analysis of variance (ANO​VA) with Tukey’s post-hoc test or a two-tailed Student’s t test.
Online supplemental material

Fig. S1 demonstrates that ZNRF1 is specifically phosphorylated at Y103
in neurons in response to oxidative stress in vitro and in vivo. Fig. S2
demonstrates that ZNRF1 signaling is activated in response to oxidative
stress. Fig. S3 demonstrates that the down-regulated expression of
EGFR results in the inhibited activation of ZNRF1 and subsequent

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Noriyuki Matsuda for his technical advice.
This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas (Brain Environment) from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (to S. Wakatsuki);
a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Japan Society for the
Promotion of Science (to S. Wakatsuki); an Intramural Research Grant
for Neurological and Psychiatric Disorders from the National Center
of Neurology and Psychiatry (to T. Araki); and grants from the Takeda
Science Foundation (to S. Wakatsuki and T. Araki), Suzuken Memorial
Foundation (to S. Wakatsuki), Japan Foundation for Applied Enzymology (to S. Wakatsuki), and Pfizer academic contributions (to T. Araki).

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

Morphological changes in the striatum or SN were photographed, and
the images were processed using Photoshop software. The intensity of
TH staining on both sides of the striatum was measured using ImageJ
software. The intensity from the background reading was also measured.
The difference in intensity between the background and TH staining was
calculated and used in data analyses. To estimate the number of dopaminergic neurons in the SN, TH-positive neurons were counted in every five
coronal slices throughout the midbrain, and the sum multiplied by five was
taken as the total number of TH-positive neurons in the SN. Data were
obtained from 20–25 slices per mouse. The ipsilateral/contralateral ratios
of the intensity of TH immunoreactivity for the striatum or the estimated
number of TH-positive neurons for the SN were averaged and compared
between the two treatment groups. To prepare brain homogenates, a series
of frozen coronal sections distributed between the coordinates AP 0.2 and
0 cm from the bregma in the ipsilateral or contralateral hemisphere (three
independent experiments in each group) were collected, lysed in RIPA
buffer, and subjected to further analyses.

apoptosis in cultured cortical neurons in response to 6OHDA. Fig. S4
demonstrates that the progression of Wallerian degeneration is delayed
by antioxidants, NAD​PH oxidase inhibitors, and an EGFR inhibitor.
Fig. S5 shows the down-regulation of the catalytic subunits of NAD​
PH oxidases by specific shRNA in cultured DRG neurons. Online
supplemental material is available at http​://www​.jcb​.org​/cgi​/content​
/full​/jcb​.201506102​/DC1. Additional data are available in the JCB
DataViewer at http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1083​/jcb​.201506102​.dv.

The authors declare no further competing financial interests.
Submitted: 22 June 2015
Accepted: 19 October 2015

References
Araki, T., and J. Milbrandt. 2003. ZNRF proteins constitute a family of presynaptic E3 ubiquitin ligases. J. Neurosci. 23:9385–9394.
Araki, T., Y. Sasaki, and J. Milbrandt. 2004. Increased nuclear NAD biosynthesis
and SIRT1 activation prevent axonal degeneration. Science. 305:1010–
1013. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1126​/science​.1098014
Barnham, K.J., C.L. Masters, and A.I. Bush. 2004. Neurodegenerative diseases
and oxidative stress. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 3:205–214. http​://dx​.doi​.org​
/10​.1038​/nrd1330
Bedard, K., and K.H. Krause. 2007. The NOX family of ROS-generating NAD​
PH oxidases: physiology and pathophysiology. Physiol. Rev. 87:245–313.
http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1152​/physrev​.00044​.2005
Blandini, F., and M.T.  Armentero. 2012. Animal models of Parkinson’s disease.
FEBS J. 279:1156–1166. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1111​/j​.1742​-4658​.2012​.08491​.x
Broughton, B.R., D.C. Reutens, and C.G. Sobey. 2009. Apoptotic mechanisms
after cerebral ischemia. Stroke. 40:e331–e339. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1161​/
STR​OKEAHA​.108​.531632
Calixto, A., J.S.  Jara, and F.A.  Court. 2012. Diapause formation and
downregulation of insulin-like signaling via DAF-16/FOXO delays
axonal degeneration and neuronal loss. PLoS Genet. 8:e1003141. http​://
dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1371​/journal​.pgen​.1003141
Chen, M., J.A. Maloney, D.Y. Kallop, J.K. Atwal, S.J. Tam, K. Baer, H. Kissel,
J.S.  Kaminker, J.W.  Lewcock, R.M.  Weimer, and R.J.  Watts. 2012.
Spatially coordinated kinase signaling regulates local axon degeneration.
J.  Neurosci. 32:13439–13453. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1523​/JNE​UROSCI​
.2039​-12​.2012
Cheng, H.C., S.R.  Kim, T.F.  Oo, T.  Kareva, O.  Yarygina, M.  Rzhetskaya,
C. Wang, M. During, Z. Talloczy, K. Tanaka, et al. 2011. Akt suppresses
retrograde degeneration of dopaminergic axons by inhibition of
macroautophagy. J.  Neurosci. 31:2125–2135. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1523​/
JNE​UROSCI​.5519​-10​.2011
Cole, A.R., W.  Noble, L.  van Aalten, F.  Plattner, R.  Meimaridou, D.  Hogan,
M.  Taylor, J.  LaFrancois, F.  Gunn-Moore, A.  Verkhratsky, et al. 2007.
Collapsin response mediator protein-2 hyperphosphorylation is an early
event in Alzheimer’s disease progression. J. Neurochem. 103:1132–1144.
http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1111​/j​.1471​-4159​.2007​.04829​.x
Coleman, M. 2005. Axon degeneration mechanisms: Commonality amid diversity.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6:889–898. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1038​/nrn1788

ZNRF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase regulates neurodegeneration • Wakatsuki et al.

895

Published November 16, 2015

896

JCB • Volume 211 • Number 4 • 2015

Masuyama, N., K. Oishi, Y. Mori, T. Ueno, Y. Takahama, and Y. Gotoh. 2001. Akt
inhibits the orphan nuclear receptor Nur77 and T-cell apoptosis. J. Biol.
Chem. 276:32799–32805. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1074​/jbc​.M105431200
Osterloh, J.M., J.  Yang, T.M.  Rooney, A.N.  Fox, R.  Adalbert, E.H.  Powell,
A.E. Sheehan, M.A. Avery, R. Hackett, M.A. Logan, et al. 2012. dSarm/
Sarm1 is required for activation of an injury-induced axon death pathway.
Science. 337:481–484. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1126​/science​.1223899
Press, C., and J. Milbrandt. 2008. Nmnat delays axonal degeneration caused by
mitochondrial and oxidative stress. J. Neurosci. 28:4861–4871. http​://dx​
.doi​.org​/10​.1523​/JNE​UROSCI​.0525​-08​.2008
Raff, M.C., A.V.  Whitmore, and J.T.  Finn. 2002. Axonal self-destruction and
neurodegeneration. Science. 296:868–871. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1126​/
science​.1068613
Ryan, K.A., and S.W. Pimplikar. 2005. Activation of GSK-3 and phosphorylation
of CRMP2 in transgenic mice expressing APP intracellular domain.
J. Cell Biol. 171:327–335. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1083​/jcb​.200505078
Saitoh, F., and T. Araki. 2010. Proteasomal degradation of glutamine synthetase
regulates Schwann cell differentiation. J. Neurosci. 30:1204–1212. http​://
dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1523​/JNE​UROSCI​.3591​-09​.2010
Sajadi, A., B.L. Schneider, and P. Aebischer. 2004. Wlds-mediated protection of
dopaminergic fibers in an animal model of Parkinson disease. Curr. Biol.
14:326–330. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1016​/j​.cub​.2004​.01​.053
Taguchi, A., Y. Kasahara, T. Nakagomi, D.M. Stern, M. Fukunaga, M. Ishikawa,
and T. Matsuyama. 2010. A reproducible and simple model of permanent
cerebral ischemia in CB-17 and SCID mice. J. Exp. Stroke Transl. Med.
3:28–33. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.6030​/1939​-067X​-3​.1​.28
Tsuchiya, D., S.  Hong, Y.  Matsumori, H.  Shiina, T.  Kayama, R.A.  Swanson,
W.H.  Dillman, J.  Liu, S.S.  Panter, and P.R.  Weinstein. 2003.
Overexpression of rat heat shock protein 70 is associated with reduction
of early mitochondrial cytochrome C release and subsequent DNA fragmentation after permanent focal ischemia. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
23:718–727.
Ueda, H., and R. Fujita. 2004. Cell death mode switch from necrosis to apoptosis
in brain. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 27:950–955. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1248​/bpb​
.27​.950
Wakatsuki, S., F.  Saitoh, and T.  Araki. 2011. ZNRF1 promotes Wallerian
degeneration by degrading AKT to induce GSK3B-dependent CRMP2
phosphorylation. Nat. Cell Biol. 13:1415–1423. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1038​
/ncb2373
Wang, J.T., Z.A. Medress, and B.A. Barres. 2012. Axon degeneration: Molecular
mechanisms of a self-destruction pathway. J. Cell Biol. 196:7–18. http​://
dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1083​/jcb​.201108111
Whitmore, A.V., T.  Lindsten, M.C.  Raff, and C.B.  Thompson. 2003. The
proapoptotic proteins Bax and Bak are not involved in Wallerian
degeneration. Cell Death Differ. 10:260–261. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1038​/
sj​.cdd​.4401147
Williamson, R., L.  van Aalten, D.M.  Mann, B.  Platt, F.  Plattner, L.  Bedford,
J.  Mayer, D.  Howlett, A.  Usardi, C.  Sutherland, and A.R.  Cole. 2011.
CRMP2 hyperphosphorylation is characteristic of Alzheimer’s disease
and not a feature common to other neurodegenerative diseases.
J.  Alzheimers Dis. 27:615–625. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.3233​/JAD​-2011​
-110617
Yang, J., Z.  Wu, N.  Renier, D.J.  Simon, K.  Uryu, D.S.  Park, P.A.  Greer,
C.  Tournier, R.J.  Davis, and M.  Tessier-Lavigne. 2015. Pathological
axonal death through a MAPK cascade that triggers a local energy deficit.
Cell. 160:161–176. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1016​/j​.cell​.2014​.11​.053
Zhong, Q., W. Gao, F. Du, and X. Wang. 2005. Mule/ARF-BP1, a BH3-only E3
ubiquitin ligase, catalyzes the polyubiquitination of Mcl-1 and regulates
apoptosis. Cell. 121:1085–1095. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1016​/j​.cell​.2005​.06​.009
Zhou, F.Q., J. Zhou, S. Dedhar, Y.H. Wu, and W.D. Snider. 2004. NGF-induced
axon growth is mediated by localized inactivation of GSK-3beta and
functions of the microtubule plus end binding protein APC. Neuron.
42:897–912. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1016​/j​.neuron​.2004​.05​.011
Zille, M., T.D.  Farr, I.  Przesdzing, J.  Muller, C.  Sommer, U.  Dirnagl, and
A.  Wunder. 2012. Visualizing cell death in experimental focal cerebral
ischemia: Promises, problems, and perspectives. J.  Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 32:213–231.

Downloaded from on October 4, 2016

Coleman, M.P., and M.R. Freeman. 2010. Wallerian degeneration, wld(s), and
nmnat. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 33:245–267. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1146​/
annurev​-neuro​-060909​-153248
Conner, D.A. 2004. Transgenic mouse production by zygote injection. In Current
Protocols in Molecular Biology. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York.
Cormack, B. 2001. Directed mutagenesis using the polymerase chain reaction. In
Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York.
Elmore, S. 2007. Apoptosis: A review of programmed cell death. Toxicol. Pathol.
35:495–516. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1080​/01926230701320337
Finn, J.T., M. Weil, F. Archer, R. Siman, A. Srinivasan, and M.C. Raff. 2000.
Evidence that Wallerian degeneration and localized axon degeneration
induced by local neurotrophin deprivation do not involve caspases.
J. Neurosci. 20:1333–1341.
Gallagher, E., M.  Gao, Y.C.  Liu, and M.  Karin. 2006. Activation of the E3
ubiquitin ligase Itch through a phosphorylation-induced conformational
change. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 103:1717–1722. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​
.1073​/pnas​.0510664103
Gandhi, S., and A.Y.  Abramov. 2012. Mechanism of oxidative stress in
neurodegeneration. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2012:428010. http​://dx​.doi​
.org​/10​.1155​/2012​/428010
Gerdts, J., Y. Sasaki, B. Vohra, J. Marasa, and J. Milbrandt. 2011. Image-based
screening identifies novel roles for IκB kinase and glycogen synthase
kinase 3 in axonal degeneration. J. Biol. Chem. 286:28011–28018. http​://
dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1074​/jbc​.M111​.250472
Gerdts, J., D.W.  Summers, Y.  Sasaki, A.  DiAntonio, and J.  Milbrandt. 2013.
Sarm1-mediated axon degeneration requires both SAM and TIR
interactions. J.  Neurosci. 33:13569–13580. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1523​/
JNE​UROSCI​.1197​-13​.2013
Gerdts, J., E.J. Brace, Y. Sasaki, A. DiAntonio, and J. Milbrandt. 2015. SARM1
activation triggers axon degeneration locally via NAD+ destruction.
Science. 348:453–457. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1126​/science​.1258366
Grünblatt, E., S. Mandel, and M.B. Youdim. 2000. Neuroprotective strategies in
Parkinson’s disease using the models of 6-hydroxydopamine and MPTP.
Ann. N.  Y.  Acad. Sci. 899:262–273. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1111​/j​.1749​
-6632​.2000​.tb06192​.x
Guégan, C., B.  Onténiente, Y.  Makiura, M.  Merad-Boudia, I.  Ceballos-Picot,
and B.  Sola. 1998. Reduction of cortical infarction and impairment of
apoptosis in NGF-transgenic mice subjected to permanent focal ischemia.
Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 55:133–140. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1016​/S0169​
-328X(97)00372​-0
Hou, S.T., S.X.  Jiang, A.  Aylsworth, G.  Ferguson, J.  Slinn, H.  Hu, T.  Leung,
J.  Kappler, and K.  Kaibuchi. 2009. CaMKII phosphorylates collapsin
response mediator protein 2 and modulates axonal damage during
glutamate excitotoxicity. J.  Neurochem. 111:870–881. http​://dx​.doi​.org​
/10​.1111​/j​.1471​-4159​.2009​.06375​.x
Hoxhaj, G., A.  Najafov, R.  Toth, D.G.  Campbell, A.R.  Prescott, and
C.  MacKintosh. 2012. ZNRF2 is released from membranes by growth
factors and, together with ZNRF1, regulates the Na+/K+ATPase. J. Cell
Sci. 125:4662–4675. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1242​/jcs​.110296
Kazlauskaite, A., V.  Kelly, C.  Johnson, C.  Baillie, C.J.  Hastie, M.  Peggie,
T. Macartney, H.I. Woodroof, D.R. Alessi, P.G. Pedrioli, and M.M. Muqit.
2014. Phosphorylation of Parkin at Serine65 is essential for activation:
Elaboration of a Miro1 substrate-based assay of Parkin E3 ligase activity.
Open Biol. 4:130213. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1098​/rsob​.130213
Kinoshita, E., E. Kinoshita-Kikuta, K. Takiyama, and T. Koike. 2006. Phosphatebinding tag, a new tool to visualize phosphorylated proteins. Mol.
Cell. Proteomics. 5:749–757. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1074​/mcp​.T500024​
-MCP200
Li, Y., T.  Perry, M.S.  Kindy, B.K.  Harvey, D.  Tweedie, H.W.  Holloway,
K.  Powers, H.  Shen, J.M.  Egan, K.  Sambamurti, et al. 2009. GLP-1
receptor stimulation preserves primary cortical and dopaminergic
neurons in cellular and rodent models of stroke and Parkinsonism. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:1285–1290. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1073​/pnas​
.0806720106
Lobner, D. 2000. Comparison of the LDH and MTT assays for quantifying cell
death: Validity for neuronal apoptosis? J.  Neurosci. Methods. 96:147–
152. http​://dx​.doi​.org​/10​.1016​/S0165​-0270(99)00193​-4

