[Link]
mailto:anne.joutel@inserm.fr
[Link]
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0
[Link]
http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/
RESEARCH Open Access
Early white matter changes in CADASIL: evidence
of segmental intramyelinic oedema in a
pre-clinical mouse model
Emmanuel Cognat, Sabine Cleophax, Valérie Domenga-Denier and Anne Joutel*
Abstract
Introduction: Small vessel disease (SVD) of the brain is a leading cause of age- and hypertension-related cognitive
decline and disability. Cerebral white matter changes are a consistent manifestation of SVD on neuroimaging,
progressing silently for many years before becoming clinically evident. The pathogenesis of these changes remains
poorly understood, despite their importance. In particular, their pathological correlate at early stages remains
largely undefined. Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy
(CADASIL), caused by dominant mutations of the NOTCH3 receptor, is regarded as a paradigm for the most
common form of sporadic SVD. In this study, we used immunohistochemistry, confocal microscopy and electron
microscopy, together with qualitative and quantitative analyses to assess oligodendroglial, axon and myelin
damage in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice, a model of preclinical CADASIL.
Results: The principal cerebral white matter changes in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice are microvacuoles (≤1 μm
diameter) in the myelin sheaths associated with focal myelin degradation and occurring in the absence of
oligodendrocyte loss. Half the damaged myelin sheaths still contain an apparently intact axon. Clearance of
myelin debris appears inefficient, as demonstrated by the significant but mild microglial reaction, with occasional
myelin debris either contacted or internalized by microglial cells.
Conclusion: Our findings suggest that segmental intramyelinic oedema is an early, conspicuous white matter
change in CADASIL. Brain white matter intramyelinic oedema is consistently found in patients and mouse models
with compromised ion and water homeostasis. These data provide a starting point for novel mechanistic studies
to investigate the pathogenesis of SVD-related white matter changes.
Keywords: Small vessel disease, White matter, Intramyelinic oedema, CADASIL, Mouse model
Introduction
Cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) is increasingly recognized
as a major health problem in developed countries
, accounting for 25 to 30% of ischemic stroke [1]
and as a leading cause of age-related cognitive decline
and disability [2]. The majority of SVD appears to result
from a complex mix of genetic and cardiovascular risk
factors, the most important of which are age and hypertension
[3,4].
The main manifestations of SVD on standard magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) are lacunes and white matter
(WM) hyperintensities [5]. The underlying microstructural
changes responsible for WM hyperintensities are
unclear, and it has been suggested that these features may
simply reflect an increase in water content [6]. Novel MRI
techniques, such as diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which
measures the magnitude and direction of water diffusion,
and magnetization transfer imaging (MTI), which measures
the efficiency of magnetization exchange between
the relatively free water protons within tissue and protons
bound to macromolecules, are highly sensitive to changes
in white matter tract integrity [7,8]. Changes reflecting
axonal loss and demyelination have consistently been observed
in subjects with SVD. These changes are detected
not only in areas of WM hyperintensities but also in white
matter of normal appearance, suggesting that the WM
* Correspondence: anne.joutel@inserm.fr
INSERM, U1161 and Univ Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMRS 1161,
F-75010 Paris, France
© 2014 Cognat et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1068894583)
hyperintensities observed on conventional MRI may be no
more than the tip of the iceberg [6]. WM lesions are
highly prevalent in patients with SVD, and in populations
at risk of SVD, including the elderly, in particular. This
suggests that WM lesions probably progress silently for
many years before becoming clinically evident [9].
Little is known about the pathophysiological events
leading to WM lesions in SVD. The two prevailing
hypotheses attribute WM abnormalities to chronic hypoperfusion
[3], or to an increase in blood–brain-barrier
permeability, causing fluid to leak into the surrounding
brain tissue [4]. It has also been suggested that WM
changes may arise from Wallerian degeneration due to
cortical neuron loss [10]. There are several reasons for
the current lack of knowledge. Firstly, SVD is highly heterogeneous
and the mechanisms underlying WM lesions
are potentially diverse [3]. Secondly, the pathological
correlate of WM abnormalities, particularly at early
stages, remain largely undefined. WM lesions have been
studied on autopsy, in patients with end-stage SVD [4,9].
At this stage, severe white matter disorganization is the
rule, with marked losses of myelin and axons, accompanied
by severe vessel wall and perivascular space
abnormalities [11].
Monogenic forms of SVD, largely indistinguishable from
sporadic SVD, have been characterized in recent years
[12]. Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with
Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL
), caused by dominant mutations in the NOTCH3
receptor, is regarded as a paradigm for the most common
form of sporadic SVD [13-15]. All NOTCH3 mutation
carriers display WM abnormalities, which constitute early
signs of the disease detectable well before the occurrence
of stroke, cognitive impairment and disability [16]. In the
current study, we investigated a mouse model of preclinical
CADASIL (TgPAC-Notch3R169C), in which cerebral
WM pathology develops with aging [17,18]. Through
immunohistochemistry, confocal microscopy and electron
microscopy, combined with qualitative and quantitative
evaluations, we carried out, to the best of our knowledge,
the first microstructural characterization of changes to
brain WM in the initial stages of a pure, well defined form
of SVD.
Material and methods
Mice
TgPAC-Notch3R169C (FVB/N) and TgPAC-Notch3WT
(FVB/N) mice have been described elsewhere [17].
These mice and their wild-type control littermates were
bred at the animal facility on the Villemin site of Paris
Diderot University (Paris, France). The TgPAC-Notch3WT
mice and their non-transgenic littermates did not differ
for any of the parameters assessed, and we therefore
pooled the data for these two groups, which we used as a
single control group. Mice were housed under a normal
light/dark cycle (12 h) with standard rodent chow and tap
water supplied ad libitum. All the experiments described
here were conducted in full accordance with the guidelines
of our local institutional animal care and use committee
(Lariboisière-Villemin), and every effort was made
to minimize the number of animals used.
Electron microscopy
Mice were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital
(80 mg/kg) and transcardially perfused with 50 ml of
0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (PB) followed by 200 ml
of 2% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde in PB. The
skull was opened and incubated for one hour in 2% glutaraldehyde
/2% paraformaldehyde in PB at 4°C, for
fixation of the brain tissues. The brain was removed, cut
into 1 mm-thick paramedian brain slices (median,−1mm,
+1 mm), and 1×1×1-mm blocks from the corpus callosum
, internal capsule and fimbria regions were dissected
under a microscope. The blocks of tissue were incubated
overnight in 2% glutaraldehyde/2% paraformaldehyde in
PB at 4°C and then post-fixed by incubation in 2%
osmium tetroxide in PB. Then samples were dehydrated
by passage through a graded series of ethanol concentrations
and were then embedded in epoxy resin. Semi-thin
sections were cut with an ultramicrotome (Leica EM
EC7), stained with 1% toluidine blue and screened by light
microscopy to select areas in which the myelin fibers were
perpendicular to the cutting plane. Ultrathin sections of
regions of interest were cut, mounted on copper grids,
contrast stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and
examined by transmission electron microscopy (Philips
CM100).
Immunohistochemistry
Mice were deeply anesthetized with sodium pentobarbital
(80 mg/kg) and transcardially perfused with 50 ml
of PB followed by 50 ml of 4% paraformaldehyde in PB.
The brain was removed, cut along the midline and postfixed
by incubation overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde at
4°C. Half the brain was dehydrated, embedded in paraffin
, and cut into 7 μm-thick sagittal sections on a rotary
microtome (Leica RM2255). These sections were placed
on silane-treated glass slides. The other half of the brain
was cryoprotected by incubation in 30% sucrose solution
until precipitation occurred at 4°C, transferred to a plastic
cryomold filled with optimal cutting temperature
compound (Tissue-tek) and immersed in a pre-chilled
isopentane bath cooled with liquid nitrogen. It was then
(immediately before use) cut into 16 μm-thick sagittal
slices on a cryostat (Leica CM 1850), and the slices were
collected in PBS in 12-well plates.
Immunodetection for myelin basic protein, Iba-1,
CD68, Alzheimer precursor protein A4, phosphorylated
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 2 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-111094901)
[Link]
http://gratio.efil.de/
light neurofilament, non-phosphorylated heavy neurofilament
and cleaved caspase 3 was performed on freefloating
cryosections. Sections were washed and blocked
by incubation with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in
PBS supplemented with 0.4% Triton X-100 for 1 h at
room temperature. They were then incubated in 0.5%
BSA and 0.4% Triton X-100 at 4°C overnight, with one
or two of the following primary antibodies: mouse
monoclonal anti-myelin basic protein (1:2000, SMI94,
Covance), rabbit polyclonal anti-degraded myelin basic
protein (1:500, Millipore), rabbit polyclonal anti-Iba-1
(1:2000, Wako), rat monoclonal anti-CD68 (1:250, FA-
11, AbD Serotec), rabbit monoclonal anti-phosphorylated
neurofilament light (1:100, C28E10, Cell Signaling),
mouse monoclonal anti-non-phosphorylated neurofilament
heavy (1:50000, SMI32, Covance), mouse monoclonal
anti-Alzheimer precursor protein A4 (1:1000, 22C11,
Millipore), rabbit monoclonal anti-cleaved caspase 3
(1:250, Asp175/5A1E, Cell Signaling). Olig2 immunodetection
was performed on paraffin-embedded sections.
Samples were deparaffinized, rehydrated in graded series
of ethanol concentrations and boiled in 10 mM citrate
buffer (pH 6.0) for 10 minutes to unmask the antigens.
The slides were allowed to cool to room temperature and
were washed in PBS. Sections were blocked by incubation
with 5% fetal bovine serum in PBS supplemented with
0.2% Triton X-100 for 1 h at room temperature. They
were then incubated with a rabbit polyclonal anti-Olig2
antibody (1:200, Millipore) in 0.5% fetal bovine serum,
overnight at 4°C.
The cryosections and paraffin-embedded sections were
then incubated with AlexaFluor-conjugated secondary
antibodies (1:500, Life technologies) for 2 h at room
temperature. Sections were washed, counterstained with
DAPI (1:10,000, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS for 5 minutes at
room temperature, mounted in a drop of Dako fluorescence
mounting medium and subjected to epifluorescence
imaging (Nikon eclipse 80i) or laser scanning confocal
microscopy (Olympus BX61). The same imaging parameters
were used for all images acquired from all the groups
compared. A detailed description of all the primary and
secondary antibodies used is provided in Additional file 1:
(Table S1).
Quantitative analysis
All quantitative image analyses were performed in blind
conditions.
Lesions on electron micrographs
Lesions were first counted in the corpus callosum when
the mice were 20 months old (n= 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C
mice and 4 control mice). Images were acquired randomly
, with a magnification of x3,400 (6 fields per section,
1–2 sections per mouse). A 400 μm2 square was randomly
drawn on each image and the lesions located within the
square (excluding 2 borders) were counted manually.
Results are expressed as the number of lesions per
1000 μm2. The lesions present in TgPAC-Notch3R169C
mice were characterized further. A mean of 200 lesions
per section (from 7–12 fields, 1–2 sections per mouse, 
n= 4 mice) were manually and systematically identified
with NIH ImageJ software and assessed to determine the
lesion type, its subcellular location, its position relative to
the myelin sheath, and the presence or absence of an
axon. Degenerating axons were distinguished on the basis
of an accumulation of mitochondria and lysosomes in the
axoplasm, vacuolar bodies, a disrupted plasma membrane,
or a dark axoplasm. The other axons were considered to
be “apparently intact”. In vacuolated lesions, area and
equivalent diameter were measured. The results are
expressed as a percentage of the total lesion count.
g-ratios
The g-ratio (diameter of the axon/total outer myelin
sheath diameter) was determined on electron micrographs
of the corpus callosum of 20-month old mice (n=3
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice and 3 control mice). Images
were acquired randomly at a magnification x17,500. The
g-ratio was calculated for at least 120 randomly selected
apparently intact myelin sheaths (i.e., non-vacuolated) per
genotype, with the GRatio for ImageJ plugin (Ingo Bormuth,
http://gratio.efil.de/). We then plotted g-ratio against
axon diameter.
Myelin debris
The amount of myelin debris was determined at the ages
of 12 months (n= 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice and 4
control mice) and 20 months (n= 5 TgPAC-Notch3R169C
mice and 8 control mice). Epifluorescence images were
obtained for sections (1.5 ± 0.4 mm lateral to the midline)
labeled with SMI94, with a 20x objective, from both the
anterior (2 fields) and posterior (1 field) parts of the
corpus callosum (3 fields per section, 4–10 sections per
mouse), using a CCD camera and identical parameters.
Myelin debris were counted with a custom-made threestep
NIH ImageJ macro: manual delineation of the corpus
callosum, automatic detection of the foci with the highest
intensity relative to the regional background (local maxima
) and automated counting of hyperintense foci and
measurement of the area of the corpus callosum. The
results are expressed as the number of SMI94 hyperintense
foci over the area of the corpus callosum.
Presence of axons within damaged myelin fibers
We checked altered myelin sheaths for the presence of
the axon in 20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice
(n= 5). Confocal images of the fimbria were generated
with a x60 oil-immersion objective, from sections labeled
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 3 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(8.0.0.2542,530250938 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
with SMI94 (myelin debris, red) and C28E10 (axon, green)
(88 × 88 μm field, 2 fields per section, 2 sections per
mouse). We used a custom-made two-step NIH ImageJ
macro to assess the colocalization of myelin debris with
axons. Myelin debris (15–20 debris per image, 4 images
per mouse, 5 mice) were first randomly selected on the
red channel image (blind to the green channel) and two
perpendicular lines (width: 1 pixel) were drawn over each.
The pixel intensity values of the red and green channels
were then plotted along each of the two lines (two profiles
per myelin debris). Myelin debris with a green profile peak
within the red profile curve over at least one of the two
lines were classified as “axon present”, whereas myelin
debris not fulfilling this criterion were classified as “axon
absent”. Results are expressed as a percentage of the total
number of myelin debris analyzed.
Olig2-positive cells
The number of Olig2-positive cells was determined at
the age of 20 months (n= 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice
and 4 control mice). Epifluorescence images were generated
from sections (1.2 ± 0.3 mm lateral to the midline)
labeled with anti-Olig2 antibody, with a x20 objective,
from the fimbria and the posterior part of the corpus
callosum (4 sections per mouse). A custom NIH ImageJ
macro was developed for the quantification of oligodendrocyte
density. All steps were automated unless
otherwise indicated. Briefly the global region of interest
(global ROI) was delimited manually, its area was measured
and the part of the image outside the global ROI
was excluded. All the remaining nuclei in the DAPI
channel were then binarized, separated when overlapping
(watershed method) and converted into separate
regions of interest (nucleus ROIs). For each nucleus
ROI, mean intensity was measured for the Olig2 channel
and compared with the surrounding mean intensity
(mean intensity of the nucleus ROI enlarged by 70 pixels):
the nucleus ROI was considered to correspond to an
Olig2-positive nucleus if its mean intensity was at least 1.1
times the surrounding intensity. Oligodendrocyte density
is expressed as the ratio of the total number of Olig2-
positive nuclei to the area of the global ROI.
Microglial reaction
Total and reactive microglia were quantified in 20-
month-old mice (n= 6 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice and 4
control mice). Epifluorescence images were generated
for sections (1.5 ± 0.4 mm lateral to the midline) labeled
for Iba-1 (total microglial population) and CD68 (reactive
microglia) from the corpus callosum (4–6 sections per
mouse), with a 40x objective. Total and reactive microglia
were quantified with a custom-built NIH ImageJ macro.
The corpus callosum was delimited manually, its area was
measured and the part of the image outside the corpus
callosum was excluded. Immunostained microglia were
then binarized by automatic thresholding (the Otsu
method) and the area covered by the microglia was determined.
Results are expressed as the ratio of the area
covered by the microglia to that of the corpus callosum.
Clearance of myelin debris
The phagocytosis of myelin debris by microglial cells in
the corpus callosum was assessed in 20 month-old
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. Electron micrographs were
acquired at a magnification of x3,400 (10–12 fields per
section, 6 sections per mouse, n= 4 mice). Confocal
images were generated for sections labeled with SMI94
and anti-Iba-1 antibodies, with a x20 oil-immersion objective
(155 × 155 μm field, 4 fields per section, 2 sections
per mouse,n= 4 mice). Myelin debris coming into contact
with or internalized by microglial cell processes were
counted manually on electron micrographs and on confocal
images. The results are expressed as the ratio of the
number of myelin debris coming into contact with or
internalized by microglia to the total number of myelin
debris.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as the mean ± standard error of
the mean (SEM). Student’s t tests were used for comparisons
between groups. P values <0.05 were considered
significant.
Results
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice display intramyelinic oedema in
the brain WM
We previously reported that TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice
display cerebral WM pathology upon aging [17]. We
characterized this pathology further, by assessing the
integrity of the cerebral WM on semithin resin sections
of corpus callosum, fimbria and internal capsule from
TgPAC-Notch3R169C and control mice at the age of
20 months. Toluidine blue-stained semithin sections
showed widespread spongiosis confined to the myelinated
fiber tracts, in all regions of TgPAC-Notch3R169C
mice analyzed, but not in control mice (Figure 1A-B and
Additional file 2: Figure S1, n=4TgPAC-Notch3 R169C and
4 control mice). The adjacent gray matter and the cortex
ofthemutantmicewerealmostentirelyspared(Additional
file 2: Figure S1).
We undertook a qualitative and quantitative electron microscopy
analysis of cerebral WM in TgPAC-Notch3R169C
and control mice to confirm and extend these findings. We
decided to use the corpus callosum for further analysis,
because it contains large bundles of similarly orientated
myelin fibers, making it possible to obtain cross-sections of
fibers. Two predominant types of lesion were identified unambiguously
: (i) membrane-bound vacuoles (Figure 1C-E,
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 4 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Figure 1 (See legend on next page.)
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 5 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-762135221)
pink), which were distinguished from the vascular lumen
(Figure 1C-D, yellow or “c”) by the absence of surrounding
endothelial cells and astrocytic endfeet, and (ii) whorls of
myelin-like figures, probably corresponding to remnants
of the myelin sheath (Figure 1E-F, blue and inset). Both
lesions were significantly more frequent in mutant than in
control mice (Additional file 3: Figure S2, p<0.05,n=4
TgPAC-Notch3R169C and 4 control mice). Quantitative
morphological analysis showed that vacuoles were the predominant
lesions in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice, accounting
for 76.8 ± 5.7% of all lesions, whereas myelin whorls
accounted for 14.7 ± 4.2% of all lesions (Figure 1C-G;
n= 4 mice). Most vacuoles had a diameter of less than
1 μm (median diameter: 0.83 μm; Figure 1D, white arrows
and Figure 1 H), well below the detection threshold of conventional
light microscopy at about 3.5 μm, even after correction
for eccentric sectioning (expected median vacuole
diameter for an observed median diameter of 0.83 μm:
1.13 μm). We found no evidence of fluid accumulation in
the interstitial space of TgPAC-Notch3R169C mouse brains.
Moreover, elements of the blood–brain barrier, including
the endothelial cells with tight junctions, pericytes and
astrocytic endfeet, although the latter were occasionally
enlarged, were essentially morphologically normal, even
when close to vacuoles (Additional file 4: Figure S3). Thus,
the brain damage in aged TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice consisted
mostly of segmental microvacuolation of the cerebral
WM tracts, and electron microscopy was required to
assess this damage accurately.
We looked for structural correlates of this microvacuolation
by examining high-power electron micrographs of
mutant corpus callosum tissue (n= 4 20-month-old
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice). Most vacuoles (83.8 ± 3.0%)
were surrounded by myelin, suggesting that they were
formed within the myelin sheath (Figure 2A-C). These
intra-myelinic vacuoles were generally located in the
innermost layers of the myelin sheath (76.5 ± 1.1%),
with the axon squashed against one side of the sheath
and separated from the vacuole by a thin layer of myelin
(Figure 2A, empty arrowhead). These vacuoles generally
had a smooth ovoid shape, contained aberrant myelin
sheets (Figure 2A, arrows) and were located in the internodal
region (Figure 2A-B). They developed less
frequently in the outermost layers of the myelin sheath
(24 ± 1.1%), where they were surrounded by a thin layer of
myelin (Figure 2C, empty arrowheads) and occasionally
contained aberrant myelin sheets (Figure 2C, arrows). By
contrast, 4.8 ± 1.2% of these vacuoles were located within
cells, either in astrocytes (Figure 2D, orange arrows) or in
microglial cells. We were unable to determine the precise
subcellular location of 11.8 ± 2.6% of vacuoles, these
unassigned vacuoles being extremely small (diameter≤
0.5 μm; Additional file 5: Figure S4).
We investigated the possibility of a general myelination
problem, by determining the g-ratio for apparently
intact myelin sheaths. Quantitative analysis of the g-ratio
in the corpus callosum revealed no difference between
TgPAC-Notch3R169C and control mice (Figure 2G, n=4
TgPAC-Notch3R169C and 4 control mice, aged 20 months).
Overall, these data indicate that segmental intramyelinic
oedema, occurring preferentially in the innermost
layer of the myelin sheath, can be considered to be
the ultrastructural correlate of WM damage in aged
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice.
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice display progressive focal myelin
alteration with poor elimination of myelin debris
We evaluated the integrity of myelin further, by immunolabeling
for myelin basic protein (MBP) in TgPACNotch3R169C and control mice at 20 months of age. We
used the SMI94 monoclonal antibody, which was raised
against a peptide of MBP encompassing an epitope known
to be unmasked during myelin degradation (Additional
file 6: Figure S5) [19]. We found that this antibody, which
stains normal myelin, also labeled degraded myelin with a
pattern similar to but much more robust than that
obtained with the polyclonal antibody commonly used to
stain degraded myelin (Additional file 6: Figure S5). The
labeling of brain sections with SMI94 resulted in essentially
uniform staining of the WM tracts in control mice
(n= 8; Figure 3A), whereas it revealed numerous hyperintense
foci in the WM tracts, under an almost similar background
of staining, in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n=5;
Figure 3B, arrows). Foci were distributed throughout all
the WM tracts, including those of the corpus callosum
(Figure 3B), fimbria, internal capsule and anterior commissure
(data not shown), but were essentially absent from
the cortex (Additional file 7: Figure S6). We quantitatively
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 1 Microvacuolation of the cerebral WM in 20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. (A-B) Representative toluidine blue stained 1 μm
resin sections of the corpus callosum showing abundant lesions (arrows) in the TgPAC-Notch3R169C (B) but not in the control (A). (C-F) Representative
electron micrographs of the corpus callosum from a control (C) and a TgPAC-Notch3R169C (D-F), showing multiple membrane-bound vacuoles
(D-E, colored in pink), including numerous inframicrometric vacuoles (D, white arrows), as well as myelin whorls (E, colored in blue and
arrowheads) in the TgPAC-Notch3R169C (D, E) contrasting with rare vacuoles in the control (C). (F) Inset of the boxed area in (E) containing five
myelin whorls; Inset has been left uncolored to improve visualization. (G-H) Diagrams showing the % of vacuoles and myelin whorls (G) and
the distribution of vacuole diameter (H) inthecorpuscallosumofTgPAC-Notch3 R169C mice (n = 4), indicating that the majority of WM lesions
are infra-micrometric vacuoles. O, oligodendrocytes (colored in green); A, astrocyte (colored in purple); M, microglia (colored in brown); C,
capillary (colored in yellow). Scale bar represents 30 μm (A-B),5μm (C-E) and 1.5 μm (F).
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 6 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
( 8.0.0.2542.223491576 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
Figure 2 (See legend on next page.)
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 7 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
( 8.0.0.2542.291275722 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
assessed myelin degradation with a quantification algorithm
based on the local maxima method, which
we applied to the corpus callosum of control and mutant
brains labeled with SMI94 (Figure 3C). We found that
there was 3.9 times more myelin debris in TgPACNotch3R169C mice than in control mice at 20 months of
age (Figure 3E, p=2.6  ×  10 −5, n = 5 TgPAC-Notch3R169C
and 8 control mice). We assessed the progressive nature
of myelin degradation in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice, by
analyzing the cerebral WM of younger mice and comparing
the results obtained with those for 20-month-old
mice. At 12 months of age, TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice had
significantly larger amounts of myelin debris than agedmatched
control mice (Figure 3D, p=0.017,n=4TgPACNotch3R169C and 4 control mice). The amount of myelin
debris in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice was almost four times
higher at 20 months than at 12 months, highlighting a
large increase in debris load with age. Interestingly, in
12-month-old mice, myelin debris were essentially confined
to the anterior periventricular region of the corpus
callosum, suggesting that, as in humans, WM lesions
begin in the periventricular regions, subsequently expanding
towards the cortex in a centripetal manner.
It has recently been shown that the primary loss of
oligodendrocytes can lead to myelinic vacuolation [20,21].
We investigated whether the myelin damage in TgPACNotch3R169C mice resulted from oligodendrocyte cell
death, by carrying out ultrastructural examinations on
mutant mice at 20 months of age. Electron micrographs
showed no appreciable ultrastructural abnormalities of the
oligodendrocytes in the corpus callosum (data not shown).
We then evaluated oligodendrocyte density. Immunolabeling
for the oligodendroglial lineage marker Olig2
showed that the density of oligodendrocytes was similar in
the cerebral WM of TgPAC-Notch3R169C and control mice
(Additional file 8: Figure S7, p >0.05, n=4  TgPACNotch3R169C and 4 control mice). Furthermore, no
apoptotic cells were detected on cleaved-caspase 3 immunostaining
of the WM tracts of TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice
(data not shown).
Microglia plays an essential role in removing tissue debris.
There is recent evidence to suggest that the phagocytic
clearance of myelin debris is required to prevent a detrimental
effect of these debris on the brain and to trigger
repair [22]. We began by investigating the microglial
response in the cerebral WM of TgPAC-Notch3R169C and
control mice at 20 months of age. Immunohistochemistry
with an antibody directed against Iba-1, a marker of the
total microglial population, resulted in the staining of
areas of similar sizes in TgPAC-Notch3R169C and control
mice (Figure 4A-B, G; p=0.99,n= 6 TgPAC-Notch3R169C
and 4 control mice). By contrast, immunostaining for
CD68, a marker of phagic microglia/macrophages, showed
the CD68-positive area in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice to be
slightly, but significantly larger than that in control mice
(Figure 4C-D, H; p=0.037,n= 6 TgPAC-Notch3R169C and
4 control mice). We then assessed the clearance of myelin
debris, by counting the number of myelin debris either in
contact with or internalized by a microglial cell on brain
sections labeled with SMI94 and anti-Iba-1 antibodies. In
the corpus callosum, only 13.3 ± 0.7% of the myelin debris
was in direct contact with microglial processes or cell
bodies (Figure 4E, I; n=4  TgPAC-Notch3 R169C mice).
We confirmed this finding through another approach
based on electron microscopy. An analysis of electron
micrographs of the corpus callosum from TgPACNotch3R169C mice revealed that only 6.1 ± 1.8% of abnormal
myelin figures were either in contact with or
internalized by a migroglial cell (Figure 4F, J,n=4TgPACNotch3R169C).
Thus, these data indicate that TgPAC-Notch3R169C
mice display progressive focal myelin degradation in the
cerebral WM that is unlikely to result from oligodendrocyte
cell death. They also suggest that this myelin pathology
is associated with inefficient phagocytic clearance
of the myelin debris.
Myelin pathology in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice is associated
with axon damage
We then hypothesized that axons might be disrupted
either as a cause or a consequence of this prominent
myelin pathology. Wallerian degeneration is a well-known
process in which primary axon degeneration leads to
secondary myelin sheath breakdown [23]. Conversely,
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 2 Ultrastructural characteristics of vacuoles in the corpus callosum of TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice at 20 months of age. (A) Typical
vacuole (star) in the innermost layer of the myelin sheath. The vacuole separates the axon from its myelin sheath (black arrowheads) and contains
multiple aberrant myelin sheets (arrows). Notice the thin myelin sheet (empty arrowhead) at the interface between the axon and the vacuole.
(B) Longitudinal section of a myelinated fiber containing a vacuole in the innermost layer of the myelin sheath. (C) Typical vacuole (star) in the
outermost layer of the myelin sheath. The vacuole is delineated by a thin rim of myelin (empty arrowheads) and contains occasional myelin
debris (arrows). (D) Shown are 3 atypical intracellular vacuoles (orange arrows) located in an astrocytic endfoot (delineated by a white dashed
line). Notice the presence of a small typical intramyelinic vacuole (star) in the same field. (E) Diagram of the distribution of vacuole location
revealing a large preponderance of intramyelinic vacuoles (n = 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C). (F) Diagram of the % of vacuoles developed in the
innermost versus outermost layers of the myelin sheath showing a large majority of the innermost lesion type (n = 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C).
(G) Scattergram of g-ratios in relation to axonal diameters showing no difference between control (n = 4) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n = 4).
Scale bar represents 1 μm (A), 0.5 μm (B), 1.3 μm (C) and 1.75 μm (D).
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 8 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
( 8.0.0.2542.104003968 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
Figure 3 Progressive myelin degradation in the cerebral WM of TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. (A-B) Representative sections of corpus callosum
sections from a control (A) and a TgPAC-Notch3R169C (B) immunolabeled with SMI94, which stains normal and degraded myelin; the TgPAC-Notch3R169C
displays numerous hyperintense foci (white arrows). (C) Image processing used to automatically identify the hyperintense foci. (Left panel) Shown is a
8-bit image of a TgPAC-Notch3R169C corpus callosum section immunostained with SMI94. (Middle panel) Shown is the corresponding 3D image
intensity profile with a LUT scale displaying the non-uniform background of the image that impedes accurate detection of hyperintense foci using
simple thresholding. (Right panel) The local maxima in the image are determined to overcome this limitation: maxima are ignored if they do not stand
out from the surroundings by more than a noise tolerance value (this value is set initially, from a batch of randomly selected images, to allow best
discrimination of foci from background). (D-E) Diagrams of the myelin debris density in the corpus callosum, expressed as a total number of debris
over a given area (number/mm2), in control and mutant mice at 12 months of age (D) (n = 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C and 4 control mice) and 20 months
of age (E) (n = 5 TgPAC-Notch3R169C and 8 control mice). Notice that the scale is different between E and D. Scale bar represents 50μm (A-B).
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 9 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Figure 4 (See legend on next page.)
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 10 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1174200325)
in multiple sclerosis, for example, axon degeneration is
thought to result from demyelination [24,25]. We studied
electron micrographs of the affected areas of WM from
20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n=4).  Three
morphologically different types of lesion were observed:
(i) myelin sheath vacuolation with an apparently intact
axon generally flattened against one side of the sheath
(Figure 5A), (ii) myelin sheath vacuolation with a degenerating
axon (Figure 5B) or whorls of myelin-like figures
(Figure 1E-F, blue and arrowheads) and (iii) an empty vacuolated
myelin sheath with no detectable axon (Figure 5C).
Quantitative analysis showed that 49.9 ± 4.4% of damaged
myelin sheaths contained an apparently intact axon (lesion
type (i)), whereas 49.8 ± 4.3% contained either a degenerating
axon or no axon (lesions type (ii) or (iii)) (Figure 5D).
We excluded from this quantitative analysis the vacuolated
myelin sheaths in which vacuoles formed in
the outermost lamellae of the myelin sheath, as it was
not possible to determine clearly whether or not the
axon was present in these sheaths. We detected no
degenerating axons within morphologically normal myelin
sheaths.
We also investigated the presence of axons within
damaged myelin sheaths on cross-sections of fimbria
labeled for phosphorylated light neurofilament and
MBP in 20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n=5;
Figure 5E), to confirm these findings. Color profiling of
MBP hyperintense foci on multichannel confocal images
led to the identification of three distinct profiles: (i) hyperintense
foci with the axon in a central position (Figure 5F),
(ii) hyperintense foci with the axon in a lateral position
(Figure 5G) and (iii) hyperintense foci with no axon
(Figure 5H). Quantitative analysis showed that 54.5 ±
1.4% of foci were associated with an axon profile (lesion
types (i) and (ii); Figure 5I). Thus, both ultrastructural and
confocal analyses indicate that the myelin pathology in
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice is associated with axonal
damage, but that a significant proportion of damaged
myelin sheaths still contain an apparently intact axon.
This suggests that axonal degeneration occurs secondarily
to myelin degradation.
Discussion
This study provides, to the best of our knowledge, the
first detailed microstructural characterization of the
initial brain WM lesions in a well-defined form of
SVD. Using a mouse model of preclinical CADASIL,
we showed that myelin damage was progressive and
segmental. It occurred in the absence of oligodendrocyte
loss and axonal injury appeared to be secondary.
Our findings identify intramyelinic oedema as a prototypic
lesion. We also provide evidence for the poor clearance
of myelin debris. We found no ultrastructural
evidence of blood–brain-barrier leakage, providing further
support for the view that prominent changes to the
blood–brain barrier are not the mechanism responsible
for triggering WM lesions in CADASIL [17]. Our findings
shed new light on the potential mechanisms of SVD-
related WM changes.
It remains unclear from the results of autopsy studies
on patients with SVD whether myelin degradation,
axonal injury, oligodendrocyte and neuronal loss are
connected or occur sequentially [9,26,27]. In this study
on a preclinical CADASIL model, we obtained several
lines of evidence that myelin injury occurs first, in the
absence of oligodendrocyte death. First, oligodendrocytes
appeared normal on electron microscopy analysis,
with no evidence of abnormal swelling or pyknosis. Second
, Olig2 staining showed that there was no change in
oligodendrocyte density in the affected WM areas. Finally,
immunostaining for cleaved caspase3 revealed an absence
of apoptotic oligodendrocytes. Similarly, our data suggest
that axonal injury, another pathological change observed
in this mouse model of CADASIL, occurs after myelin
degradation. We found that about half the altered myelinated
sheaths still contained an axon with no overt
morphological signs of degeneration. Conversely, none of
the morphologically normal myelin sheaths contained a
degenerating axon. We also found that the absolute number
of injured axons in affected WM areas was small. In
particular, staining for non-phosphorylated neurofilaments
or an axonal accumulation of APP, which is commonly
used to identify and quantify injured axons [20], revealed
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 4 Analysis of myelin debris clearance in the cerebral WM of TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. (A-B) Sections of corpus callosum
(delineated by a dashed line) immunostained with anti-Iba-1 antibody showing comparable labeling patterns in the control (A) and TgPACNotch3R169C (B) mice. (C-D) Sections of corpus callosum immunostained with anti-CD68 antibody showing an increased labeling and presence
of microglial aggregates (arrows) in TgPAC-Notch3R169C (D) compared to control (C). (E) Sections of corpus callosum labeled with both SMI94
(red, myelin debris) and Iba-1 (green, microglia) showing two myelin debris contacted and/or internalized by microglial cells and processes
(white arrowheads) while many others are not (empty arrowheads). (F) Electron micrograph of a microglial cell (colored in brown) containing a
whorl of degenerating myelin (colored in blue) and two other inclusions of phagocytic material (colored in green). (G-H) Diagrams showing that
the area of total microglia (Iba-1) is comparable between control (n = 4) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n = 6) (G), whereas the area of reactive
microglia (CD68) is slightly, but significantly larger in TgPAC-Notch3R169C (n = 6) compared to control mice (n = 4) (H). (I-J) Diagrams showing
the % of myelin debris contacted or internalized by a microglial cell as determined on confocal images (I) or electron micrographs (J) in
20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n = 4). Scale bar represents 75 μm (A-D),10μm (E) and 2 μm (F).
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 11 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(8.0.0.2542,216400643 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
Figure 5 (See legend on next page.)
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 12 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
no significant differences between mutant and control
mice (data not shown). Nevertheless, additional experiments
are required for the formal exclusion of more subtle
axonal defects, such as changes in axonal transport, which
might precede intramyelinic oedema. The lack of prominent
axonal degeneration in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice may
account for the lack of an overt clinical phenotype in these
mice. This finding may also be of clinical relevance, because
it seems likely that NOTCH3 mutation carriers may
undergo changes to the WM that remain asymptomatic
until a significant number of axons have been injured or
other lesions, such as lacunar infarcts, occur.
The identification of segmental intramyelinic oedema
as the prototypic lesion sheds new light on the mechanisms
of SVD-related WM changes, at least in CADASIL.
Intramyelinic oedema is an uncommon phenotype
corresponding to the accumulation of ion and water in
the periaxonal space or between myelin lamellae. In
myelinated axons, repetitive axonal firing leads to continuous
movements of ions associated with osmotically
driven movements of water. It has been suggested that
the so-called “panglial syncytium”, which consists of
oligodendrocytes, astrocytes and ependymal cells strongly
interlinked by abundant gap junctions, is essential for the
long-distance disposal of the excess ions and water
released from the periaxonal space (input end) into the
pericapillary and subependymal spaces (output end) [28].
This process, which is also known as spatial potassium
buffering or siphoning, presumably prevents axonal
activation-induced intramyelinic oedema. There is strong
evidence, from both mouse models and human diseases,
that changes to the molecular components of this panglial
syncytium, from the input to the output ends, can ultimately
cause ultrastructural lesions of the myelin, with
intramyelinic oedema. Mice in which the gap junction
coupling of oligodendrocytes and astrocytes is eliminated
by the genetic inactivation of both connexins on oligodendrocytes
(Cx32 and Cx47) or astrocytes (Cx30 and Cx43)
display myelin-associated vacuoles in the cerebral WM
tracts, with intramyelinic oedema. This phenotype is
greatly attenuated by the suppression of axonal activity,
and strongly exacerbated by increases in neuronal activity
[29,30]. In mice, deletion of the gene encoding the
potassium channel Kir4.1 [31] or the gene encoding the
chloride channel ClC-2 [32], both of which are strongly
expressed in the astrocytic endfeet at the perivascular
basal lamina, the output end of the panglial syncytium,
leads to WM vacuolation with intramyelinic oedema.
Kir4.1 is a weakly rectifying potassium channel, capable of
mediating spatial potassium buffering in the central
nervous system [33]. There is genetic evidence in mice to
suggest that Kir4.1 and connexins are involved in the
same pathway [29,30]. Finally, in humans, a loss of ClC-2
function and dominant mutations of the gene encoding
MLC1, a protein that is also highly abundant in the astrocytic
endfeet, cause megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy
with subcortical cysts, a disease characterized by chronic
brain WM oedema in vacuoles predominantly located
within myelin sheaths [34,35]. These findings, together
with those presented here, support the notion that early
WM lesions in CADASIL may be due to a defect in ion
and water homeostasis, providing a new starting point for
mechanistic studies.
Mutant NOTCH3 could impair water and ion homeostasis
via at least two potential mechanisms. Firstly,
chronic hypoperfusion, which has been demonstrated in
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice [17], may decrease the functioning
of ion pumps involved in ionic homeostasis,
leading to intramyelinic oedema. Early studies in rodents
showed that the cerebral WM was highly vulnerable to
ischemia [36,37]. Remarkably, segmental vacuolation of
the WM tracts, with intramyelinic oedema, is one of the
most conspicuous and very early pathological changes in
ischemic WM induced by brief focal ischemia, in
addition to major damage to oligodendrocytes and axons
[37]. An energy deficit leads to a decrease in ATP levels,
resulting in the failure of several key ATP-dependent ion
pumps thought to make a critical contribution to overall
ion homeostasis [38]. Alternatively, the mutant NOTCH3
may impair the functioning of astrocytic endfeet, the
output end of the panglial syncytium, directly. The astrocytic
endfeet cover the abluminal surface of pericytes and
smooth muscle cells where mutant NOTCH3 accumulates
aberrantly [17,39]. Further experimental studies are
required to test these hypotheses.
We found that myelin degradation was associated with
a weak microglial response. Moreover, negligible amounts
of myelin debris were eliminated by phagocytosis, as
(See figure on previous page.)
Figure 5 Assessment of axonal integrity within damaged myelin sheaths in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice aged 20 months. (A-C)
Representative electron micrographs of myelin sheaths containing either an apparently normal axon, although squashed against one side of
the sheath (A) or a degenerating axon (B), and of an empty sheath with no axon (C). (D) Diagram showing that a similar proportion of abnormal
myelin sheaths contains an apparently-intact axon (axon+) versus no or a degenerating axon (axon-) (n = 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice). (E)
Representative confocal image of fimbria double stained with SMI94 (red, MBP hyperintense foci) and C28E10 (green, axon) antibodies. Notice
that acquisition parameters have been set to minimize visualization of normal myelin and maximize visualization of axon and myelin debris.
(F-H) Red and green profiling of MBP hyperintense foci (red) with the axon (green) in a central position (F) (axon+) or in lateral position (G)
(axon +) and foci with no axon (axon-) (H). (I) Diagram of the % of damaged myelin sheaths with axon (axon+) or without axon (axon-)
(n = 5 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice). Scale bar represents 0.6 μm (A, C), 0.5 μm (B) and 6.5 μm (E).
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 13 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S1.docx
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S2.tiff
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S3.tiff
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S4.tiff
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S5.tiff
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S6.tiff
demonstrated by both immunohistochemical and electron
microscopy studies, suggesting that the resident microglia
was inefficient at the removal of myelin debris. The
reasons for this poor clearance of debris remain unclear.
Inefficient microglial clearance has been reported to be
prevalent in several neurodegenerative diseases and to
increase with aging [22]. It has also been suggested that
resident microglia clear debris less efficiently in the presence
of an intact blood–brain barrier, because of the
absence of blood-derived macrophages or stimulation by
recruited adaptive immune cells [22]. The clearance of
tissue debris is thought to play an important role in
creating a proregenerative environment within the
central nervous system. The presence of uncleared myelin
debris in the central nervous system has been associated
with inefficient remyelination and impaired axon regeneration
[22,23].
Our study has several methodological strengths. These
include the use of a genetically defined model of SVD in
which no surgery was required to obtain the WM
phenotype. Bilateral carotid artery stenosis or ligation is
commonly used to reproduce mild chronic hypoperfusion
and associated ischemic injury to the WM. This
model has the disadvantage of requiring a surgical procedure
that may itself cause various degrees of transient
brain ischemia potentially leading to brain lesions
[36,40]. We assessed the focal degradation of myelin by
a quantitative and semi-automatic approach that we developed
, which proved to be highly sensitive and robust,
with very low interobserver variability (data not shown).
This approach has clear advantages over other widely
used qualitative or semi-quantitative approaches [19,41].
Finally, electron microscopy was found to be crucial for
the evaluation of vacuolation.
However, this study also has several limitations. We
cannot exclude the possibility that WM lesions in
CADASIL differ markedly from those in other forms of
SVD. However, many studies have highlighted the
similarities of WM lesions between patients with CADASIL
and those with age- or hypertension-related SVD, particularly
as concerns the overall spread of changes across
disease stages [42]. We did not attempt to assess cognitive
functions in the TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. A recurrent
issue concerning WM changes is their possible association
with cognitive deficits, including executive dysfunction in
particular, and disability, and the strength of the correlation.
However, TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice were generated
in the genetic FVB/N background. This background is
widely used for genetic manipulations, but behavioral
assessments in mice of this strain are complicated due to
their relative hyperactivity and severe visual impairment
[43]. Finally, it may be of interest to apply novel MRI techniques
to TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice, to define neuroradiological
correlates of these early WM lesions in CADASIL.
Conclusion
Using TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice as a model of a pure, well
defined SVD, we identified intramyelinic oedema as an
early and conspicuous feature of cerebral WM changes.
Our findings suggest that SVD-related WM changes may
be triggered by a defect in ion and water homeostasis. Our
results thus provide a new starting point for mechanistic
studies of the pathogenesis of SVD–related WM changes.
Supporting data
The data sets supporting the results of this article are
included within the article and its additional files.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Table S1. Antibodies used in specific applications.
Additional file 2: Figure S1. Assessment of cerebral lesions in TgPACNotch3R169C mice by light microscopy on semi-thin resin sections.
Representative toluidine-blue stained 1 μm semi-thin resin sections of
fimbria (A, B), internal capsule (C, D) and cortex (E, F) from control
(A, C, E) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C (B,D,F) mice. White matter (WM) tracts
of fimbria and internal capsule exhibit widespread spongiosis (arrows) in
TgPAC-Notch3R169C (B, D) comparatively to control (A, C), whereas the
cortex of TgPAC-Notch3R169C is spared (F). c, capillary lumen. Scale bar
represents 20 μm. Representative out of 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C and 4
control mice aged 20 months.
Additional file 3: Figure S2. Quantitative assessment of electron
microscopy lesion load in the cerebral WM. Diagrams showing the
number of WM lesions (A) and vacuoles (B) in the corpus callosum of
20-month-old control (n = 4) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n = 4) as
determined on electron micrographs. Amount of WM lesions and vacuoles
is significantly increased in TgPAC-Notch3R169C compared to control.
Additional file 4: Figure S3. Electron microscopy assessment of the
blood brain barrier in the WM from TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. Shown
are representative electron micrographs of WM capillaries from TgPACNotch3R169C mice, at medium (A) and high magnification (B) showing no
overt abnormality of the elements of the blood brain barrier including
tight junctions of endothelial cells (white arrowheads), basement membrane,
pericytes (P) and astrocytic endfeet (As). Notice the presence of a typical
intramyelinic vacuole (star) in the vicinity of the capillary (A). Scale bar
represents 1μm (A) and 0.15μm (B). Representative out of 4 TgPACNotch3R169C mice aged 20 months.
Additional file 5: Figure S4. WM vacuoles of undetermined location.
Shown are two representative electron micrographs of WM from
TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice with both typical intramyelinic vacuoles (star)
and vacuoles of uncertain subcellular location (arrows). These “unassigned”
vacuoles are usually very small (mean diameter, 0.25 μm), membrane bound
(A) and tend to coalesce (B). Scale bar represents 0.5 μm. Representative
out of 4 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice aged 20 months.
Additional file 6: Figure S5. SMI94 labels degraded myelin. (A)
Sequence alignment of guinea pig and human myelin basic protein
(MBP) showing that SMI94 monoclonal antibody and the historical
anti-degraded MBP polyclonal antibody (dMBP) have been raised against
overlapping epitopes. (B-C) Shown are adjacent sections of the corpus
callosum from 20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice immunostained
with anti-dMBP (B) or SMI94 (C) displaying comparable staining pattern
of hyperintense foci. (D-L) Shown are adjacent corpus callosum sections
from a 20-month-old TgPAC-Notch3R169C mouse double labeled with
anti-dMBP (green, left panel) and SMI-94 (red, middle panel) at the
indicated dilutions and the corresponding merged picture (right panel).
(D-F) anti-dMBP and SMI94 antibodies were used at the same dilution
than in B and C. Notice that almost all green and red hyperintense foci
co-localize (F), and that the staining intensity with anti-dMBP (D) is
strongly reduced when this antibody is used in combination with SMI94.
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 14 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S7.tiff
[Link]
http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/supplementary/2051-5960-2-49-S8.tiff
(G-I) A 5-fold decrease in SMI94 concentration partially restores anti-dMBP
staining intensity while (J-L) a 5-fold decrease in anti-dMBP concentration
almost abolishes anti-dMBP staining. Scale bar represents 50 μm.
Representative out of 3 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice aged 20 months.
Additional file 7: Figure S6. SMI94 specifically marks degraded myelin
in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice. Photomicrographs of SMI94 immunostaining
from the head of the corpus callosum (cc) and adjacent cortex of
representative controls (A) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (B). WM tracts
in the control (A) are uniformly stained, whereas WM tracts in TgPACNotch3R169C (B) display numerous hyperintense foci. Scale bar represents
100 μm. White dashed line delineate the corpus callosum from the
cortex. Representative out of 3 control and 3 TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice
aged 20 months.
Additional file 8: Figure S7. Quantitative assessment of oligodendrocytes
in TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice WM. (A-B) Representative fimbria sections from
control (A) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C (B) mice immunostained with anti-Olig2
(green) antibody, with nucleus counterstained with DAPI (blue). (C-D)
Diagrams of oligodendrocyte density in the fimbria (C) and in the posterior
part of the corpus callosum (D) showing comparable oligodendrocyte
density in control (n = 4) and TgPAC-Notch3R169C mice (n =4) at 20 months
of age. Scale bar represents 100 μm.
Abbreviations
BSA: Bovine serum albumin; CADASIL: Cerebral Autosomal Dominant
Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy;
DTI: Diffusion Tensor Imaging; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging;
MTI: Magnetization transfer imaging; PB: Sodium phosphate buffer;
SVD: Small Vessel Disease; WM: White matter.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors’ contributions
EC and AJ designed the study. EC carried most of the experiments,
interpreted the results, wrote the first draft and contributed to the revision
of the manuscript. SC participated in the immunohistochemical studies. VD
genotyped the mice and participated in the electron microscopy studies.
AJ supervised all the experiments, wrote and revised the final draft.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from the French National Research
Agency (grant number ANR Genopath 2009-RAE09011HSA and ANR Blanc
2010-RPV11011HHA) and the Fondation Leducq (Transatlantic Network of
Excellence on the Pathogenesis of Small Vessel Disease of the Brain) to AJ.
EC is a recipient of fellowship from Inserm. We thank Aurélien Dauphin and
Andrée Rouche of the Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope Core Facility at
“Plate-forme d’Imagerie Cellulaire Pitié Salpêtrière” for providing assistance
with confocal microscopy as well Carmen Diaz and Jean Paul Rio of the
electron microscopy Core Facility at Institut du Fer-à-Moulin for providing
assistance with electron microscopy.
Received: 22 April 2014 Accepted: 22 April 2014
Published: 30 April 2014
References
1. Bejot Y, Catteau A, Caillier M, Rouaud O, Durier J, Marie C, Carlo AD, Osseby
G-V, Moreau T, Giroud M: Trends in Incidence, Risk Factors, and Survival
in Symptomatic Lacunar Stroke in Dijon, France, From 1989 to 2006 A
Population-Based Study. Stroke 2008, 39:1945–1951.
2. American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Epidemiology and
Prevention, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, Council on Cardiovascular
Radiology and Intervention, and Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and
Anesthesia, Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, Decarli C, Greenberg SM,
Iadecola C, Launer LJ, Laurent S, Lopez OL, Nyenhuis D, Petersen RC,
Schneider JA, Tzourio C, Arnett DK, Bennett DA, Chui HC, Higashida RT,
Lindquist R, Nilsson PM, Roman GC, Sellke FW, Seshadri S: Vascular
contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia: a statement for
healthcare professionals from the american heart association/american
stroke association. Stroke 2011, 42:2672–2713.
3. Pantoni L: Cerebral small vessel disease: from pathogenesis and clinical
characteristics to therapeutic challenges. Lancet Neurol 2010, 9:689–701.
4. Wardlaw JM, Smith C, Dichgans M: Mechanisms of sporadic cerebral
small vessel disease: insights from neuroimaging. Lancet Neurol 2013,
12:483–497.
5. Wardlaw JM, Smith EE, Biessels GJ, Cordonnier C, Fazekas F, Frayne R,
Lindley RI, O’Brien JT, Barkhof F, Benavente OR, Black SE, Brayne C,
Breteler M, Chabriat H, Decarli C, de Leeuw F-E, Doubal F, Duering M,
Fox NC, Greenberg S, Hachinski V, Kilimann I, Mok V, van Oostenbrugge R,
Pantoni L, Speck O, Stephan BCM, Teipel S, Viswanathan A, Werring D, et al:
Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel disease and its
contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet Neurol 2013,
12:822–838.
6. Patel B, Markus HS: Magnetic resonance imaging in cerebral small vessel
disease and its use as a surrogate disease marker. Int J Stroke 2011,
6:47–59.
7. Jones DK, Lythgoe D, Horsfield MA, Simmons A, Williams SCR, Markus HS:
Characterization of White Matter Damage in Ischemic Leukoaraiosis with
Diffusion Tensor MRI. Stroke 1999, 30:393–397.
8. Fazekas F, Ropele S, Enzinger C, Gorani F, Seewann A, Petrovic K, Schmidt R:
MTI of white matter hyperintensities. Brain 2005, 128:2926–2932.
9. Schmidt R, Schmidt H, Haybaeck J, Loitfelder M, Weis S, Cavalieri M,
Seiler S, Enzinger C, Ropele S, Erkinjuntti T, Pantoni L, Scheltens P,
Fazekas F, Jellinger K: Heterogeneity in age-related white matter changes.
Acta Neuropathol 2011, 122:171–185.
10. Wen W, Sachdev PS, Chen X, Anstey K: Gray matter reduction is correlated
with white matter hyperintensity volume: a voxel-based morphometric
study in a large epidemiological sample. Neuroimage 2006, 29:1031–1039.
11. Gouw AA, Seewann A, van der Flier WM, Barkhof F, Rozemuller AM,
Scheltens P, Geurts JJG: Heterogeneity of small vessel disease: a
systematic review of MRI and histopathology correlations. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2011, 82:126–135.
12. Yamamoto Y, Craggs L, Baumann M, Kalimo H, Kalaria RN: Review:
molecular genetics and pathology of hereditary small vessel diseases of
the brain. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2011, 37:94–113.
13. Joutel A, Corpechot C, Ducros A, Vahedi K, Chabriat H, Mouton P,
Alamowitch S, Domenga V, Cécillion M, Marechal E, Maciazek J, Vayssiere C,
Cruaud C, Cabanis EA, Ruchoux MM, Weissenbach J, Bach JF, Bousser MG,
Tournier-Lasserve E: Notch3 mutations in CADASIL, a hereditary
adult-onset condition causing stroke and dementia. Nature 1996,
383:707–710.
14. Chabriat H, Joutel A, Dichgans M, Tournier-Lasserve E, Bousser M-G:
Cadasil. Lancet Neurol 2009, 8:643–653.
15. Joutel A, Faraci FM: Cerebral Small Vessel Disease Insights and
Opportunities From Mouse Models of Collagen IV–Related Small
Vessel Disease and Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy
With Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy. Stroke 2014,
45:1215–1221.
16. Chabriat H, Levy C, Taillia H, Iba-Zizen MT, Vahedi K, Joutel A, Tournier-Lasserve
E, Bousser MG: Patterns of MRI lesions in CADASIL. Neurology 1998,
51:452–457.
17. Joutel A, Monet-Leprêtre M, Gosele C, Baron-Menguy C, Hammes A,
Schmidt S, Lemaire-Carrette B, Domenga V, Schedl A, Lacombe P, Hubner N:
Cerebrovascular dysfunction and microcirculation rarefaction precede
white matter lesions in a mouse genetic model of cerebral ischemic
small vessel disease. J Clin Invest 2010, 120:433–445.
18. Joutel A: Pathogenesis of CADASIL: transgenic and knock-out mice to
probe function and dysfunction of the mutated gene, Notch3, in the
cerebrovasculature. Bioessays 2011, 33:73–80.
19. Matsuo A, Lee GC, Terai K, Takami K, Hickey WF, McGeer EG, McGeer PL:
Unmasking of an unusual myelin basic protein epitope during the
process of myelin degeneration in humans: a potential mechanism for
the generation of autoantigens. Am J Pathol 1997, 150:1253–1266.
20. Pohl HBF, Porcheri C, Mueggler T, Bachmann LC, Martino G, Riethmacher D,
Franklin RJM, Rudin M, Suter U: Genetically induced adult oligodendrocyte
cell death is associated with poor myelin clearance, reduced
remyelination, and axonal damage. J Neurosci 2011, 31:1069–1080.
21. Traka M, Arasi K, Avila RL, Podojil JR, Christakos A, Miller SD, Soliven B,
Popko B: A genetic mouse model of adult-onset, pervasive central
nervous system demyelination with robust remyelination. Brain 2010,
133:3017–3029.
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 15 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1586265429)
22. Neumann H, Kotter MR, Franklin RJM: Debris clearance by microglia: an
essential link between degeneration and regeneration. Brain 2009,
132:288–295.
23. Vargas ME, Barres BA: Why Is Wallerian Degeneration in the CNS So Slow?
Annu Rev Neurosci 2007, 30:153–179.
24. Trapp BD, Peterson J, Ransohoff RM, Rudick R, Mörk S, Bö L: Axonal
transection in the lesions of multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 1998,
338:278–285.
25. Trapp BD, Stys PK: Virtual hypoxia and chronic necrosis of demyelinated
axons in multiple sclerosis. Lancet Neurol 2009, 8:280–291.
26. Baudrimont M, Dubas F, Joutel A, Tournier-Lasserve E, Bousser MG:
Autosomal dominant leukoencephalopathy and subcortical ischemic
stroke. A clinicopathological study. Stroke 1993, 24:122–125.
27. Viswanathan A, Gray F, Bousser M-G, Baudrimont M, Chabriat H:
Cortical neuronal apoptosis in CADASIL. Stroke 2006, 37:2690–2695.
28. Rash JE: Molecular disruptions of the panglial syncytium block potassium
siphoning and axonal saltatory conduction: pertinence to neuromyelitis
optica and other demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system.
Neuroscience 2010, 168:982–1008.
29. Menichella DM, Majdan M, Awatramani R, Goodenough DA, Sirkowski E,
Scherer SS, Paul DL: Genetic and physiological evidence that
oligodendrocyte gap junctions contribute to spatial buffering of
potassium released during neuronal activity. J Neurosci 2006,
26:10984–10991.
30. Lutz SE, Zhao Y, Gulinello M, Lee SC, Raine CS, Brosnan CF: Deletion of
astrocyte connexins 43 and 30 leads to a dysmyelinating phenotype and
hippocampal CA1 vacuolation. J Neurosci 2009, 29:7743–7752.
31. Neusch C, Rozengurt N, Jacobs RE, Lester HA, Kofuji P: Kir4.1 potassium
channel subunit is crucial for oligodendrocyte development and in vivo
myelination. J Neurosci 2001, 21:5429–5438.
32. Blanz J, Schweizer M, Auberson M, Maier H, Muenscher A, Hübner CA,
Jentsch TJ: Leukoencephalopathy upon disruption of the chloride
channel ClC-2. J Neurosci 2007, 27:6581–6589.
33. Olsen ML, Sontheimer H: Functional implications for Kir4.1 channels in
glial biology: from K + buffering to cell differentiation. J Neurochem 2008,
107:589–601.
34. Van der Knaap MS, Boor I, Estévez R: Megalencephalic
leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts: chronic white matter
oedema due to a defect in brain ion and water homoeostasis.
Lancet Neurol 2012, 11:973–985.
35. Depienne C, Bugiani M, Dupuits C, Galanaud D, Touitou V, Postma N, van
Berkel C, Polder E, Tollard E, Darios F, Brice A, de Die-Smulders CE, Vles JS,
Vanderver A, Uziel G, Yalcinkaya C, Frints SG, Kalscheuer VM, Klooster J,
Kamermans M, Abbink TE, Wolf NI, Sedel F, van der Knaap MS: Brain
white matter oedema due to ClC-2 chloride channel deficiency: an
observational analytical study. Lancet Neurol 2013, 12:659–668.
36. Shibata M, Ohtani R, Ihara M, Tomimoto H: White matter lesions and glial
activation in a novel mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion.
Stroke 2004, 35:2598–2603.
37. Pantoni L, Garcia JH, Gutierrez JA: Cerebral White Matter Is Highly
Vulnerable to Ischemia. Stroke 1996, 27:1641–1647.
38. Stys PK: Anoxic and ischemic injury of myelinated axons in CNS white
matter: from mechanistic concepts to therapeutics. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 1998, 18:2–25.
39. Mathiisen TM, Lehre KP, Danbolt NC, Ottersen OP: The perivascular
astroglial sheath provides a complete covering of the brain
microvessels: An electron microscopic 3D reconstruction.
Glia 2010, 58:1094–1103.
40. Toyama K, Koibuchi N, Uekawa K, Hasegawa Y, Kataoka K, Katayama T,
Sueta D, Jie Ma M, Nakagawa T, Yasuda O, Tomimoto H, Ichijo H,
Ogawa H, Kim-Mitsuyama S: Apoptosis Signal-Regulating Kinase 1 Is a
Novel Target Molecule for Cognitive Impairment Induced by Chronic
Cerebral Hypoperfusion. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2013,
34:616–625.
41. Yamamoto Y, Ihara M, Tham C, Low RWC, Slade JY, Moss T, Oakley AE,
Polvikoski T, Kalaria RN: Neuropathological Correlates of Temporal
Pole White Matter Hyperintensities in CADASIL. Stroke 2009,
40:2004–2011.
42. Duering M, Csanadi E, Gesierich B, Jouvent E, Hervé D, Seiler S, Belaroussi B,
Ropele S, Schmidt R, Chabriat H, Dichgans M: Incident lacunes
preferentially localize to the edge of white matter hyperintensities:
insights into the pathophysiology of cerebral small vessel disease.
Brain 2013, 136:2717–2726.
43. Pugh PL, Ahmed SF, Smith MI, Upton N, Hunter AJ: A behavioural
characterisation of the FVB/N mouse strain. Behav Brain Res 2004,
155:283–289.
doi:10.1186/2051-5960-2-49
Cite this article as: Cognat et al.: Early white matter changes in
CADASIL: evidence of segmental intramyelinic oedema in a pre-clinical
mouse model. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014 2:49.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color figure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Cognat et al. Acta Neuropathologica Communications 2014, 2:49 Page 16 of 16
http://www.actaneurocomms.org/content/2/1/49
( 8.0.0.2542.1698662104 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
