Chapter 21
Central nervous system imaging in diabetic cerebrovascular
diseases and white matter hyperintensities
SIMERPREET BAL, MAYANK GOYAL, ERIC SMITH, AND ANDREW M. DEMCHUK*
Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Radiology, Foothills Medical Centre, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
INTRODUCTION
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an established independent
risk factor for stroke and minimally symptomatic cerebral
microvascular disease that may present with
changes in cognition, gait, and mood causing high morbidity
and mortality (Stegmayr and Asplund, 1995). This
increased risk has been linked to pathophysiologic
changes in the cerebral arteries/arterioles.
Central nervous system (CNS) imaging focusing on
functional brain changes that occur in association with
diabetes may shed light on the underlying mechanisms.
Parenchymal brain imaging outlines brain structural
anatomy, tissue status, perfusion abnormalities, atrophy
, white matter hyperintensities, and small vessel brain
injury. This, along with vascular imaging, which detects
the abnormalities in the large extracranial and intracranial
vessels, percentage of stenosis, plaque burden,
occlusions, and collateral status, is commonly used in
both research and clinical settings. Different imaging
techniques can be used to diagnose and prognosticate
DM-related acute ischemic stroke and chronic cerebrovascular
disorders. These imaging modalities provide
insight into the etiology of diabetes-related cerebral disorders
and helps to identify candidates for acute stroke
treatment and secondary preventive strategies.
We summarize different modalities of parenchymal
and vascular imaging which can used in diabetic patients
with acute and chronic disease manifestations. The
chapter is divided into two sections. The first part provides
an approach to imaging in a setting of the acute
manifestations of diabetic cerebrovascular disorder.
The second part will provide detailed insights into imaging
used in diabetes-related chronic disorders such as
lacunar infarcts, brain atrophy, and white matter hyperintensities
(WMH). Methods quantifying WMH and
future imaging prospects to define white matter integrity
are also discussed.
STROKEIN PATIENTSWITH DIABETES
MELLITUS
DM causes accelerated microvascular disease and generalized
atherosclerosis that increases stroke risk
1.7–2.1-fold (Whisnant et al., 1996). Several differences
exist in the manifestations of stroke in diabetic subjects
as compared to nondiabetic patients. For example, ischemic
stroke is proportionally more common than hemorrhagic
stroke in diabetic patients compared to the general
population (11: 1 versus 5: 1) (Roehmboldt et al., 1983). In
the Honolulu Heart Study, the incidence of ischemic
stroke was more than twofold higher in diabetic patients
compared to general population (44.9 versus 20.7 per
1000), while the rates of hemorrhagic strokes were similar
(10.1 versus 9.6 per 1000) (Abbott et al., 1987).
A significant increase in morbidity from stroke of ischemic
origin has been found in the patients with type 1 DM,
with predominance of lacunar stroke, silent cerebral
infarcts, and white matter hyperintensities (Laing
et al., 2003).
Lacunar infarcts (small, round less than 15 mm in
maximal diameter, and deeply located) are considered
to be a typical stroke in diabetic subjects (Gandolfo
et al., 1988; Ghika et al., 1989). Indeed DM is present
in up to 28–43% of patients with lacunar strokes
(Tuszynski et al., 1989; Arboix et al., 1990; Horowitz
et al., 1992) and symptomatic silent infarcts or covert
stroke may be more common amongst diabetic patients,
*Correspondence to: Andrew M. Demchuk, MD, FRCPC, Director, Calgary Stroke Program, AI-HS Scholar, Professor, Department
of Clinical Neurosciences and Radiology, Room 1162, Foothills Medical Centre, 1403 29 St NW, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N
2T9. Tel: +1-403-944-8671, Fax: +1-403-944-1602, E-mail: ademchuk@ucalgary.ca
Handbook of Clinical Neurology, Vol. 126 (3rd series)
Diabetes and the Nervous System
D.W. Zochodne and R.A. Malik, Editors
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1227218504)
although this is controversial (Vermeer et al., 2002;
Eguchi et al., 2003). Macrovascular disease is a leading
cause of death among patients with DM due to atherosclerosis
involving the internal carotid and other major
cerebral arteries. (Bradley et al., 2000; Goksan et al.,
2001). Elevated fasting glucose or DM in combination
with other coexisting vascular risk factors in those with
metabolic syndrome have a higher risk of vascular events
than those with a single risk factor (Alberti et al., 2005).
DM as a component of metabolic syndrome has been
shown to be significantly associated with both extracranial
(McNeill et al., 2004) and intracranial (Bang et al.,
2005) atherosclerosis. The North Manhattan Study has
shown that DM and metabolic syndrome are major
determinants of intracranial atherosclerosis in comparison
to extracranial atherosclerotic disease and nonatherosclerotic
disease (Palumbo et al., 1978; Rincon et al.,
2009). DM increases the risk of stroke after a TIA
and has been incorporated into the ABCD2 TIA risk
stratification score (Ray et al., 2009). Case control studies
have shown that the incidence of TIA may be lower in
diabetic patients (Schoenberg et al., 1980; Weinberger
et al., 1983; Fritz et al., 1987). The prevalence of DM
may in fact be lower among patients with TIA in comparison
to those with ischemic strokes (Weimar et al., 2002).
Despite its lower TIA incidence, DM also increases
the probability of disabling or fatal outcome in patients
with brainstem and cerebellar infarction (Hornig et al.,
1992). It is conceivable that a lower incidence of TIA
taken together with the high prevalence of disabling or
fatal stroke could be explained by a greater susceptibility
to stroke recurrence and ischemic injury in diabetic
patients, leading to a larger volume of brain infarction.
Neuroimaging of the acute stroke syndrome
in diabetes
DM patients with acute ischemic strokes have higher
mortality rates and more severe disability in comparison
to patients without diabetes (Oppenheimer et al., 1985).
Severe hyperglycemia in the acute phase of stroke contributes
to worse clinical outcomes (Martini and Kent,
2007). In view of the rapid ischemic damage and anticipated
poor clinical outcomes, early treatment in these
patients may be critical.
ACUTE ISCHEMIC STROKE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PERTAINING TO IMAGING
In a setting of acute cerebral artery occlusion, focal cerebral
ischemia occurs below a critical cerebral blood flow
threshold of 12 mL/100 g tissue/min. Compensatory
mechanisms such as increased oxygen extraction fraction
may keep the cellular membranes intact at this
phase. However, a persistent decrease in cerebral blood
flow below 12 mL/100 g tissue/min leads to ischemic
depolarization due to Na/K channel failure, NMDA
receptor activation, and massive calcium influx into
the cells. The consequence is an uncontrolled net shift
of extracellular water in the intracellular space resulting
in cytotoxic edema and irreversible damage to neurons
(Astrup et al., 1981). Depending on the extent of cerebral
blood flow reduction and neuron viability, a central area
of irreversibly damaged brain parenchyma known as the
infarct core can be distinguished from a surrounding
area of potentially salvageable tissue known as the penumbra
(Fig. 21.1). Noncontrast CT brain imaging in the
acute setting can be used to rule out hemorrhage. CT
Normal 
Penumbra
A B C 
CORE
Fig. 21.1. The concept of ischemic core and penumbra showing (A) a central circular area of ischemic core of infarcted tissue
surrounded by area of tissue at risk, also called a penumbra, surrounded by unaffected viable brain tissue; (B) decreased cerebral
blood flow which includes area of reduced CBV (cerebral blood volume) marked in central white oval depicting the core surrounded
by an area of penumbra; (C) area of reduced cerebral blood volume showing central circular area marked in white oval
as the ischemic core.
292 S. BAL ET AL.
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1758771216)
angiography (CTA) (with precautions for contrast load
in patients at risk of nephropathy) and magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA) can identify site of occlusion
and thrombus burden. CT and MR perfusion analysis
can also help to quantify penumbra and areas of ischemia
at risk of further damage. Diffusion-weighted
MR imaging offers a precise characterization of the
infarct core. The extent of these two areas of ischemic
tissue is highly dependent on pre-existing cerebral leptomeningeal
arterial collaterals, which can be visualized
with CT angiography (Koroshetz et al., 2006).
GOALS OF IMAGING IN ACUTE DIABETIC
CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
The imaging protocols and approach to acute stroke
management in patients with DM is similar to a nondiabetic
patient. Both parenchymal and vascular imaging
information are needed to determine suitability for acute
stroke treatment. In acute stroke the goals for imaging
are to depict the “4 P’s”: parenchymal imaging to rule
out hemorrhage, to reveal early signs of acute ischemic
changes, and to assess the potential extent of irreversibly
damaged tissue; pipes (vascular imaging) to assess the
extracranial circulation (carotid and vertebral arteries
of the neck) and the intracranial circulation for evidence
of thrombus, occlusion or stenosis; penumbra, identifying
tissue at risk using perfusion imaging to estimate
cerebral blood volume, cerebral blood flow, and mean
blood flow transit time (Rowley, 2001). Since patients
with DM have a higher frequency of large artery disease,
detailed review of large artery (intracranial and extracranial
) abnormalities is required.
Computed tomography-based neuroimaging
in acute stroke
NONCONTRAST COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
Noncontrast CT (NCCT) brain has been extensively utilized
in acute stroke imaging for the last 3 decades and is
the only imaging test that is mandatory in acute stroke
assessment. It is highly sensitive to intracranial hemorrhage
and crucial for planning acute stroke treatment.
NCCT can detect and evaluate well evolved ischemic
stroke but its utility in the decision making for treatment
in acute ischemic stroke requires familiarity with the pattern
of early ischemic changes (EIC). Typical EIC imaging
features include: (1) hyperdense middle cerebral
artery (HDMCA) sign (M1 segment of the MCA) and
the MCA dot sign (M2 division in the sylvian fissure),
both representing visualized thrombus on NCCT present
in 35–67% of cases with acute stroke, (Schuknecht et al.,
1990) and associated with poor outcomes in most studies
(Launes and Ketonen, 1987; Ricci et al., 1991; Grotta
et al., 2001; Manno et al., 2003); (2) loss of gray/white
matter differentiation; (3) sulcal effacement; and (4)
early subtle hypoattenuation influenced by water shift,
causing a decrease in Hounsfield units (HU) at a rate
of 1–2 HU per hour of ischemia. These early signs are
present alone or in combination in almost 92% of cases
with acute ischemic stroke, when disabling deficits are
present (Tomura et al., 1988). ASPECTS (Alberta Stroke
Program Early CT Score) is a radiological semiquantitative
grading of early ischemic changes on NCCT. It
grades subtle hypoattenuation of brain tissue in the middle
cerebral artery region on a 10-point anatomical template
(Barber et al., 2000; Pexman et al., 2001). These
early ischemic changes on NCCT evolve with duration
and severity of ischemia and are less reliable in ultraearly
phase (<90 minutes from onset of stroke symptoms
) of ischemic stroke (Fig. 21.2).
CT ANGIOGRAPHY
Advances in CT scanner technology, including development
of helical scanners with multidetector row or multislice
CT, have enabled acquisition of CT angiography
(CTA) with increased speed and improved quality. With
the development of these faster multi-array scanners,
CTA can include coverage of the contrast bolus from
the aortic arch to the brain vertex. Multiple studies have
confirmed the ability of CTA reliably to detect large vessel
thrombus and intracranial occlusions (Wildermuth
et al., 1998; Lev et al., 2001). CTA offers an important
screening procedure for patients undergoing interventional
therapy targeting recanalization. For example, it
is the investigation of choice to diagnose extracranial stenosis
and intracranial occlusions. This helps to prognosticate
thrombolysis-related recanalization. Distal
intracranial occlusions recanalize better with thrombolytic
therapy (Sims et al., 2005). CTA has been shown
to be useful for the evaluation of total thrombus burden,
which correlates to recanalization rates with systemic
thrombolysis and collateral related backfilling distal to
intracranial occlusions. These factors are crucial to
determine the extent of salvageable brain tissue (Puetz
et al., 2008; Menon et al., 2011). CTA evaluates brain
parenchyma on whole brain perfused blood volume
images, generally referred to as CTA source image
(CTASI), which predicts final infarct better than NCCT
and is easily visualized even when imaging is less than
90 minutes from symptom onset. CTASI improves visualization
of the ischemic area by demonstrating a perfusion
abnormality characterized by a decrease in cerebral
blood flow/volume. This, in turn, may change depending
on the status of recanalization and leptomeningeal collaterals
(Rosenthal et al., 2008; Schaefer et al., 2008).
The recent evolution of fast acquisition CTA protocols
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 293
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
has resulted in an overestimation of ischemic core, rendering
this CTASI approach less useful (Yoo et al., 2012)
(Fig. 21.3).
CTA is the modality of choice to detect acute extracranial
carotid artery steno-occlusive disease, a common
presenting finding in acute stroke patients with DM.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) has traditionally
been the gold standard for extracranial stenosis/
occlusion assessment but has been gradually replaced
by noninvasive imaging such as CTA. DSA offers little
advantage over CTA since CTA provides similar
“lumenographic” information by X-ray contrast of the
arterial lumen. CTA measurements of carotid artery
diameter and residual lumen have been compared
favorably with DSA, MRA, and duplex ultrasound for
determining degree of stenosis (Schwartz et al., 1994;
Josephson et al., 2004). CTA can also identify carotid
floating thrombi that may portend a high risk of stroke
recurrence, with a characteristic appearance resembling
a donut (CTA donut sign) (Menon et al., 2010). Extracranial
carotid disease in the form of severe stenosis, occlusion
, or floating thrombi is important to be aware of when
planning acute endovascular treatment (Fig. 21.4). Risk
of contrast-induced nephropathy (absolute (>0.5 mg/dl)
or relative (>25% increase) increase in serum creatinine
within 48–72 hours of administration of intravenous
contrast) has been seen to be marginally higher in patients
with diabetes mellitus (Parfrey et al., 1989). Adequate
Fig. 21.3. Images showing (A) early ischemic changes in Lt middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory on NCCT brain in a
77-year-old man with right-sided hemiparesis and aphasia. (B) CT angiography source images showing hypoattenuation in Lt
MCA territory. (C) CTA angiogram showing e/o Lt MCA (M1) occlusion.
Fig. 21.2. Noncontrast CT scan in 64-year-old man presenting with left-sided hemiparesis and dysarthria within 1 hour of onset of
symptoms. (A) Evidence of right M1 occlusion seen as hyperdense sign (arrow marked). (B) Normal MCA territory marked on
10 point template as per Alberta Stroke Program Early Ct Score (ASPECTS). C, caudate nucleus; L, lentiform nucleus; Ic, internal
capsule; I, insula; rest of the MCA (middle cerebral artery) territory classified into six areas (M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M6) on left side
and early ischemic changes characterized by loss of gray–white difference with subtle hypoattenuation in Rt MCA territory with
early ischemic changes (EIC) seen in M1, M2, caudate nucleus, lentiform nucleus, and M5 territory. These early ischemic changes
in the area are marked by white arrows.
294 S. BAL ET AL.
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1826555362)
hydration and close monitoring of renal function parameters
after the procedure should be done to avoid longterm
complications.
CT angiography can also be used to estimate leptomeningeal
collateral backfilling which is an essential
“backdoor” method of flow to the brain, keeping it alive
for a while in the setting of a proximal intracranial artery
occlusion. CTA detected collaterals has been shown reliably
to predict outcomes in patients with acute ischemic
stroke (Maas et al., 2009; Souza et al., 2012; Giurgiutiu
et al., 2014). Good leptomeningeal collateral flow has
also been linked to increasing the recanalization rates
(Nambiar et al., 2014). It has also been postulated that
collaterals may help by increasing the availability of
the fibrinolytics close to the clot interface. From a risk
factor perspective, metabolic syndrome appears to be
associated with worse outcomes due to high proportion
of subjects with poor leptomeningeal collateral status
(Menon et al., 2013a). Time resolved CTA with multiple
snapshots of flow over 60 seconds appears to best assess
leptomeningeal collateral circulation by captured even
delayed filling of the ischemic hemisphere via collaterals
(Menon et al., 2013b).
CT PERFUSION IMAGING
CT perfusion imaging is used to investigate the presence
or absence of alterations in cerebral hemodynamics
in patients with suspected stroke (Wintermark et al.,
2001, 2002, 2005, 2007; Schaefer et al. 2008). An intravenous
contrast medium bolus is given followed by
single or multislice CT acquisition at fixed time intervals.
This imaging technique is based on the indicator dilution
theory, i.e., demarcation of specific X-ray density
of the brain (ischemic as compared to normal) following
administration of an intravenous contrast medium
bolus. Using mathematical algorithms and commercially
available software, cerebral perfusion is calculated and
represented in the form of color coded maps. The most
commonly used parameters are cerebral blood volume
(CBV), cerebral blood flow (CBF), mean transit time
(MTT), and time to peak (TTP). One of the major limitations
of perfusion imaging has been limited coverage
of the brain with CT. However, with recent advances
in techniques, some scanners now provide entire brain
coverage (Toshiba Aquilion 320). Some vendors also
propose toggling table techniques to improve the extent
of imaging area visualized for a better estimate of the
ischemic tissue. CT perfusion source images can also
be helpful to estimate leptomeningeal collateral status
due to the multiple time points of imaging data over
60–90 seconds (Calleja et al., 2013). Penumbra thresholds
detected by CT perfusion have a high correlation
with MR perfusion measurements (Wintermark et al.,
2006; Schaefer et al., 2008). From a practical and timeefficient
perspective CT perfusion is more likely to
become routine in acute stroke assessment compared
to MR perfusion (Knoepfli et al., 2009)( Fig. 21.5).
Multimodal magnetic resonance imaging
in acute stroke
Conventional MRI sequences including combinations of
diffusion-weighted sequences, apparent diffusion coefficient
(ADC), perfusion imaging, gradient echo imaging
(to exclude hemorrhage), and magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA) are used in acute stroke protocols
(Srinivasan et al., 2006). An acute MRI protocol can
be performed in less than 15 minutes to achieve reliable
information about the site of vessel occlusion, the extent
of potentially salvageable brain tissue, and, unlike
NCCT, it also helps to excludes stroke mimics. MRI
may offer the advantage of avoiding radiation exposure
in children and younger adults.
Fig. 21.4. A 76-year-old diabetic woman with right hemiparesis and aphasia, admitted within 2 hours of onset of symptoms. CT
angiogram of the patient showed left M1 occlusion. CT perfusion images showed left MCA perfusion abnormality with figures
showing (A) decreased CBV (marked area); (B) area of decreased cerebral blood flow (CBF) (area in blue marked with arrows);
(C) area of increased mean transit time (delay of 4 seconds) (area in red). The vessel did not recanalize and this area at risk evolved
into a complete infarct.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 295
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1220127571)
DIFFUSION-WEIGHTED IMAGING AND APPARENT
DIFFUSION COEFFICIENT
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) along with reduction
of the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) demonstrates
ischemic tissue changes very early after vessel
occlusion (Chalela et al., 2007). A net shift of extracellular
water in the intracellular compartment (cytotoxic
edema) with a consecutive reduction of free water diffusion
is the main underlying mechanism for the DWI
changes and ADC decrease. DWI is the most sensitive
method (92–100%) for the detection of infarction during
the very early phase of ischemia (Fiebach et al., 2002;
Saur et al., 2003). DWI lesions can be at least partially
reversible in the early phase of ischemia, if reperfused,
and therefore do not necessarily represent irreversibly
infarcted brain (Saur et al., 2003).
T2-WEIGHTED AND FLUID-ATTENUATED INVERSION
RECOVERY IMAGING
On T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) images, acute ischemic infarction appears as a
hyperintense lesion seen within hours after stroke onset.
These sequences are primarily used to identify conditions
that mimic stroke such as demyelinating disorders
and tumors. FLAIR imaging may have a role in acute
stroke imaging by indirectly timing the onset of stroke.
The absence of a FLAIR abnormality in the presence of a
DWI lesion (DWI-FLAIR mismatch) would suggest the
ischemia is still early from onset. This DWI-FLAIR mismatch
may indicate ischemia<6 hours from symptom
onset, suggesting greater benefit/less risk for thrombolysis
(Thomalla et al., 2011). This mismatch is being
applied for imaging-based selection in thrombolysis clinical
trials of patients with unclear time of onset or
patients with stroke on awakening (Dong-Wha Kang
and Sung-il-Sohn, 2011).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE PERFUSION IMAGING
MR perfusion imaging (PI) allows the measurement of
capillary perfusion of the brain. The bolus passage of
an intravascular MRI contrast agent (gadoliniumbased
agents – Gadodiamide, Gadoterate, Gadobenate,
Gadobutrol) through the cerebral capillaries causes a
nonlinear signal loss because of the susceptibility effect
(T2* effect) of the contrast agent (Grandin, 2003). The
dynamic contrast-enhanced (CE) PI technique tracks
the tissue signal changes caused by the T2* effect to create
a hemodynamic time to signal intensity curve (Rosen
et al., 1990). Maps of the cerebral blood flow (CBF),
the cerebral blood volume (CBV), and the mean transit
time (MTT) can be generated by using software based
on a deconvolution technique (Wintermark et al.,
2008). There are further advances in MR technology
such as the use of arterial spin labeling (ASL). This technique
does not require contrast agent, and exploits the
spins of endogenous water protons to measure perfusion.
The spin polarity of arterial protons flowing into
the imaging plane is inverted by applying radiofrequency
pulses upstream from the imaging section. The perfusion
parameters are calculated by the subtraction of two
imaging sets with flow-sensitive and flow-insensitive
measurements (Mohr et al., 1995). It is very sensitive
to delayed perfusion abnormality, commonly seen in
patients with acute ischemic stroke (Chalela et al.,
2000). In current settings, ASL perfusion imaging is
an investigational tool for acute ischemic stroke but
could evolve into an excellent tool for repeated measurements
of perfusion since no contrast injections are
required.
Fig. 21.5. Extracranial CT angiography with carotid images. (A) Axial views of carotid artery showing e/o bilateral carotid atherosclerosis
Lt>RT (arrow on left side indicates plaque with calcific atherosclerotic disease. (B) Axial views showing intraluminal
thrombus. (C) Oblique views showing critical stenosis at the origin of left internal carotid artery. (D) Oblique view showing
e/o severe stenosis at origin of internal carotid artery with distal collapse of the vessel.
296 S. BAL ET AL.
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1287911717)
Gadolinium bolus enhanced perfusion imaging currently
remains the standard MR perfusion technique.
More work using this technique is required to standardize
the parameters most predictive of the three major tissue
compartments relevant to stroke: (1) benign blood
flow reductions not at risk for infarction (oligemia);
(2) critical hypoperfused but salvageable brain (penumbra
); and (3) already infarcted tissue (core) (Nuutinen
et al., 2009). One illustration of these challenges has been
recent improvements in our understanding of the arterial
input function (AIF) crucial in perfusion imaging. Calculation
of the quantitative cerebral blood flow requires
knowledge of the arterial input function (AIF), which
can be determined by multiple measuring points (region
of interest) of importance in the brain vasculature. Thijs
et al. evaluated the impact of the AIF measured at four
different locations in 13 ischemic stroke patients (Thijs
et al., 2004). The curves of AIF were measured at both
middle cerebral arteries, in branches adjacent to the largest
DWI abnormality, and also in the brain tissue contralateral
to the DWI lesion. The largest PI lesion was
measured based on the AIF of the unaffected middle
cerebral artery, now the preferred approach. The other
three AIFs led to an underestimation of the infarct size
on follow-up images.
PERFUSION IMAGING/DIFFUSION-WEIGHTED IMAGING
MISMATCH CONCEPT
An attempt to differentiate infarct core from penumbra
usingMRIimagingwasmadebyintroducingDWIandPI
into the clinical setting. The PI/DWI mismatch concept
hypothesizes that DWI more or less reflects the irreversibly
damaged infarct and PI, the complete area of hypoperfusion
(Fiebach et al., 2002). The volume difference
between these two (termed the PI/DWI mismatch) would
thereforebetheequivalentoftheischemicpenumbra.On
the other hand, if there is no difference or a negative difference
in PI and DWI volumes this is termed a PI/DWI
matched deficit. This matched deficit is equivalent to a
patient who does not have penumbral tissue because of
normalization of prior hypoperfusion or completion of
infarction causing total loss of penumbra (Parsons
et al., 2002; Schellinger et al., 2003). An important limitationofthismodelisthatitdoesnottakeintoaccountthe
fact that PI lesions frequently include areas of oligemia
which represent hypoperfused brain that still has sufficient
flow to not evolve to infarction. The reversibility
of DWI abnormalities has also raised concerns that
DWI volumes may not truly represent infarcted brain
(ischemic core), especially very early after stroke onset
when early reperfusion occurs (<6 hours from symptom
onset) (Kidwell et al., 2003)( Fig. 21.6).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE ANGIOGRAPHY
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) has evolved
over the last few years as an important diagnostic tool
to image extra- and intracranial vasculature. Time of
flight (TOF), phase contrast (PC), and contrast-enhanced
MRA (CE-MRA) techniques are the three main imaging
techniques used for MRA. The basic principle behind
thesetechniquesistoidentifyasignaldifferencebetween
moving blood and background stationary tissue.
TOF-MRA relies on the differences in exposure to
radiofrequency excitation between in-plane or in-slab
stationary protons and the blood protons flowing into
the section or slab. Stationary protons in the imaging section
become relatively saturated with repeated excitation
pulses and produce low signal intensity. Inflowing blood
protons in arteries and veins have not experienced the
excitation pulses, are not saturated, and therefore generate
high signal intensity. The image is constructed using
this difference in signal intensity. For selective imaging
of arteries, saturation bands are applied on the venous
side of imaging sections to null signal from the venous
flow (Miyazaki and Lee, 2008). Acquisitions can be performed
using two-dimensional or three-dimensional
(3D) methods depending on the spatial resolution and
the extent of the vascular territory to be imaged. For
Fig. 21.6. MR perfusion images in 59-year-old man with right temporoparietal lobe infarct with ischemic core area in perfusion
imaging shown in black, followed by penumbra shown in yellow and normal area shown in green color maps. (A) DWI image with
small subcortical changes; (B) and (C) show MR perfusion with a perfusion abnormality involving right MCA (middle cerebral
artery) territory, showing DWI/PWI mismatch. (D) DWI image on day 7 with a large right MCA infarct.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 297
(8.0.0.2542.681483926 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
the evaluation of intracranial vessels, 3D-TOF-MRA is
the preferred method. MRA is useful for detecting intravascular
occlusion due to thrombus and for evaluating
the vessels for possible stenosis in patients with acute
stroke (Srinivasan et al., 2006)( Fig. 21.7). CE-MRA is
the technique of choice for extracranial and intracranial
artery imaging and it relies on injection of a paramagnetic
agent such as gadolinium to reduce the T1 relaxation
time of tissue and to generate contrast between the
intravascular lumen and surrounding tissues (Leclerc
et al., 1999a). Unlike TOF-MRA, CE-MRA is relatively
independent of flow dynamics, and artifacts associated
with saturation effects are substantially reduced. Vessels
from the aortic arch to the circle of Willis can be obtained
in less than 1 minute. The multisegmental vascular coverage
enables potential assessment of stenosis or vessel
occlusion (Bowen, 2007). CE-MRA can also demonstrate
a flap as a linear low signal defect or luminal narrowing
in acute vascular dissection (Leclerc et al.,
1999b). Depending on the scan delay, the arterial or
the venous phase can be imaged with CE-MRA for evaluation
of different forms of cerebrovascular pathology.
Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging shows arterial
lumen enhancement in 50% of hyperacute ischemic
strokes. This arterial enhancement is thought to be secondary
to slow flow, collateral flow, or hyperperfusion
following early recanalization (Yuh et al., 1991). It may
be detected as early as 2 hours after stroke onset and
can persist for up to 7 days. Parenchymal gyriform
enhancement of the infarcted brain tissue may be visible
2–3 days after stroke onset but is consistently present at
6 days and persists for 4–6 weeks (Crain et al., 1991).
Use of transcranial Doppler in acute stroke
Transcranial Doppler (TCD) is the third modality sometimes
used in the assessment of acute stroke. It requires
significant training to be able to isolate each of the major
intracranial arteries and detect Doppler waveforms. It is
usually only performed at comprehensive stroke centers
where a TCD service is in place to support other cerebrovascular
conditions such as vasospasm following subarachnoid
hemorrhage and vasculopathy in sickle cell
disease. The major limitations are the technical challenges
to insonate the correct artery within the cranial vault. It
may also be difficult obtaining Doppler waveforms in
elderly patients, because of attenuation of ultrasound
energy through a thick skull common in such patients
(12–19% of patients with acute stroke). TCD should not
be directly compared to CTA/MRA, which are both
superior “snapshots in time” modalities but rather be
considered a complementary modality allowing bedside
real-timemonitoringoftheintracranialarteriestoidentify
dynamicchanges inflow.Forexample,thismayoccurdue
to recanalization during systemic thrombolysis. TCD may
identify microembolic signals from more proximal
sources such as the extracranial large arteries or heart
(Alexandrov et al., 1999). It has also been shown that continuous
monitoring with TCD may have therapeutic benefit
by enhancing recanalization of systemic thrombolysis.
It was hypothesized that ultrasound waves facilitate the
thrombolytic effects of tissue plasminogen activator by
increasing surface area interactions with the thrombus
(TPA) (Alexandrov et al., 2004). (See alsoFig. 21.8.)
Table 21.1 compares different imaging modalities in
acute stroke.
IMAGINGTECHNIQUESIN PATIENTS
WITH DIABETESMELLITUS-RELATED
CHRONICCEREBROVASCULAR
DISORDERS
Imaging large artery abnormalities
in patients with diabetes mellitus
UTILITY OF CAROTIDDOPPLER
Duplex ultrasonography is a noninvasive method to
assess preclinical atherosclerosis and plaques in
Fig. 21.7. MR angiography (MRA) of a 78-year-old diabetic patient presenting with right-sided hemiparesis and aphasia.
(A) MRA showing left M1 occlusion; (B) recanalization of left M1 artery after thrombolytic therapy.
298 S. BAL ET AL.
( 8.0.0.2542.330112035 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
Table 21.1
Comparison of different imaging modalities (vascular and parenchymal) used in the management of acute stroke
Imaging modality Advantages Disadvantages
NCCT brain Widely available
Requires less time to acquire images
Sensitive to detect hemorrhage
Inexpensive
Less sensitive in detecting early changes
Low positive predictive value for subcortical/lacunar
infarction
Not ideal for posterior circulation strokes
Radiation exposure
CT angiography Assess the site of occlusion
Tissue perfusion status – source image
Clot burden assessment
Collateral status assessment
Assess carotid artery disease
Available in specialized centers
Contrast-induced anaphylaxis, nephropathy
Excess radiation exposure
CT perfusion Detects area of hypoperfusion
Estimate of ischemic core and penumbra
Available in specialized center
Contrast-induced anaphylaxis, nephropathy, radiation
exposure
Time-consuming
Needs technical expertise to process data
Not ideal for posterior circulation strokes
MRI brain
DWI/ADC
Can give estimate of acute ischemic core
Highly sensitive to detect lacunar infarct Less
time-consuming sequence
Higher sensitivity to detect posterior circulation strokes
Availability in special center
Not very sensitive for acute hemorrhage
With gadolinium
contrast
Better in acute to subacute infarcts
Helps to differentiate from stroke mimics
Cost of gadolinium
Hypersensitivity to gadolinium
GRE Highly sensitive to detect hemorrhages
Also detects vascular lesions/clots
Lack of availability and time-consuming
MR angiography Assess vessel patency/occlusions/stenosis Limited data in subcortical/small vessel disease
False-positives with time of flight (TOF)
MR perfusion Assess brain perfusion/ischemic core/penumbra
Complimentary information to DWI helpful to guide
clinicians for reperfusion therapy
Availability in specialized centers
Not sufficient data in lacunar infarcts
Not ideal for posterior circulation strokes
MRS Assess brain metabolism
Improve prognostication in large cortical strokes
Limited data in acute/lacunar infarcts
Transcranial Doppler
studies
Assess sites of occlusion
“Clot bust” – assist clot thrombolysis
Monitor and assess recanalization
Bed side/can be repeated
Real time sequence
Operator dependent/debatable sensitivity
Technical difficulties in old patients
Cannot be used in uncooperative patient
Not helpful in small vessel disease
NCCT, non contrast computed tomography; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; DWI, diffusion weighted imaging;
ADC, apparent diffusion co-efficient; GRE, gradient echo; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Fig. 21.8. Spectral flow patterns showing velocities of different arteries in a 70-year-old diabetic patient. (A) Anterior cerebral
artery (ACA) velocities; (B) velocities and spectral flow pattern of M2 branch of middle cerebral artery (MCA); (C) spectral flow
pattern and velocities of both branches (p1 and p2) of posterior cerebral artery; (D) emboli detection in left MCA secondary to left
carotid artery atherosclerosis (white oblique abnormality seen in the spectral flow of middle cerebral artery).
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 299
(8.0.0.2542,749268072 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL)
peripheral, extracranial carotid and vertebral arteries.
The B-mode technique within carotid duplex can provide
a measure of intima-media thickness (IMT). The IMT
comprises endothelial cells, connective tissues, smooth
muscle and is the site for lipid streak formation, and plaque
formation, which may form a nidus for platelet
aggregation and thrombus formation, with subsequent
large artery territory stroke. Common carotid artery
(CCA) IMT is an established sonographic marker for
preclinical atherosclerosis which correlates with generalized
atherosclerosis and increased CCA-IMT in patients
with DM is associated with a higher risk for stroke
(Bonithon-Kopp et al., 1996; Ebrahim et al., 1999;
Touboul et al., 2000; Davis et al., 2001; Cupini et al.,
2002; Matsumoto et al., 2002; Kitamura et al., 2004;
Vemmos et al., 2004; Touboul et al., 2005). Increased
CCA-IMT is associated with increased risk of acute
ischemic stroke in patients with type 2 DM (Lee et al.,
2007). There may be a stronger correlation of CCAIMT
with stroke than with myocardial infarction, since
it is more significantly associated with small vessel disease
, responsible for approximately one-quarter of all
strokes (Touboul et al., 2000; Cupini et al., 2002;
Jackson and Sudlow, 2005). Type 2 DM is related not
only to a higher degree of atherosclerosis but also to a
different, more echolucent plaque on Doppler studies
which is more vulnerable to plaque rupture and subsequent
atheroembolic events (Ostling et al., 2007)
(Fig. 21.9).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF VULNERABLE
CAROTID PLAQUES IN DIABETES MELLITUS
MRI-based plaque imaging represents a new noninvasive
technique to reliably analyze plaque characteristics.
A specific pattern of atherosclerotic plaque character
associated with greater vulnerability to atheroembolic
events has been postulated in DM (Henry et al., 2004).
Specific diabetic plaque features include a high degree
of vasa vasorum neovascularization, intraplaque hemorrhage
, and lipid core expansion (Moreno and Fuster,
2004). Type 2 DM irrespective of other vascular risk factors
and degree of stenosis represents a predictor for the
presence of “vulnerable” carotid plaques detected by
MR imaging (Esposito et al., 2010). The European
Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST) (ECST, 1998) and the
North American Symptomatic Endarterectomy Trial
(NASCET) (NASCET, 1991) have identified a high association
between DM and postendarterectomy procedure
deaths and stroke.
Imaging small vessel abnormalities
in diabetes mellitus
USE OF TRANSCRANIALDOPPLER IN DIABETIC PATIENTS
WITH CHRONIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
In contrast to macroangiopathy, assessed with many
invasive and noninvasive investigations discussed above,
cerebral microangiopathy involving small perforating
arteries contributes to lacunar infarction but has no specific
diagnostic tool. TCD may provide indirect assessment
of the microvasculature by the pulsatility index
(PI), which is calculated from the difference between
peak systolic velocity and end-diastolic velocity. Increased
PI has been associated with the duration of
DM, old age (>60 years), hypertension, intracranial atherosclerosis
, vascular dementia, and small vessel disease
(Hassler et al., 1988; Foerstl et al., 1989; Cho et al., 1997;
Lee et al., 2000; Kidwell et al., 2001). The PI is postulated
to reflect the vascular resistance distal to the examined
artery. Therefore, disease or dysfunction of distal small
intracranial perforating arteries may alter the PI of
upstream larger intracranial artery such as the MCA.
Indirect findings of increased PI is more relevant when
there is other evidence of DM-related microangiopathic
disease such as retinopathy or nephropathy (Lippera
et al., 1997; Lee et al., 2000). In a TCD study comparing
cerebral hemodynamics in type 2 diabetic patients of
Fig. 21.9. Images from carotid Doppler studies. (A) Common carotid artery intima media thickness (CCA-IMT) as a marker of
early atherosclerosis; (B) carotid Doppler study showing the blood flow in common carotid artery with spectral flow pattern of
common carotid artery; (C) carotid Doppler study (colour duplex) showing common carotid artery bifurcation with e/o plaque in
common carotid artery bulb extending into proximal internal carotid artery causing stenosis of the vessel.
300 S. BAL ET AL.
(TRIAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1519796000)
disease duration greater than 5 years, flow velocities
(Vm) and PI was higher in comparison to age-matched
controls. Lacunar infarcts in an otherwise asymptomatic
diabetic population have revealed increased PI in intracranial
vessels shown on TCD (Tkac et al., 2001). Further
studies using long-term serial follow-up TCD exams
may clarify the temporal changes in the PI of DM
patients and verify the clinical usefulness of PI as a surrogate
marker for diabetes-related cerebral microangiopathic
disease.
Imaging diabetes mellitus patients with
cognition, gait, and mood disorders
DIABETES AS RISK FACTOR AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
OF LACUNAR INFARCTIONS
Many studies have not shown a significant association
between DM and lacunar infarct (Rosamond et al.,
1999; Jackson and Sudlow, 2005; Bejot et al., 2008). In
a systematic review of studies addressing the risk factors
for lacunar infarction, Jackson and Sudlow observed
that while hypertension and DM appeared common
among patients with lacunar compared to nonlacunar
infarction, the latter was not independently associated
with the increased risk of lacunar infarction (Jackson
and Sudlow, 2005). In other studies DM was found to
be frequently present in subjects with either lacunar
and thromboembolic stroke (Chamorro et al., 1991;
Petty et al., 1999), but not with cardioembolic stroke
(Lodder et al., 1990). Population-based studies reported
an increased incidence and prevalence of lacunar
infarcts in patients with type 2 DM (Vermeer et al.,
2002; Korf et al., 2007). A systematic review has shown
that patients with type 2 DM have twofold increased risk
of silent infarcts compared to the nondiabetic population
(van Harten et al., 2006), with an independent relative
risk of lacunar infarction in diabetic patients of 2–3.6
(You et al., 1995), similar to the risk of ischemic stroke
in the general population (Gandolfo et al., 1988). There
is also a high prevalence of combined diabetes and
hypertension in 20% of patients with lacunar infarcts
(Arboix et al., 1990).
Imaging lacunar infarction
CT is commonly used for detecting lacunar infarction
(Launay et al., 1985; Hamorro et al., 1991). The yield
can be low, with fewer than 40% of patients having lacunar
syndromes with a lesion detected by CT (Hommel
et al., 1990). Small lacunar infarcts, especially involving
the brainstem, are difficult to visualize with CT, especially
against a background of significant white matter
disease where distinguishing acute or subacute from
chronic changes is quite difficult. Similarly, bony artifact
in the posterior fossa may limit the resolution of
NCCT in identifying these lesions. Since lacunar infarcts
involve small sized perforator vessels (<500 mm), MRI-
based DWI is the best imaging technique due to the high
signal to noise differences, characteristic of the DWI
sequence for detecting acute ischemia. In lacunar syndromes
imaged with magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) using DWI and ADC, there is a high sensitivity
(80–90%) for detection (Singer et al., 1998; Ay et al.,
1999; Papamitsakis et al., 2000). Despite the resolution
available, a small percentage of patients with posterior
circulation stroke symptoms may have normal DWI
imaging, probably because their brainstem lacunar
infarcts are too small to visualize (Papamitsakis et al.,
2000). Dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI or
bolus tracking perfusion imaging may also provide further
information about subcortical infarction (Gerraty
et al., 2001)( Fig. 21.10).
Time of flight (TOF) MR angiography using a 7 tesla
magnet can show perforating arteries in brain without
the use of contrast agents. The presence of very small
microbleeds could be one of the earliest manifestations
of cerebral small vessel diseases and these can be
detected easily with dual echo T2* weighted imaging
at 7 T (Theysohn et al., 2011).
Fig. 21.10. (A) NCCT brain; (B) MRI – T2-weighted image; (C) diffusion-weighted image of a patient with right-sided hemiparesis
and mild hemiataxia, showing a lacunar infarct in the left internal capsule. The infarct is demonstrated only in the diffusionweighted
sequence (C) (NCCT brain and T2-weighted MRI are normal).
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 301
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
Imaging cerebral atrophy associated
with diabetes mellitus
Cerebral atrophy or diffuse loss of brain tissue is
strongly associated with age and vascular risk factors
such as DM. In patients with type 1 DM, an early age
of diabetes onset (7 years) has been associated with
a larger ventricular volume and generalized cerebral
atrophy (Ferguson et al., 2003, 2005). Furthermore,
chronic hyperglycemia, multiple episodes of acute
severe hypoglycemia, and the presence of retinopathy
have been associated with reduced gray matter densities
(Musen et al., 2006; Wessels et al., 2006). Research on
the cognitive effects of diabetes suggests that some
patients with type 1 DM may have an increased risk
for cognitive dysfunction, which corresponds to subtle
generalized brain atrophy. These findings, in turn,
may correspond clinically to reduced recent memory
and psychomotor slowing (Ryan, 1997). The primary
objective of imaging diabetic patients for cerebral atrophy
is to screen those with mild to moderate cognitive
disturbances for early intervention.
Neurocognitive research has shown that type 1 DM is
primarily associated with psychomotor slowing and
reductions in mental efficiency with structural changes
on MR imaging (de Leeuw et al., 2001; Vermeer et al.,
2003). Using voxel-based morphometry patients with
type 1 diabetes showed lower gray matter densities
(GMD) in posterior temporal, hippocampus, and parahippocampal
gyri, which contribute to memory, compared
to healthy controls (Musen et al., 2006).
Decreased GMD was also seen in the superior temporal
gyrus and angular gyri, which are important in language
processing, in comparison to healthy controls. In conclusion
, type 1 DM with end organ involvement has a tendency
to involve gray matter more than white matter,
correlating well with generalized cerebral atrophy and
cognitive disturbances (Wessels et al., 2006; Weinger
et al., 2008).
Although controversial, brain atrophy may also be
associated with type 2 DM (Korf et al., 2006; Last
et al., 2007; van Harten et al., 2007; Jongen and
Biessels, 2008; Moran et al., 2013; Roberts et al., 2014).
A significant association of type 2 DM with greater ventricular
size has been shown (Knopman et al., 2005; Korf
et al., 2007). Korf et al. found higher scores of medial
temporal lobe atrophy in patients with type 2 DM from
a large study of elderly individuals selected for the presence
of white matter hyperintensities (Korf et al., 2007).
Population-based studies have shown type 2 DM associated
with a reduction of hippocampal and amygdala volumes
(Korf et al., 2006) and a threefold increase risk of
moderate to severe medial temporal lobe atrophy (Korf
et al., 2007). There has been evidence to suggest that
within groups of type 2 diabetic patients, cognitive function
abnormalities are related to white matter hyperintensities
, generalized brain atrophy, and the presence of
subcortical infarcts (Akisaki et al., 2006).
A recent study (ACCORD-MIND) of type 2 DM
patients compared the effect of intensive with standard
glycemia-lowering strategies on cognitive domains and
structural changes in brain. It showed that more intensive
as opposed to standard blood sugar control may
be associated with higher total brain volumes. This study
did not, however, confirm differences in cognition in
either group. This suggests that brain atrophy seen on
brain imaging may develop at the subclinical stage of disease
before cognitive abnormalities are measureable
(Launer et al., 2011).
Use of magnetic resonance imaging
to measure cerebral atrophy
MR imaging is the ideal tool tomeasure brainatrophy and
is superior to CT scan imaging (Pirttila et al., 1992; Araki
et al., 1994; Padovani et al., 1997; Longstreth et al., 2000).
Various methods for atrophy assessmenthave been developed
, ranging from visual rating scales to automated volumetric
measurements.
MEASURING LOCALIZED OR FOCAL BRAIN VOLUMES
Voxel based morphometry (VBM) is a technique using
MRI that allows investigation of focal differences in
brain anatomy, using the statistical approach of parametric
mapping. In this technique, volume of the whole
brain, or its subparts, is measured by drawing regions of
interest (ROIs) on images from the scan and calculating
the volume enclosed. However, this technique is timeconsuming
and can only provide measures of large
areas. VBM registers every brain to a template, which
eliminates most of the interindividual differences in
brain anatomy. These brain images are smoothed so that
each voxel represents the average of itself and its surrounding
areas. Finally, the image containing volume
is compared across brains at every voxel to detect exact
volume. VBM permits the detection of changes in gray
matter before overt cortical atrophy is apparent. Earlier
detection of brain structural changes may, at some stage,
provide options for early interventions to slow progression
before overt cortical atrophy develops (Baron et al.,
2001)( Fig. 21.11).
MEASURING TOTAL BRAIN VOLUMES
Volumetry is another technique, which provides
quantitative information on brain tissue volumes and
has the advantage of reproducibility and short user
interaction time.
302 S. BAL ET AL.
(8.0.0.2542.561996318 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
Atlas-based segmentation is a technique that uses
registration of a prelabeled atlas image on a patient
image for calculating the brain volumes, thus reducing
the possibility for error. Atlas-based segmentation of
the hippocampus has been shown to give reasonable
results compared to manual outlining in Alzheimer’s
disease and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and has
been employed in diabetes-related trials (Carmichael
et al., 2005).
Adaptive segmentation is another technique using an
automated method for calculating whole brain volume
(Wells et al., 1996). This method estimates parameters
of the intensity distributions of gray matter, white matter
, and cerebrospinal fluid. Probabilistic classification
has been used for segmentation of the brain into gray
matter, white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, lateral ventricle
, and white matter hyperintensities (Anbeek et al.,
2004a). Longitudinal changes in brain volume can be
measured by estimating the displacement of the brain
boundary between baseline and follow-up scans. This
approach has been adapted in the structural image evaluation
using normalization of atrophy (SIENA) method
(Freeborough and Fox, 1997; Smith et al., 2001). Other
approaches include tensor-based morphometry to assess
volume change between baseline and follow-up scans
(Ashburner and Friston, 2000).
Use of imaging in diabetes mellitus to assess
brain metabolism
MAGNETIC RESONANCE SPECTROSCOPY
In vivomagnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) provides
information about the concentrations of many brain
metabolites. The shape and size of peaks in the spectra
are used to infer the tissue’s chemical composition.
Concentrations of these metabolites can be compared to
known standard values and ascertain abnormalities
(Minati et al., 2007). For example, there have been studies
showing changes in cerebral metabolism in patients with
DM using MRS. Increased myo-inositol to creatine ratios
and decreased N-acetylaspartate to creatine (NAA/Cr)
ratios wereidentified inpatients with type 2 diabetes, indicating
reduced neuronal viability (Kreis and Ross, 1992;
Kario et al., 2005; Selvarajah et al., 2008; Sorensen
et al., 2008). Myo-inositol is involved in osmoregulation
and insulin signaling, whereas taurine is thought to contribute
to neuroprotection and osmoregulation. Both
are postulated to be important biochemical markers of
cerebral edema in rats (Kreis and Ross, 1992). Thus, the
presence of measurable amounts of taurine may be a useful
warning signal for cerebral edema and detection of
taurine during diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) may predict
incipient cerebral edema (Cameron et al., 2005). For
example, MRS has been used in children with type 1
DM as a screening measure for early detection of
DKA-induced cerebral edema. The results showed an
increase in myo-inositol and glucose along with the
appearance of taurine associated with edema. Decreased
NAA/Cr ratios during DKA and improvement after
recovery indicated compromised neuronal function or
viability (Wootton-Gorges et al., 2007).
Table 21.2 compares imaging modalities used in the
management of diabetic cerebrovascular disease.
White matter hyperintensities in patients
with diabetes mellitus
As the brain ages, periventricular changes are thought to
arise from the long-term impact of atherosclerosis and
arteriolosclerosis to produce decreased blood flow,
causing ischemic injury. These areas of presumed ischemic
injury are termed white matter hyperintensities
(WMH) or leukoaraiosis (from the Greekleuko¼white,
araios¼rarefied) (Hachinski et al., 1986) to indicate “a
diminution of the density of representation of the white
matter” on neuroimaging. There are numerous
Fig.21.11. Voxel-based morphometry shows a reductioningraymatter densityina patient withtype 1diabetes andretinopathy.
Changes in gray matter density are shown on a mean normalized structural image in axial planes. The images show areas of
significantly reduced gray matter density in right frontal gyrus (A), right occipital lobe (B), left cerebellum (C), and left middle
frontal gyrus (D). Left in the image is right in the brain. (Images courtesy of Dr. A.M. Wessels, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, Netherlands; reproduced from Wessels et al., 2006, with permission from the publisher.)
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 303
(WITH PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
synonyms in the literature used for white matter hyperintensities
(Table 21.3). These are areas of bright, high signal
intensities noted on MRI T2-weighted and proton density
sequences, representing regions of scattered brain white
matter loss associated with local increases in brain water
content. WMH of vascular origin can be divided morphologically
into punctate, early confluent, and confluent
hyperintensities (Schmidt et al., 1992). Punctate lesions
tend to correspond to a perivascular reduction in myelin
content with atrophy of the white matter and may indicate
minor tissue damage. Early confluent and well developed
confluent hyperintensities indicate more extensive ischemic
damage consistent with advanced microangiopathy
(Fazekas et al., 1988). Hyperintensities are also categorized
into three types depending on the site or location
they are found; deep white matter hyperintensities, periventricular
white matter hyperintensities adjacent to the
lateral ventricles, and subcortical hyperintensities which
occur in the basal ganglia.
Until recently, WMH were considered clinically irrelevant
, but a culmination of sample and population-based
research has demonstrated otherwise (Malloy et al.,
2007; Gunning-Dixon et al., 2009). White matter hyperintensities
are observed frequently in elderly (age>60
years) individuals. Chronological age appears to be the
strongest predictor of severity and has been linked to
vascular risk factors such as DM, hypertension, and
large vessel atherosclerosis. Despite these associations,
the underlying pathophysiology of white matter hyperintensities
is still unclear. It may progress over time and its
presence and severity are associated with accelerated
cognitive decline (Schmidt et al., 2002)( Fig. 21.12).
Pathologic correlation has shown that patchy white
matter hyperintensities correspond primarily to areas
of ischemic demyelination and gliosis, and occasionally
to asymptomatic silent infarcts. Chronic low-grade vascular
insufficiency produces atrophic perivascular
demyelination rather than acute tissue necrosis. As discussed
above, WMH are associated with hypoperfusion
and ischemic arteriolar disease (Fazekas et al., 1993).
Lipohyalinosis of the media and thickening of the vessel
walls narrow the lumen of the small perforating arteries
and arterioles which nourish the deep white matter
(Fisher, 1982; Liao et al., 1997). The perforating vessels,
which originate from cortical and leptomeningeal arteries
, have a relatively poor anastomotic system, which
makes the white matter vulnerable to cerebral ischemia.
Thus, cerebral arteriolosclerosis of the penetrating vessels
may be a major factor in the pathogenesis of ischemic
WMH (Pantoni and Garcia, 1995).
There has been an ongoing debate as to whether there
exists a relationship between DM and WMH. The majority
of studies used ordinal rating scales, ranging from
absenttosevere confluentWMH, and volumetric analysis
Table 21.2
Imaging modalities used in the management of diabetic cerebrovascular disease
Acute stroke
Small vessel disease
Cerebral atrophy Lacunar infarct White matter hyperintensities
Plain CT scan
CT angiography
MRI/MRA (DWI, ADC,
GRE)
CT/MR perfusion
Transcranial Doppler
Carotid Doppler
CT scan
MRI (DWI, ADC, FLAIR, T2
weighted)
CTA/MRA
Magnetic resonance
spectroscopy
CT scan
MRI (proton weighted FLAIR,
T2-weighted)
Quantitative assessment
Magnetization transfer ratio
Diffusion tensor imaging
CT scan
MRI (FLAIR, T1-,
T2-weighted)
Voxel-based morphometry
Volumetry
PET/SPECT studies
CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; MRA, magnetic resonance angiography; DWI, diffusion weighted imaging; ADC,
apparent diffusion co-efficient; GRE, gradient echo; CTA, CT angiography; FLAIR, fluid attenuated inversion recovery; PET, positron emission
tomography; SPECT, single photon emission tomography.
Table 21.3
Synonyms used for deep-seated white matter radiological
lesions
Binswanger disease Periventricular white matter lesions
Diffuse white matter
disease
Stripes, caps and unidentified
objects (UBOs)
Leukoaraiosis White matter low attenuation
Patchy white matter
lesions
White matter signal
hyperintensities
Periventricular
leukomalacia
Small vessel diseases
Periventricular
lucency
Deep-seated white matter
hyperintensities
304 S. BAL ET AL.
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.23352673)
of WMH has shown conflicting results. In a systematic
review by van Harten there was a definite association
of DM with cerebral atrophy and lacunar infarcts. However
, in this “vascular cohort” (patients with stroke or
othercardiovascular riskfactors) there was noassociation
between diabetes and WMH (OR 1.1 [95% CI 0.9–1.4]). In
contrast, in “outpatient cohorts” (cohorts of neurologic or
psychiatric outpatients), there appeared to be a modest
association between WMH and DM (point estimates
for ORs varied from 1.8 to 2.4) (van Harten et al., 2006).
Direct comparison between patients with type 1 DM
and an age, sex and education matched group of patients
with type 2 DM revealed a large burden of white matter
hyperintensities in those with type 2 diabetes, despite a
much shorter known duration of diabetes in this group.
In patients with type 1 DM, presence of diabetic retinopathy
, an indicator of chronic exposure to hyperglycemia
, was associated with small punctate white matter
hyperintensity, whereas recurrent severe hypoglycemic
episodes were associated with brain atrophy and cognitive
disturbances (vanHartenetal.,2007 ).
Studies of type 2 DM patients revealed that the duration
of diabetes, glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level,
insulin levels, blood pressure fluctuations, and the presence
of infarcts correlated with the severity of WMH
(de Graaf et al., 2001).
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING OF WHITE MATTER
HYPERINTENSITIES
MRI is the imaging of choice to visualize and rate WMH
severity. Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)
imaging, proton-weighted imaging and T2-weighted imaging
are commonly used MRI sequences to analyze WMH.
FLAIR is an inversion-recovery pulse sequence used to
null signal from fluids. It is used in brain imaging to suppress
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and highlight the periventricular
and deep-seated WMHs. By carefully choosing the
inversion time in TI (the time between the inversion and
excitation pulses), the signal from any surrounding tissue
can be suppressed (De Coene et al., 1992).
T*2-weighted MRI. T*2 (pronounced “T 2 star”)
weighted scans use a gradient echo (GRE) sequence,
with long TE and TR. The gradient echo sequence used
does not have the extra refocusing pulse used in spin
echo and is subject to additional losses above the normal
T2 decay (referred to as T20); these when combined
together are called T*2. This sequence makes it more
prone to susceptibility losses (loss of transfer magnetization
) at air/tissue boundaries giving a clear image of
WMH (Haacke et al., 1999).
Spin density-weighted MRI, also called proton
density-weighted scans, are special sequences which
are weighted to proton density reducing contrast signal
from either T2 or T1 decay. The only signal change documented
is from differences in the amount of available
spins (hydrogen nuclei in water). It uses a spin echo or
sometimes a gradient echo sequence, with short TE
and longTR making it one of the key sequences to highlight
WMH (Haacke et al., 1999)( Fig. 21.13).
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF WHITE
MATTER HYPERINTENSITIES
White matter hyperintensities (WMH) are defined as areas
with high signal intensities on T2-weighted MRI and as
areas with low attenuation on CT. MRI has proved to be
more sensitive than NCCT in detecting white matter hyperintensities.
Van Sweiten developed and tested a simple
three-pointscalewhichwasusedonNCCTbraintoquantify
white matter lesions (van Swieten et al., 1990). These periventricular
changes were graded according to their extent
as absent, partly involving the white matter, or extending
up to the subcortical region (Wahlund et al., 2001).
Both qualitative and quantitative techniques have
been used to measure WMHs using MRI. The qualitative
approach uses visual rating scales. A single summary
value of WMH severity is assigned to each image by a
well-trained rater based on a previously validated and
operationally defined rating scale (Scheltens et al.,
1998; Wahlund et al., 2001). Visual rating scales have
the advantage of ease of use, protocol-based interpretation
, and insensitivity to artifacts that commonly limit
Fig. 21.12. MRI FLAIR images with white matter hyperintensities predominantly in periventricular areas and deep-seated white
matter, in a 74-year-old man with diabetes and early cognitive changes.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 305
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
quantitative methods (Scheltens et al., 1995; Mantyla
et al., 1997; Pantoni et al., 2002; Kapeller et al., 2003).
Table 21.4 gives visual rating scales and documentation
of periventricular hyperintensities (PVHI) and deep
white matter hyperintensities (DWMHI) in different
MRI sequences.
Quantitative methods of measuring WMH, using
computer-basedtechniquestoobtainvolumetricmeasures
of lesion burden, have also been developed (DeCarli et al.,
1995; Grimaud et al., 1996; Guttmann et al., 1999; Alfano
et al., 2000; Itti et al., 2001; Zijdenbos et al., 2002; Anbeek
et al., 2004b; Wen and Sachdev, 2004; Admiraal-Behloul
et al., 2005). These methods vary from manual outlining
techniques using region of interest(ROI) to computerized
calculation of the volume of interest based on section
thickness and the number of pixels in the traced area,
added yielding WMH volume to fully automatic WMH
detection. The concept of using semi-automated quantitative
techniques in estimating measures of total number
andvolumeoflesionsisderivedfromimagingapproaches
in multiple sclerosis. The volume analysis of subcortical
white matter is an effective tool to assess and quantify
damageinpatientswithtype1andtype2DM.Quantitative
measures usingautomatic and semi-automatictechniques
are more sensitive in detecting and displaying the full
range of lesions. These techniques have higher reliability
than techniques using qualitative or categorical measures
(Lenze et al., 1999; Garrett et al., 2004; van den Heuvel
et al., 2006)( Fig. 21.14).
Emerging neuroimaging techniques
that could be applied to diabetes mellitus
to measure white matter integrity
MAGNETIZATION TRANSFER RATIO
Magnetization transfer ratio (MTR) imaging provides
information about the macromolecular structure of
cerebral white matter based on the interaction of the normally
observed tissue water signals with protons contained
in large macromolecules (including myelin).
Macromolecular semisolid structures in the brain, such
as myelinated axons, are ordinarily not detectable with
Fig. 21.13. Comparison of T1, T2-weighted, proton density (PD), and FLAIR MRI images in a 65-year-old diabetic patient presenting
with transient weakness of the left side.
Table 21.4
Visual rating scales and documentation of periventricular hyperintensities and deep white matter hyperintensities
in different MRI sequences{
Imaging
modality
Proton-weighted images
(PVHI)
T2/PD-weighted (PVHI
and DWMHI)
T2-weighted (PVHI
and DWMHI) DWMHI
Rating scales (Gerard and Weisberg, 1986)
(5 grade scale)
(Erkinjuntti et al., 1994)
(4 grade scale)
(Breteler et al., 1994)
(4 grade scale)
(Herholz et al., 1990)
(4 grade scale)
(Shimada et al., 1990)
(5 grade scale)
(Mirsen et al., 1991)
4 grade scale)
(Schmidt et al., 1992)
(4 grade scale)
(Hunt et al., 1989)
(4 grade scale)
(Ylikoski et al., 1993) ( Wahlund et al., 1990,
2001)
(4 grade scale)
(van Swieten et al.,
1990)
(3 grade scale)
{The number of grades used in each scale is mentioned along with the scale.
PVHI, periventricular hyperintensities; DWMHI, deep white matter hyperintensities; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
306 S. BAL ET AL.
( 8.0.0.2542.442508710 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
MR imaging because of their short transverse relaxation
times (TR). However, protons bound to them can be
selectively excited using off-resonance radio-frequency
pulses. To achieve MTR contrast, two MR sequences are
used. The first is a proton density (PD)-weighted
sequence, which reflects the total water signal, and the
second employs an additional pulse prior to the basic
proton density sequence. This serves to null the signal
from water molecules that are associated with macromolecules.
Thus, the second sequence reflects the signal
from free water. The percent contrast difference
between these two image sets is usually expressed as the
Magnetization transfer ratio : MTR¼ðM0MSATÞ=M0:
Studies conducted in early multiple sclerosis suggest
that DTI and MTR may provide complementary information
about white matter integrity, and among the
two, MTR is particularly sensitive (Wozniak and Lim,
2006). MTR in early development shows an increase during
the initial years of life that coincides with brain myelination
and follows the posterior to anterior temporal
pattern that occurs in myelination. Earlier, the evidence
did not support the relationship of MTR to age (Tanabe
et al., 1997), but some recent studies show that MTR
readouts of normal appearing white matter are lower
in elderly subjects (Fazekas et al., 2005; Spilt et al.,
2005), but do not differ between individuals with minimal
versus extensive WMH. Lower MTR is documented
in areas with WMH. Thus, these studies support the existence
of age-related reductions of MTR, which are exacerbated
in areas of WMH. Since declines in MTR also
occur in normal appearing white matter, it may be premature
to consider it an investigational tool for prognosticating
the effect of WMH. It is likely, however, that
using this MR sequence, prediction of atrophy and
extent of disintegrity of white matter in DM and several
demyelinating disorders will be possible in the future
(Fig. 21.15).
DIFFUSE TENSOR IMAGING
Diffuse tensor imaging (DTI) offers a promising new
technique for the identification of cerebral networks most
vulnerable to the aging process or tract disruption in disease.Thismethodmeasuresthemagnitudeandorientation
of self-diffusion of water molecules in white matter. Diffusionoccurs
equallyinall directions inthe absence of any
barriers (i.e., it is isotropic). However, when barriers are
present, diffusion tends to follow the long axis of these
barriers (i.e., diffusion is anisotropic). Barriers to diffusion
in the brain include cell membranes, myelin sheaths,
Fig. 21.14. Region of interest (ROI) markers used for automated quantitative analysis of white matter hyperintensities on MRI.
Fig. 21.15. Axial magnetization transfer (MT) images of the brain obtained from 2D spin-echo pulse proton density-weighted
images (PD-WI). Image (A) shows MRI of brain with white matter hyperintensities and image (B) without on-resonance axial
magnetization transfer (MT) saturation radio frequency pulse shows periventricular white matter lesions. (C) The
PD-weighted images are coregistered and MT ratio (MTR) maps are created after nulling the CSF signal and the lesions are seen
close to ventricles in the white matter.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 307
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
and white matter fiber tracts. Diffusion anisotropy can
be quantified by fractional anisotropy (FA), which is a
measure of the strength of the directional dependence
of diffusion and tissue disruption. FA is a sensitive
marker of aging that may precede atrophy in many
regions of the brain. DTI indices also distinguish normal
from pathologic aging and primarily reflects organization
of fiber tracts in deep white matter and are thus
helpful in assessing the white matter integrity. In the
present scenario this imaging tool is used for experimental
and research purposes (Hugenschmidt et al., 2008;
Reijmer et al., 2013).
Because of increased sensitivity of this method to
detect white matter hyperintensities, it is likely to be used
more frequently in diabetes research. DTI can be used to
understand structural and cognitive functions in patients
with type 1 DM (van Duinkerken et al., 2012)andtype2
DM (Hsu et al., 2012). In a study using this technique to
measurewhitematterintegrityinchildrenwithtype1DM,
it showed that white matter integrity in the right superior
occipital white matter region was negatively correlated
with hyperglycemia. These results were further associated
with lower verbal intelligence (Wu et al., 2007). Recent
study using axial diffusivity on DTI has shown that
children with type 1 DM have different white matter
structure in comparison to controls and this was correlated
with HBA1c values (glycosylated hemoglobin)
(Aye et al., 2012). Although these are preliminary results,
the findings suggest that white matter may show early
signs of degradation that may be related to glycemic control
and highlights the potential importance of DTI in
diabetes-related research (Fig. 21.16).
CONCLUSIONS
Imaging of cerebrovascular diseases has evolved considerably
over the past few decades. In the setting of acute
ischemic stroke with DM, CT imaging accompanied by
CT angiography and whole brain coverage CT perfusion
appear to be the most practical tools for acute stroke
assessment. Tissue fate, occlusion site, and collateral
status are crucial elements for acute stroke decision
making even in diabetic subjects. MRI provides an
alternative approach to CT but further work is needed
to standardize the DWI-PI mismatch paradigm for
salvageable brain.
In the subacute setting MRI is more sensitive than
CT for the detection of acute lacunar stroke, which
are commoner in diabetes. MRA and CTA can both
provide crucial information on the burden of intracranial
and extracranial atherosclerotic disease, a key feature
of patients with diabetes mellitus and metabolic
syndrome. In the chronic setting, MRI is the ideal
imaging tool for measuring gray and white matter
abnormalities repeatedly. Volumetric estimates and
quantitative MR techniques may help in the early identification
of patients at risk of progressive cognitive
decline. Diabetic patients develop cerebral atrophy,
silent infarcts and possibly WMH more rapidly than
other patient populations. Future diabetic imaging
studies with longitudinal design and use of sensitive
quantitative methods should confirm the degree of
structural brain changes or WMH. This should then
lead to imaging-based treatment trials to slow or arrest
diabetes-related brain abnormalities.
Fig. 21.16. Diffusion tensor imaging showing areas of increased fractional anisotropy (FA) in white matter of the brain marked in
red in patient with longstanding diabetes mellitus and perivascular white matter hyperintensities (top row). Recontruction images
using standardized atlas show the structural integrity of the white matter tracts (A and B).
308 S. BAL ET AL.
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1632192675)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0070
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0070
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0070
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0075
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0080
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0085
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0090
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0090
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0090
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0095
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0095
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0095
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0095
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0100
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0105
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0105
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0105
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0110
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0110
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0110
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0110
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0115
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0115
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0115
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0115
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0120
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0120
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0120
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0120
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0125
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0125
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0125
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0130
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0135
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0140
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0140
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0140
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0140
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0145
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0145
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0145
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0150
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0150
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0150
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0155
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0155
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0155
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0160
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0160
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0160
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0165
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0170
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0170
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0170
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0170
REFERENCES
Abbott RD, Donahue RP, MacMahon SW et al. (1987).
Diabetes and the risk of stroke. The Honolulu Heart
Program. JAMA 257: 949–952.
Admiraal-Behloul F, van den Heuvel DM, Olofsen H et al.
(2005).Fully automatic segmentation of white matter hyperintensities
in MR images of the elderly. Neuroimage 28:
607–617.
Akisaki T, Sakurai T, Takata T et al. (2006). Cognitive dysfunction
associates with white matter hyperintensities
and subcortical atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging
of the elderly diabetes mellitus Japanese elderly diabetes
intervention trial (J-EDIT). Diabetes Metab Res Rev 22:
376–384.
Alberti KG, ZimmetP, Shaw J(2005).Themetabolicsyndrome–
a new worldwide definition. Lancet 366: 1059–1062.
Alexandrov AV, Demchuk AM, Wein TH et al. (1999). Yield
of transcranial Doppler in acute cerebral ischaemia. Stroke
30: 1604–1609.
Alexandrov AV, Molina CA, Grotta JC et al. (2004).
Ultrasound-enhanced systemic thrombolysis for acute
ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 351: 2170–2178.
Alfano B, Brunetti A, Larobina M et al. (2000). Automated
segmentation and measurement of global white matter
lesion volume in patients with multiple sclerosis. J Magn
Reson Imaging 12: 799–807.
Anbeek P, Vincken KL, van Osch MJ et al. (2004a). Automatic
segmentation of different-sized white matter lesions by
voxel probability estimation. Med Image Anal 8: 205–215.
Anbeek P, Vincken KL, van Osch MJ et al. (2004b).
Probabilistic segmentation of white matter lesions in MR
imaging. Neuroimage 21: 1037–1044.
Araki Y, Nomura M, Tanaka H et al. (1994). MRI of the brain
in diabetes mellitus. Neuroradiology 36: 101–103.
Arboix A, Marti-Vilalta JL, Garcia JH (1990). Clinical study
of 227 patients with lacunar infarcts. Stroke 21: 842–847.
Ashburner J, Friston KJ (2000). Voxel-based morphometry –
the methods. Neuroimage 11: 805–821.
Astrup J, Siesjo BK, Symon L (1981). Thresholds in cerebral
ischemia – the ischemic penumbra. Stroke 12: 723–725.
Ay H, Buonanno FS, Rordorf G et al. (1999). Normal
diffusion-weighted MRI during stroke-like deficits.
Neurology 52: 1784–1792.
Aye T, Barnea-Goraly N, Ambler C et al. (2012). White matter
structural differences in young children with type 1 diabetes
: a diffusion tensor imaging study. Diabetes Care 35:
2167–2173.
Bang OY, Kim JW, Lee JH et al. (2005). Association of the
metabolic syndrome with intracranial atherosclerotic
stroke. Neurology 65: 296–298.
Barber PA, Demchuk AM, Zhang J et al. (2000). Validity and
reliability of a quantitative computed tomography score in
predicting outcome of hyperacute stroke before thrombolytic
therapy. ASPECTS Study Group. Alberta Stroke
Programme Early CT Score. Lancet 355: 1670–1674.
Baron JC, Chetelat G, Desgranges B et al. (2001). In vivo mapping
of gray matter loss with voxel-based morphometry in
mild Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage 14: 298–309.
BejotY,CatteauA,CaillierMetal.(2008).Trendsinincidence,
risk factors, and survival in symptomatic lacunar stroke in
Dijon, France, from 1989 to 2006: a population-based study.
Stroke 39: 1945–1951.
Bonithon-Kopp C, Touboul PJ, Berr C et al. (1996). Relation
of intima-media thickness to atherosclerotic plaques in
carotid arteries. The Vascular Aging (EVA) Study.
Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 16: 310–316.
Bowen BC (2007). MR angiography versus CT angiography in
the evaluation of neurovascular disease. Radiology 245:
357–360, discussion 60–61.
Bradley WG, Daroff RB, Jancovic J et al. (Eds.), (2000).
Vascular diseases of the nervous system. Ischemic cerebrovascular
disease. In: Neurology in Clinical Practice,
Butterworth-Heinemann, Boston, pp. 1125–1166.
Breteler MM, van Swieten JC, Bots ML et al. (1994). Cerebral
white matter lesions, vascular risk factors, and cognitive
function in a population-based study: the Rotterdam
Study. Neurology 44: 1246–1252.
CallejaAI,CortijoM,Garcia-BermejoPetal.(2013).Collateral
circulation on perfusion-computed tomography-source
imagespredictstheresponsetostrokeintravenousthrombolysis.
Eur J Neurol 20: 795–802.
Cameron FJ, Kean MJ, Wellard RM et al. (2005). Insights into
the acute cerebral metabolic changes associated with childhood
diabetes. Diabet Med 22: 648–653.
Carmichael OT, Aizenstein HA, Davis SW et al. (2005).
Atlas-based hippocampus segmentation in Alzheimer’s
disease and mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage 27:
979–990.
Chalela JA, Alsop DC, Gonzalez-Atavales JB et al. (2000).
Magnetic resonance perfusion imaging in acute ischemic
stroke using continuous arterial spin labeling. Stroke 31:
680–687.
Chalela JA, Kidwell CS, Nentwich LM et al. (2007). Magnetic
resonance imaging and computed tomography in emergency
assessment of patients with suspected acute stroke:
a prospective comparison. Lancet 369: 293–298.
Chamorro A, Sacco RL, Mohr JP et al. (1991). Clinicalcomputed
tomographic correlations of lacunar infarction
in the Stroke Data Bank. Stroke 22: 175–181.
Cho SJ, Sohn YH, Kim GW et al. (1997). Blood flow velocity
changes in the middle cerebral artery as an index of the
chronicity of hypertension. J Neurol Sci 150: 77–80.
Crain MR, Yuh WT, Greene GM et al. (1991). Cerebral ischemia
: evaluation with contrast-enhanced MR imaging.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 12: 631–639.
Cupini LM, Pasqualetti P, Diomedi M et al. (2002). Carotid
artery intima-media thickness and lacunar versus nonlacunar
infarcts. Stroke 33: 689–694.
Davis PH, Dawson JD, Riley WA et al. (2001). Carotid
intimal-medial thickness is related to cardiovascular risk
factors measured from childhood through middle age:
The Muscatine Study. Circulation 104: 2815–2819.
De Coene B, Hajnal JV, Gatehouse P et al. (1992). MR of
the brain using fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) pulse sequences. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
13: 1555–1564.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 309
(PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0175
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0175
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0175
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0180
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0185
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0190
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0190
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0190
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0190
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0195
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0200
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0200
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0200
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0205
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0205
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0205
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0205
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0210
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0215
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0220
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0220
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0220
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0225
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0225
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0230
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0235
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0235
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0235
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0240
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0245
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0245
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0250
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0250
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0250
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0255
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0260
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0260
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0260
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0265
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0265
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0265
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0270
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0270
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0270
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0270
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0275
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0275
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0280
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0280
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0285
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0285
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0285
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/neurintsurg-2013-011083
[Link]
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/neurintsurg-2013-011083
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0295
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0295
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0295
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0295
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0305
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0305
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0305
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0310
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0310
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0310
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0310
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0315
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0315
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0315
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0320
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0320
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0320
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0325
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0325
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0325
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0325
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0330
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0330
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0330
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0335
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0335
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0335
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0340
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0340
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0340
de Graaf RA, Pan JW, Telang F et al. (2001). Differentiation of
glucose transport in human brain gray and white matter.
J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 21: 483–492.
de Leeuw FE, de Groot JC, Achten E et al. (2001). Prevalence
of cerebral white matter lesions in elderly people: a population
based magnetic resonance imaging study. The
Rotterdam Scan Study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
70: 9–14.
DeCarli C, Murphy DG, Tranh M et al. (1995). The effect of
white matter hyperintensity volume on brain structure, cognitive
performance, and cerebral metabolism of glucose in
51 healthy adults. Neurology 45: 2077–2084.
Dong-Wha Kang, Sung-il-Sohn (2011). Reperfusion therapy
in acute ischemic stroke with unclear onset by MRI evaluation
(RESTORE). Abstract presented at International
Stroke Conference, Los Angeles.
Ebrahim S, Papacosta O, Whincup P et al. (1999). Carotid plaque
, intima media thickness, cardiovascular risk factors,
and prevalent cardiovascular disease in men and women:
the British Regional Heart Study. Stroke 30: 841–850.
ECST (1998). Randomised trial of endarterectomy for recently
symptomatic carotid stenosis: final results of the MRC
European Carotid Surgery Trial (ECST). Lancet 351:
1379–1387.
Eguchi K, Kario K, Shimada K (2003). Greater impact of coexistence
of hypertension and diabetes on silent cerebral
infarcts. Stroke 34: 2471–2474.
Erkinjuntti T, Gao F, Lee DH et al. (1994). Lack of difference
in brain hyperintensities between patients with early
Alzheimer’s disease and control subjects. Arch Neurol
51: 260–268.
Esposito L, Saam T, Heider P et al. (2010). MRI plaque imaging
reveals high-risk carotid plaques especially in diabetic
patients irrespective of the degree of stenosis. BMC Med
Imaging 10: 27.
Fazekas F, Niederkorn K, Schmidt R et al. (1988). White matter
signal abnormalities in normal individuals: correlation
with carotid ultrasonography, cerebral bloodflow measurements
, and cerebrovascular risk factors. Stroke 19:
1285–1288.
Fazekas F, Kleinert R, Offenbacher H et al. (1993). Pathologic
correlates of incidental MRI white matter signal hyperintensities.
Neurology 43: 1683–1689.
Fazekas F, Ropele S, Enzinger C et al. (2005). MTI of white
matter hyperintensities. Brain 128: 2926–2932.
Ferguson SC, Blane A, Perros P et al. (2003). Cognitive ability
and brain structure in type 1 diabetes: relation to microangiopathy
and preceding severe hypoglycemia. Diabetes52:
149–156.
Ferguson SC, Blane A, Wardlaw J et al. (2005). Influence of an
early-onset age of type 1 diabetes on cerebral structure and
cognitive function. Diabetes Care 28: 1431–1437.
Fiebach JB, Schellinger PD, Jansen O et al. (2002). CT and
diffusion-weighted MR imaging in randomized order:
diffusion-weighted imaging results in higher accuracy
and lower interrater variability in the diagnosis of hyperacute
ischemic stroke. Stroke 33: 2206–2210.
Fisher CM (1982). Lacunar strokes and infarcts: a review.
Neurology 32: 871–876.
Foerstl H, Biedert S, Hewer W (1989). Multiinfarct and
Alzheimer-type dementia investigated by transcranial
Doppler sonography. Biol Psychiatry 26: 590–594.
Freeborough PA, Fox NC (1997). The boundary shift integral:
an accurate and robust measure of cerebral volume changes
from registered repeat MRI. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 16:
623–629.
Fritz VU, Bilchik T, Levien LJ (1987). Diabetes as risk factor
for transient ischaemic attacks as opposed to strokes. Eur
J Vasc Surg 1: 259–262.
Gandolfo C, Caponnetto C, Del Sette M et al. (1988). Risk factors
in lacunar syndromes: a case-control study. Acta
Neurol Scand 77: 22–26.
Garrett KD, Cohen RA, Paul RH (2004). Computer-mediated
measurement and subjective ratings of white matter hyperintensities
in vascular dementia: relationship to neuropsychological
performances. Clin Neuropsychol 18: 50–62.
Gerard G, Weisberg LA (1986). MRI periventricular lesions in
adults. Neurology 36: 998–1001.
Gerraty RP, Parsons MW, Alan Barber P et al. (2001). The volume
of lacunes. Stroke 32: 1937–1938.
Ghika J, Bogousslavsky J, Regli F (1989). Infarcts in the territory
of the deep perforators from the carotid system.
Neurology 39: 507–512.
Giurgiutiu DV, Yoo AJ, Fitzpatrick K et al. (2014). Severity of
leukoaraiosis, leptomeningeal collaterals, and clinical outcomes
after intra-arterial therapy in patients with acute
ischemic stroke. J Neurointerv Surg. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1136/neurintsurg-2013-011083.
Goksan B, Erkol G, Bozluolcay M et al. (2001). Diabetes as a
determinant of high-grade carotid artery stenosis: evaluation
of 1,058 cases by Doppler sonography. J Stroke
Cerebrovasc Dis 10: 252–256.
Grandin CB (2003). Assessment of brain perfusion with
MRI: methodology and application to acute stroke.
Neuroradiology 45: 755–766.
Grimaud J, Lai M, Thorpe J et al. (1996). Quantification of
MRI lesion load in multiple sclerosis: a comparison of three
computer-assisted techniques. Magn Reson Imaging 14:
495–505.
Grotta JC, Welch KM, Fagan SC et al. (2001). Clinical deterioration
following improvement in the NINDS rt-PA
Stroke Trial. Stroke 32: 661–668.
Gunning-Dixon FM, Brickman AM, Cheng JC et al. (2009).
Aging of cerebral white matter: a review of MRI findings.
Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 24: 109–117.
Guttmann CR, Kikinis R, Anderson MC et al. (1999).
Quantitative follow-up of patients with multiple sclerosis
using MRI: reproducibility. J Magn Reson Imaging 9:
509–518.
Haacke EM, Brown RF, Thompson M et al. (1999). Magnetic
Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and Sequence
Design. J Wiley and Sons, New York.
Hachinski VC, Potter P, Merskey H (1986). Leuko-araiosis: an
ancient term for a new problem. Can J Neurol Sci 13:
533–534.
Hamorro A, Sacco RL, Mohr JP (1991). Clinical computed
tomographic correlations of lacunar infarctions in the
Stroke Data Bank. Stroke 22: 175–181.
310 S. BAL ET AL.
(DEMO VERSION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.674392993)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0345
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0345
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0345
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0345
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0350
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0350
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0350
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0350
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0355
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0355
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0355
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0360
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0360
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0360
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0365
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0365
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0365
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0370
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0370
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0375
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0375
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0375
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0380
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0380
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0380
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0385
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0385
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0385
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0390
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0390
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0390
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0390
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0395
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0395
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0395
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0395
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0400
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0400
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0400
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0405
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0405
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0405
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0410
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0410
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0410
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0410
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0415
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0415
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0415
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0420
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0420
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0420
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0425
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0425
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0425
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0425
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0430
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0430
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0430
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0435
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0435
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0435
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0435
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0440
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0440
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0440
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0445
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0445
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0445
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0450
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0450
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0450
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0455
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0455
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0455
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0460
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0460
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0460
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0460
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0465
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0465
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0465
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0470
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0470
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0470
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0475
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0475
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0475
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0475
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0480
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0480
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0480
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0480
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0485
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0485
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0485
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0490
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0490
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0490
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0495
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0495
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0495
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0495
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0500
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0500
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0500
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0505
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0505
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0505
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0505
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0510
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0510
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0510
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0515
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0515
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0515
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0515
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0515
Hassler W, Steinmetz H, Gawlowski J (1988). Transcranial
Doppler ultrasonography in raised intracranial pressure
and in intracranial circulatory arrest. J Neurosurg 68:
745–751.
Henry RM, Kostense PJ, Dekker JM et al. (2004). Carotid arterial
remodeling: a maladaptive phenomenon in type 2 diabetes
but not in impaired glucose metabolism: the Hoorn
Study. Stroke 35: 671–676.
Herholz K, Heindel W, Rackl A et al. (1990). Regional cerebral
blood flow in patients with leuko-araiosis and atherosclerotic
carotid artery disease. Arch Neurol 47: 392–396.
Hommel M, Besson G, Le Bas JF et al. (1990). Prospective
study of lacunar infarction using magnetic resonance imaging.
Stroke 21: 546–554.
Hornig CR, Buttner T, Hoffmann O et al. (1992). Short term
prognosis of vertebrobasilar ischemic stroke. Cerebrovasc
Dis 2: 273–281.
Horowitz DR, Tuhrim S, Weinberger JM et al. (1992).
Mechanisms in lacunar infarction. Stroke 23: 325–327.
Hsu JL, Chen YL, Leu JG et al. (2012). Microstructural white
matter abnormalities in type 2 diabetes mellitus: a diffusion
tensor imaging study. Neuroimage 59: 1098–1105.
Hugenschmidt CE, Peiffer AM, Kraft RA et al. (2008).
Relating imaging indices of white matter integrity and volume
in healthy older adults. Cereb Cortex 18: 433–442.
Hunt AL, Orrison WW, Yeo RA et al. (1989). Clinical significance
of MRI white matter lesions in the elderly.
Neurology 39: 1470–1474.
Itti L, Chang L, Ernst T (2001). Segmentation of progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy lesions in fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging.
J Neuroimaging 11: 412–417.
Jackson C, Sudlow C (2005). Are lacunar strokes really different
? A systematic review of differences in risk factor profiles
between lacunar and nonlacunar infarcts. Stroke 36:
891–901.
Jongen C, Biessels JG (2008). Structural brain imaging in diabetes
: a methodological perspective. Eur J Pharmacol 585:
208–218.
Josephson SA, Bryant SO, Mak HK et al. (2004). Evaluation of
carotid stenosis using CT angiography in the initial evaluation
of stroke and TIA. Neurology 63: 457–460.
Kapeller P, Barber R, Vermeulen RJ et al. (2003). Visual rating
of age-related white matter changes on magnetic resonance
imaging: scale comparison, interrater agreement, and correlations
with quantitative measurements. Stroke 34: 441–445.
Kario K, Ishikawa J, Hoshide S et al. (2005). Diabetic brain
damage in hypertension: role of renin–angiotensin system.
Hypertension 45: 887–893.
Kidwell CS, el-Saden S, Livshits Z et al. (2001). Transcranial
Doppler pulsatility indices as a measure of diffuse smallvessel
disease. J Neuroimaging 11: 229–235.
Kidwell CS, Alger JR, Saver JL (2003). Beyond mismatch:
evolving paradigms in imaging the ischemic penumbra
with multimodal magnetic resonance imaging. Stroke 34:
2729–2735.
Kitamura A, Iso H, Imano H et al. (2004). Carotid intimamedia
thickness and plaque characteristics as a risk factor
for stroke in Japanese elderly men. Stroke 35: 2788–2794.
Knoepfli AS, Sekoranja L, Bonvin C et al. (2009). Evaluation
of perfusion CT and TIBI grade in acute stroke for predicting
thrombolysis benefit and clinical outcome.
J Neuroradiol 36: 131–137.
Knopman DS, Mosley TH, Catellier DJ et al. (2005).
Cardiovascular risk factors and cerebral atrophy in a
middle-aged cohort. Neurology 65: 876–881.
Korf ES, White LR, Scheltens P et al. (2006). Brain aging in
very old men with type 2 diabetes: the Honolulu-Asia
Aging Study. Diabetes Care 29: 2268–2274.
Korf ES, van Straaten EC, de Leeuw FE et al. (2007). Diabetes
mellitus, hypertension and medial temporal lobe atrophy:
the LADIS study. Diabet Med 24: 166–171.
Koroshetz WJ, Gonzalez RG, Lev MH et al. (Eds.), (2006).
Acute Ischemic Stroke: Imaging and Intervention,
Springer, Berlin.
Kreis R, Ross BD (1992). Cerebral metabolic disturbances
in patients with subacute and chronic diabetes mellitus:
detection with proton MR spectroscopy. Radiology 184:
123–130.
Laing SP, Swerdlow AJ, Carpenter LM et al. (2003). Mortality
from cerebrovascular disease in a cohort of 23 000 patients
with insulin-treated diabetes. Stroke 34: 418–421.
Last D, Alsop DC, Abduljalil AM et al. (2007). Global and
regional effects of type 2 diabetes on brain tissue volumes
and cerebral vasoreactivity. Diabetes Care 30: 1193–1199.
Launay M, N’Diaye M, Bories J (1985). X-ray computed
tomography (CT) study of small, deep and recent infarcts
(SDRIs) of the cerebral hemispheres in adults. Preliminary
and critical report. Neuroradiology 27: 494–508.
Launer LJ, Miller ME, Williamson JD et al. (2011). Effects of
intensive glucose lowering on brain structure and function
in people with type 2 diabetes (ACCORD MIND): a randomised
open-label substudy. Lancet Neurol 10: 969–977.
Launes J, Ketonen L (1987). Dense middle cerebral artery sign:
an indicator of poor outcome in middle cerebral artery area
infarction. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 50: 1550–1552.
Leclerc X, Gauvrit JY, Nicol L et al. (1999a). Contrastenhanced
MR angiography of the craniocervical vessels:
a review. Neuroradiology 41: 867–874.
Leclerc X, Lucas C, Godefroy O et al. (1999b). Preliminary
experience using contrast-enhanced MR angiography to
assess vertebral artery structure for the follow-up of suspected
dissection. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 20: 1482–1490.
Lee KY, Sohn YH, Baik JS et al. (2000). Arterial pulsatility as
an index of cerebral microangiopathy in diabetes. Stroke31:
1111–1115.
Lee EJ, Kim HJ, Bae JM et al. (2007). Relevance of common
carotid intima-media thickness and carotid plaque as risk
factors for ischemic stroke in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 28: 916–919.
Lenze E, Cross D, McKeel D et al. (1999). White matter hyperintensities
and gray matter lesions in physically healthy
depressed subjects. Am J Psychiatry 156: 1602–1607.
Lev MH, Farkas J, Rodriguez VR et al. (2001). CT angiography
in the rapid triage of patients with hyperacute stroke
to intraarterial thrombolysis: accuracy in the detection
of large vessel thrombus. J Comput Assist Tomogr 25:
520–528.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 311
( 8.0.0.2542.323021102 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0520
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0520
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0520
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0520
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0525
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0525
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0525
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0530
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0530
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0530
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0535
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0535
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0535
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0535
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0535
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0540
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0540
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0540
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0545
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0545
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0545
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0550
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0550
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0550
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0550
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0555
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0555
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0555
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0555
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0560
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0560
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0560
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0565
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0565
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0565
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0565
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0570
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0570
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0570
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0570
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0575
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0575
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0575
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0580
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0580
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0580
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0580
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0585
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0585
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0585
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0590
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0590
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0590
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0590
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0595
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0595
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0595
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0595
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0600
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0600
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0600
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0605
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0605
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0610
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0610
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0610
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0615
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0615
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0615
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0620
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0620
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0620
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0625
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0625
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0625
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0630
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0630
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0630
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0630
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0635
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0635
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0635
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0635
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0640
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0640
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0640
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0645
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0645
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0645
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0650
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0650
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0650
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0655
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0655
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0655
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0655
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0660
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0660
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0660
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0660
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0665
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0665
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0665
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0670
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0670
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0670
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0675
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0675
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0675
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0680
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0680
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0680
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0680
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0685
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0685
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0685
Liao D, Cooper L, Cai J et al. (1997). The prevalence and
severity of white matter lesions, their relationship with
age, ethnicity, gender, and cardiovascular disease risk factors
: the ARIC Study. Neuroepidemiology 16: 149–162.
Lippera S,Gregorio F,Ceravolo MG et al. (1997).Diabetic retinopathy
and cerebral hemodynamic impairment in type II
diabetes. Eur J Ophthalmol 7: 156–162.
Lodder J, Bamford JM, Sandercock PA et al. (1990). Are
hypertension or cardiac embolism likely causes of lacunar
infarction? Stroke 21: 375–381.
Longstreth Jr WT, Arnold AM, Manolio TA et al. (2000).
Clinical correlates of ventricular and sulcal size on cranial
magnetic resonance imaging of 3,301 elderly people. The
Cardiovascular Health Study Collaborative Research
Group. Neuroepidemiology 19: 30–42.
Maas MB, Lev MH, Ay H et al. (2009). Collateral vessels on
CT angiography predict outcome in acute ischemic stroke.
Stroke 40: 3001–3005.
Malloy P, Correia S, Stebbins G et al. (2007). Neuroimaging of
white matter in aging and dementia. Clin Neuropsychol21:
73–109.
Manno EM, Nichols DA, Fulgham JR et al. (2003). Computed
tomographic determinants of neurologic deterioration in
patients with large middle cerebral artery infarctions.
Mayo Clin Proc 78: 156–160.
Mantyla R, Erkinjuntti T, Salonen O et al. (1997). Variable
agreement between visual rating scales for white matter
hyperintensities on MRI. Comparison of 13 rating scales
in a poststroke cohort. Stroke 28: 1614–1623.
Martini SR, Kent TA (2007). Hyperglycemia in acute ischemic
stroke: a vascular perspective. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
27: 435–451.
Matsumoto K, Sera Y, Nakamura H et al. (2002). Correlation
between common carotid arterial wall thickness and ischemic
stroke in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Metabolism 51: 244–247.
McNeill AM, Rosamond WD, Girman CJ et al. (2004).
Prevalence of coronary heart disease and carotid arterial
thickening in patients with the metabolic syndrome (the
ARIC Study). Am J Cardiol 94: 1249–1254.
Menon BK, Singh J, Al-Khataami A et al. (2010). The donut
sign on CT angiography: an indicator of reversible intraluminal
carotid thrombus? Neuroradiology 52: 1055–1056.
Menon BK, Smith EE, Modi J et al. (2011). Regional leptomeningeal
score on CT angiography predicts clinical and
imaging outcomes in patients with acute anterior circulation
occlusions. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 32: 1640–1645.
Menon BK, Smith EE, Coutts SB et al. (2013a).
Leptomeningeal collaterals are associated with modifiable
metabolic risk factors. Ann Neurol 74: 241–248.
Menon BK, O’Brien B, Bivard A et al. (2013b). Assessment of
leptomeningeal collaterals using dynamic CT angiography
in patients with acute ischemic stroke. J Cereb Blood Flow
Metab 33: 365–371.
Minati L, Grisoli M, Bruzzone MG (2007). MR spectroscopy,
functional MRI, and diffusion-tensor imaging in the aging
brain: a conceptual review. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol20:
3–21.
Mirsen TR, Lee DH, Wong CJ et al. (1991). Clinical correlates
of white-matter changes on magnetic resonance imaging
scans of the brain. Arch Neurol 48: 1015–1021.
Miyazaki M, Lee VS (2008). Nonenhanced MR angiography.
Radiology 248: 20–43.
Mohr JP, Biller J, Hilal SK et al. (1995). Magnetic resonance
versus computed tomographic imaging in acute stroke.
Stroke 26: 807–812.
Moran C, Phan TG, Chen J et al. (2013). Brain atrophy in type
2 diabetes: regional distribution and influence on cognition.
Diabetes Care 36: 4036–4042.
Moreno PR, Fuster V (2004). New aspects in the pathogenesis
of diabetic atherothrombosis. J Am Coll Cardiol 44:
2293–2300.
Musen G, Lyoo IK, Sparks CR et al. (2006). Effects of type 1
diabetes on gray matter density as measured by voxelbased
morphometry. Diabetes 55: 326–333.
Nambiar V, Sohn SI, Almekhlafi MA et al. (2014). CTA collateral
status and response to recanalization in patients with
acute ischemic stroke. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 35:
884–890.
NASCET (1991). Beneficial effect of carotid endarterectomy
in symptomatic patients with high-grade carotid stenosis.
North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy
Trial Collaborators. N Engl J Med 325: 445–453.
Nuutinen J, Liu Y, Laakso MP et al. (2009). Perfusion differences
on SPECT and PWI in patients with acute ischemic
stroke. Neuroradiology 51: 687–695.
Oppenheimer SM, Hoffbrand BI, Oswald GA et al. (1985).
Diabetes mellitus and early mortality from stroke. Br
Med J (Clin Res Ed) 291: 1014–1015.
Ostling G, Hedblad B, Berglund G et al. (2007). Increased
echolucency of carotid plaques in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Stroke 38: 2074–2078.
Padovani A, Di Piero V, Bragoni M et al. (1997). Correlates of
leukoariosis and ventricular enlargement on magnetic resonance
imaging: a study in normal elderly and cerebrovascular
patients. Eur J Neurol 4: 15–23.
Palumbo PJ, Elveback LR, Whisnant JP (1978). Neurologic
complications of diabetes mellitus: transient ischemic
attack, stroke, and peripheral neuropathy. Adv Neurol 19:
593–601.
Pantoni L, Garcia JH (1995). The significance of cerebral
white matter abnormalities 100 years after Binswanger’s
report. A review. Stroke 26: 1293–1301.
Pantoni L, Simoni M, Pracucci G et al. (2002). Visual rating
scales for age-related white matter changes (leukoaraiosis):
can the heterogeneity be reduced? Stroke 33: 2827–2833.
Papamitsakis NIH, Santhakumar S, Patel SC (2000). Diffusion
weighted magnetic resonance imaging in acute brainstem
stroke. Stroke 31: 2808.
Parfrey PS, Griffiths SM, Barrett BJ et al. (1989). Contrast
material-induced renal failure in patients with diabetes
mellitus, renal insufficiency, or both. A prospective controlled
study. N Engl J Med 320: 143–149.
Parsons MW, Barber PA, Chalk J et al. (2002). Diffusion- and
perfusion-weighted MRI response to thrombolysis in
stroke. Ann Neurol 51: 28–37.
312 S. BAL ET AL.
(DEMO PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-742177139)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0690
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0690
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0690
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0695
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0695
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0695
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0695
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0700
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0700
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0700
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0700
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0705
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0705
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0705
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0705
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0710
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0710
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0710
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0710
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0715
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0715
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0715
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0715
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0715
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0720
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0720
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0720
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0725
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0725
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0725
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0725
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0730
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0730
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0730
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0735
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0735
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0735
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0740
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0740
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0740
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0740
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0745
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0745
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0745
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0750
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0750
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0750
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0750
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0755
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0755
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0755
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0760
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0760
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0760
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0765
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0765
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0765
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0765
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0770
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0770
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0770
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0770
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0770
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0775
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0775
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0775
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0780
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0780
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0780
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0785
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0785
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0785
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0785
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0790
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0790
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0790
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0790
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0795
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0795
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0795
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0800
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0800
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0800
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0800
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0805
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0805
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0805
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0805
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0810
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0810
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0810
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0810
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0815
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0815
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0815
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0815
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0820
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0820
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0820
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0825
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0825
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0825
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0825
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0830
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0830
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0835
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0835
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0835
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0840
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0840
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0840
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0840
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0845
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0845
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0845
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0845
Petty GW, Brown Jr RD, Whisnant JP et al. (1999). Ischemic
stroke subtypes: a population-based study of incidence and
risk factors. Stroke 30: 2513–2516.
Pexman JH, Barber PA, Hill MD et al. (2001). Use of the
Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (ASPECTS) for
assessing CT scans in patients with acute stroke. AJNR
Am J Neuroradiol 22: 1534–1542.
Pirttila T, Jarvenpaa R, Laippala P et al. (1992). Brain atrophy
on computerized axial tomography scans: interaction of
age, diabetes and general morbidity. Gerontology 38:
285–291.
Puetz V, Dzialowski I, Hill MD et al. (2008). Intracranial
thrombus extent predicts clinical outcome, final infarct size
and hemorrhagic transformation in ischemic stroke: the
clot burden score. Int J Stroke 3: 230–236.
RayKK,SeshasaiSR,WijesuriyaSetal.(2009).Effectofintensive
control of glucose on cardiovascular outcomes and
death in patients with diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of
randomised controlled trials. Lancet 373: 1765–1772.
Reijmer YD, Brundel M, de Bresser J et al., Group Utrecht
Vascular Cognitive Impairment Study (2013).
Microstructural white matter abnormalities and cognitive
functioning in type 2 diabetes: a diffusion tensor imaging
study. Diabetes Care 36: 137–144.
Ricci S, Caputo N, Aisa G et al. (1991). Prognostic value of the
dense middle cerebral artery sign in patients with acute
ischemic stroke. Ital J Neurol Sci 12: 45–47.
Rincon F,Sacco RL, Kranwinkel G et al.(2009). Incidence and
risk factors of intracranial atherosclerotic stroke: the
Northern Manhattan Stroke Study. Cerebrovasc Dis 28:
65–71.
Roberts RO, Knopman DS, Przybelski SA et al. (2014).
Association of type 2 diabetes with brain atrophy and cognitive
impairment. Neurology 82: 1132–1141.
Roehmboldt ME, Palumbo PJ, Whisnant JP et al. (1983).
Transient ischemic attack and stroke in a community-based
diabetic cohort. Mayo Clin Proc 58: 56–58.
Rosamond WD, Folsom AR, Chambless LE et al. (1999).
Stroke incidence and survival among middle-aged adults:
9-year follow-up of the Atherosclerosis Risk in
Communities (ARIC) cohort. Stroke 30: 736–743.
Rosen BR, Belliveau JW, Vevea JM et al. (1990). Perfusion
imaging with NMR contrast agents. Magn Reson Med 14:
249–265.
Rosenthal ES, Schwamm LH, Roccatagliata L et al. (2008).
Role of recanalization in acute stroke outcome: rationale
for a CT angiogram-based benefit of recanalization model.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 29: 1471–1475.
Rowley HA (2001). The four Ps of acute stroke imaging:
parenchyma, pipes, perfusion, and penumbra. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 22: 599–601.
Ryan CM (1997). Effects of diabetes mellitus on neuropsychological
functioning: a lifespan perspective. Semin Clin
Neuropsychiatry 2: 4–14.
Saur D, Kucinski T, Grzyska U et al. (2003). Sensitivity and
interrater agreement of CT and diffusion-weighted MR
imaging in hyperacute stroke. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
24: 878–885.
Schaefer PW, Barak ER, Kamalian S et al. (2008).
Quantitative assessment of core/penumbra mismatch in
acute stroke: CT and MR perfusion imaging are strongly
correlated when sufficient brain volume is imaged.
Stroke 39: 2986–2992.
Schellinger PD, Fiebach JB, Hacke W (2003). Imaging-based
decision making in thrombolytic therapy for ischemic
stroke: present status. Stroke 34: 575–583.
Scheltens P, Barkhof F, Leys D et al. (1995). Histopathologic
correlates of white matter changes on MRI in Alzheimer’s
disease and normal aging. Neurology 45: 883–888.
Scheltens P, Erkinjunti T, Leys D et al. (1998). White matter
changes on CT and MRI: an overview of visual rating
scales. European Task Force on Age-Related White
Matter Changes. Eur Neurol 39: 80–89.
Schmidt R, Fazekas F, Kleinert G et al. (1992). Magnetic resonance
imaging signal hyperintensities in the deep and subcortical
white matter. A comparative study between stroke
patients and normal volunteers. Arch Neurol 49: 825–827.
Schmidt R, Schmidt H, Kapeller P et al. (2002). The natural
course of MRI white matter hyperintensities. J Neurol
Sci 203–204: 253–257.
Schoenberg BS, Schoenberg DG, Pritchard DA et al. (1980).
Differential risk factors for completed stroke and transient
ischemic attacks: study of vascular dieases and diabetes
mellitus. Trans Am Neurol Assoc 105: 165–167.
Schuknecht B, Ratzka M, Hofmann E (1990). The dense artery
sign – major cerebral artery thromboembolism demonstrated
by computed tomography. Neuroradiology 32:
98–103.
Schwartz RB, Tice HM, Hooten SM et al. (1994). Evaluation
of cerebral aneurysms with helical CT: correlation with
conventional angiography and MR angiography.
Radiology 192: 717–722.
Selvarajah D, Wilkinson ID, Emery CJ et al. (2008). Thalamic
neuronal dysfunction and chronic sensorimotor distal symmetrical
polyneuropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes
mellitus. Diabetologia 51: 2088–2092.
Shimada K, Kawamoto A, Matsubayashi K et al. (1990). Silent
cerebrovascular disease in the elderly. Correlation with
ambulatory pressure. Hypertension 16: 692–699.
Sims JR, Rordorf G, Smith EE et al. (2005). Arterial occlusion
re-angiography-source image hypoattenuation predicts
clinical outcome in posterior circulation strokes treated
with intra-arterial therapy. Stroke 39: 3107–3109.
Singer MB, Chong J, Lu D et al. (1998). Diffusion-weighted
MRI in acute subcortical infarction. Stroke 29: 133–136.
Smith SM, De Stefano N, Jenkinson M et al. (2001).
Normalized accurate measurement of longitudinal brain
change. J Comput Assist Tomogr 25: 466–475.
Sorensen L, Siddall PJ, Trenell MI et al. (2008). Differences in
metabolites in pain-processing brain regions in patients
with diabetes and painful neuropathy. Diabetes Care 31:
980–981.
Souza LC, Yoo AJ, Chaudhry ZA et al. (2012). Malignant
CTA collateral profile is highly specific for large admission
DWI infarct core and poor outcome in acute stroke. AJNR
Am J Neuroradiol 33: 1331–1336.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 313
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1512705067)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0850
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0850
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0850
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0850
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0855
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0855
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0855
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0860
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0860
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0860
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0865
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0865
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0865
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0865
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0870
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0870
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0870
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0875
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0875
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0875
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0880
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0880
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0880
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0880
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0880
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0880
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0885
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0885
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0885
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0890
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0890
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0890
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0895
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0895
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0895
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0895
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0895
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0900
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0900
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0900
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0900
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0905
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0905
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0905
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0910
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0910
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0910
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0910
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0915
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0915
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0915
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0915
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0920
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0920
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0920
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0925
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0925
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0925
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0925
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0930
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0930
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0930
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0935
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0935
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0935
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0935
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0940
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0940
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0940
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0945
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0945
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0945
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0945
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0950
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0950
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0950
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0955
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0955
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0955
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0960
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0960
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0960
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0960
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0965
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0965
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0965
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0965
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0970
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0970
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0970
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0975
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0975
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0975
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0980
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0980
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0980
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0985
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0985
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0985
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0985
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0990
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0990
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0990
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0995
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0995
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf0995
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1000
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1000
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1000
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1000
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1005
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1010
Spilt A, Geeraedts T, de Craen AJ et al. (2005). Age-related
changes in normal-appearing brain tissue and white matter
hyperintensities: more of the same or something else?
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 26: 725–729.
Srinivasan A, Goyal M, Al Azri F et al. (2006). State-of-the-art
imaging of acute stroke. Radiographics 26 (Suppl 1):
S75–S95.
Stegmayr B, Asplund K (1995). Diabetes as a risk factor for
stroke. A population perspective. Diabetologia 38:
1061–1068.
Tanabe JL, Ezekiel F, Jagust WJ et al. (1997). Volumetric
method for evaluating magnetization transfer ratio of tissue
categories: application to areas of white matter signal
hyperintensity in the elderly. Radiology 204: 570–575.
Theysohn JM, Kraff O, Maderwald S et al. (2011). 7 tesla MRI
of microbleeds and white matter lesions as seen in vascular
dementia. J Magn Reson Imag 33: 782–791.
Thijs VN, Somford DM, Bammer R et al. (2004). Influence of
arterial input function on hypoperfusion volumes measured
with perfusion-weighted imaging. Stroke 35: 94–98.
Thomalla G, Cheng B, Ebinger M et al. (2011). DWI-FLAIR
mismatch for the identification of patients with acute
ischaemic stroke within 4.5 h of symptom onset (PREFLAIR
): a multicentre observational study. Lancet
Neurol 10: 978–986.
Tkac I, Troscak M, Javorsky M et al. (2001). Increased intracranial
arterial resistance in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Wien Klin Wochenschr 113: 870–873.
Tomura N, Uemura K, Inugami A et al. (1988). Early CT finding
in cerebral infarction: obscuration of the lentiform
nucleus. Radiology 168: 463–467.
Touboul PJ, Elbaz A, Koller C et al. (2000). Common carotid
artery intima-media thickness and brain infarction: the
Etude du Profil Genetique de l’Infarctus Cerebral
(GENIC) case-control study. The GENIC Investigators.
Circulation 102: 313–318.
Touboul PJ, Labreuche J, Vicaut E et al. (2005). Carotid
intima-media thickness, plaques, and Framingham Risk
Score as independent determinants of stroke risk. Stroke
36: 1741–1745.
Tuszynski MH, Petito CK, Levy DE (1989). Risk factors and
clinical manifestations of pathologically verified lacunar
infarctions. Stroke 20: 990–999.
van den Heuvel DM, ten Dam VH, de Craen AJ et al. (2006).
Measuring longitudinal white matter changes: comparison
of a visual rating scale with a volumetric measurement.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 27: 875–878.
van Duinkerken E, Schoonheim MM, Ijzerman RG et al.
(2012). Diffusion tensor imaging in type 1 diabetes:
decreased white matter integrity relates to cognitive functions.
Diabetologia 55: 1218–1220.
van Harten B, de Leeuw FE, Weinstein HC et al. (2006). Brain
imaging in patients with diabetes: a systematic review.
Diabetes Care 29: 2539–2548.
van Harten B, Oosterman J, Muslimovic D et al. (2007).
Cognitive impairment and MRI correlates in the elderly
patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Age Ageing 36:
164–170.
van Swieten JC, Hijdra A, Koudstaal PJ et al. (1990). Grading
white matter lesions on CT and MRI: a simple scale.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 53: 1080–1083.
Vemmos KN, Tsivgoulis G, Spengos K et al. (2004). Common
carotid artery intima-media thickness in patients with brain
infarction and intracerebral haemorrhage. Cerebrovasc Dis
17: 280–286.
Vermeer SE, Koudstaal PJ, Oudkerk M et al. (2002).
Prevalence and risk factors of silent brain infarcts in the
population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke 33: 21–25.
Vermeer SE, Den Heijer T, Koudstaal PJ et al. (2003).
Incidence and risk factors of silent brain infarcts in the
population-based Rotterdam Scan Study. Stroke 34:
392–396.
Wahlund LO, Agartz I, Almqvist O et al. (1990). The brain in
healthy aged individuals: MR imaging. Radiology 174:
675–679.
Wahlund LO, Barkhof F, Fazekas F et al. (2001). A new rating
scale for age-related white matter changes applicable to
MRI and CT. Stroke 32: 1318–1322.
Weimar C, Kraywinkel K, Rodl J et al. (2002). Etiology, duration
, and prognosis of transient ischemic attacks: an analysis
from the German Stroke Data Bank. Arch Neurol 59:
1584–1588.
Weinberger J, Biscarra V, Weisberg MK et al. (1983). Factors
contributing to stroke in patients with atherosclerotic disease
of the great vessels: the role of diabetes. Stroke 14:
709–712.
Weinger K, Jacobson AM, Musen G et al. (2008). The effects
oftype 1diabetes on cerebral white matter. Diabetologia51:
417–425.
Wells WM, Grimson WL, Kikinis R et al. (1996). Adaptive
segmentation of MRI data. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 15:
429–442.
Wen W, Sachdev P (2004). The topography of white matter
hyperintensities on brain MRI in healthy 60- to
64-year-old individuals. Neuroimage 22: 144–154.
Wessels AM, Simsek S, Remijnse PL et al. (2006). Voxelbased
morphometry demonstrates reduced grey matter density
on brain MRI in patients with diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetologia 49: 2474–2480.
Whisnant JP, Wiebers DO, O’Fallon WM et al. (1996).
A population-based model of risk factors for ischemic
stroke: Rochester, Minnesota. Neurology 47: 1420–1428.
Wildermuth S, Knauth M, Brandt T et al. (1998). Role of CT
angiography in patient selection for thrombolytic therapy
in acute hemispheric stroke. Stroke 29: 935–938.
Wintermark M, Thiran JP, Maeder P et al. (2001).
Simultaneous measurement of regional cerebral blood flow
by perfusion CT and stable xenon CT: a validation study.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 22: 905–914.
Wintermark M, Reichhart M, Thiran JP et al. (2002).
Prognostic accuracy of cerebral blood flow measurement
by perfusion computed tomography, at the time of emergency
room admission, in acute stroke patients. Ann
Neurol 51: 417–432.
Wintermark M, Fischbein NJ, Smith WS et al. (2005).
Accuracy of dynamic perfusion CT with deconvolution
314 S. BAL ET AL.
( 8.0.0.2542.135749348 PDF Extractor SDK EVAL VERSION)
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1010
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1015
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1020
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1025
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1030
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1035
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1040
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1045
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1050
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1055
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1060
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1065
[Link]
http://refhub.elsevier.com/B978-0-444-53480-4.00021-7/rf1065
in detecting acute hemispheric stroke. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 26: 104–112.
Wintermark M, Flanders AE, Velthuis B et al. (2006).
Perfusion-CT assessment of infarct core and penumbra:
receiver operating characteristic curve analysis in 130
patients suspected of acute hemispheric stroke. Stroke 37:
979–985.
Wintermark M, Meuli R, Browaeys P et al. (2007).
Comparison of CT perfusion and angiography and MRI
in selecting stroke patients for acute treatment.
Neurology 68: 694–697.
WintermarkM,AlbersGW,AlexandrovAVetal.(2008).Acute
stroke imaging research roadmap. Stroke39: 1621–1628.
Wootton-Gorges SL, Buonocore MH, Kuppermann N et al.
(2007). Cerebral proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy
in children with diabetic ketoacidosis. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 28: 895–899.
Wozniak JR, Lim KO (2006). Advances in white matter imaging
: a review of in vivo magnetic resonance methodologies
and their applicability to the study of development and
aging. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 30: 762–774.
Wu J, Perantie DC, Sadler M (2007). Pilot diffusion tensor
imaging study in youth with type 1 diabetes mellitus
reveals changes in white matter integrity associated with
chronic hyperglycaemia. Diabetes 56 (Suppl): A477.
Ylikoski R, Ylikoski A, Erkinjuntti T et al. (1993). White matter
changes in healthy elderly persons correlate with attention
and speed of mental processing. Arch Neurol 50:
818–824.
Yoo AJ, Hu R, Hakimelahi R et al. (2012). CT angiography
source images acquired with a fast-acquisition protocol
overestimate infarct core on diffusion weighted images
in acute ischemic stroke. J Neuroimaging 22: 329–335.
You R, McNeil JJ, O’Malley HM et al. (1995). Risk factors for
lacunar infarction syndromes. Neurology 45: 1483–1487.
Yuh WT, Crain MR, Loes DJ et al. (1991). MR imaging of
cerebral ischemia: findings in the first 24 hours. AJNR
Am J Neuroradiol 12: 621–629.
Zijdenbos AP, Forghani R, Evans AC (2002). Automatic pipeline
analysis of 3-D MRI data for clinical trials: application
to multiple sclerosis. IEEE Trans Med Imaging 21:
1280–1291.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING IN DIABETIC CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES 315
(EVALUATION PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1931861104)
