Life Sciences 138 (2015) 72–77

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Life Sciences
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/lifescie

A selective cannabinoid CB2 agonist attenuates damage and improves
memory retention following stroke in mice
Richard D. Ronca a, Alyssa M. Myers c, Doina Ganea b, Ronald F. Tuma a, Ellen A. Walker c, Sara Jane Ward a,⁎
a
b
c

Center for Substance Abuse Research, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Temple University School of Pharmacy, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 10 December 2014
Received in revised form 30 March 2015
Accepted 17 May 2015
Available online 30 May 2015
Keywords:
Cannabinoid CB2
Stroke
Permanent ischemia
Photoinjury
Learning and memory

a b s t r a c t
Aims: We have recently demonstrated that treatment with a cannabinoid CB2 agonist was protective in a mouse
middle cerebral artery occlusion model of cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury. The present study aimed to determine whether these protective effects of CB2 agonism would extend to a mouse photoinjury model of permanent ischemia and determine associated alterations in cognition and infarct size.
Main methods: Mice received three injections of the CB2 selective agonist O-1966 or vehicle 1 h prior to and 2 and
5 days following induction of stroke. Infarct size was assessed at 1, 3, or 7 days post-injury and learning and memory effects of injury and O-1966 treatment were assessed on days 6 and 7 using a novel object recognition task
and an operant acquisition and retention procedure.
Key ﬁndings: O-1966 treated mice had signiﬁcantly smaller infarct volumes compared with vehicle treated mice.
Photoinjury was also associated with a signiﬁcant memory impairment on day 7 post-injury, and this deﬁcit was
reversed with O-1966 treatment. Surprisingly, sham-operated mice receiving O-1966 treatment showed a significant learning deﬁcit in both the recognition and operant tasks compared with vehicle treated sham mice.
Signiﬁcance: We conclude that CB2 activation is protective against cognitive deﬁcits and tissue damage following
permanent ischemia, but may dysregulate glial or neuronal function of learning and memory circuits in the absence of injury and/or inﬂammation.
© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Although stroke is the leading cause of morbidity and the third leading cause of death in the United States, therapeutic options other than
preventive measures, such as anticoagulants, remain extremely limited
[7]. In addition, approximately 30–50% of stroke survivors demonstrate
cognitive impairments [16]. Therefore there is a pressing need to develop effective treatment strategies not only to reduce morbidity, but also
improve quality of life functions such as cognition following stroke.
Ischemic stroke models can be either transient or permanent. In the
case of transient ischemia, blood ﬂow to the ischemic area is reinstated
after a ﬁxed period of time. Numerous studies have demonstrated that
the damage that occurs following transient ischemia is the result of
both the ischemia and reperfusion injury, which exacerbates the amount
of damage. Previous results from our laboratory and from others have
demonstrated that activation of the CB2 receptor provides protection
from the secondary injury associated with inﬂammation. For example,
we have previously demonstrated that administration of a selective cannabinoid CB2 agonist can attenuate injury in a mouse model of transient
⁎ Corresponding author at: Medical and Educational Research Building #850, 3500
North Broad Street, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
E-mail address: saraward@temple.edu (S.J. Ward).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2015.05.005
0024-3205/© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) [17–20]. The protective effect
of the selective CB2 agonist was found to be associated with a reduction
in inﬂammatory responses following injury, including a reduction in the
production of proinﬂammatory markers and a decrease in invasion by
circulating inﬂammatory cells. The progression of injury is somewhat
different in permanent models of ischemia, where the inﬂammation associated with reperfusion injury does not play a prominent role. We
were therefore interested in determining whether modiﬁcation of the
endocannabinoid system via activation of the CB2 receptor would inﬂuence infarct size following permanent occlusion using the photoinjury
model.
Cognitive impairment following stroke in humans is most often observed as deﬁcits in executive function, attention, processing speed,
and spatial memory. Cognitive deﬁcits have also been reported in rodent
models of transient ischemia, such as MCAO. Deﬁcits most widely reported include those of spatial learning (radial arm maze task; [11])
and acquisition and retention (step-down passive avoidance; [5], Hattori
et al. [21]). A challenge of this model, however, is that rodents that have
undergone MCAO exhibit severe sensorimotor deﬁcits which confound
the evaluation of cognitive function [3]. A recent study by Diederich
et al. [6] investigated the effect of the photoinjury model of permanent
occlusion on sensorimotor and cognitive performance, and reported selective deﬁcits in retention, but not acquisition, of a spatial learning task

R.D. Ronca et al. / Life Sciences 138 (2015) 72–77

(Morris water maze). This deﬁcit was seen in the absence of motor impairment in the spatial learning task.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate whether CB2
agonist treatment would be protective in a photoinjury model of a
permanent ischemia, with a focus on characterizing cognitive function.
In the present study, two cognitive learning and memory assays were
employed. The novel object recognition task is a model of visual attention
and short or long term memory (depending on the design) that does not
require training and is not depended on reward or punishment. The test
involves both cortical processing and hippocampal processing. The operant learning and memory task is a model of acquisition and retention of
conditioned reinforcement and involves activation of corticolimbic circuits. Based on our previous work coupled with the ﬁndings of Diederich
et al. [6], we hypothesized that photoinjury would produce cognitive deficits in the novel object recognition and operant learning and memory
tasks in conjunction with a focal infarct without reperfusion. We also hypothesized that treatment with the selective CB2 agonist O-1966 would
reduce infarct size while attenuating cognitive impairment in these
assays.
2. Methods
All experiments were conducted in accordance with the guidelines
approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Temple University. Male C57B/6 mice (9–12 week old males) were anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection of a Ketamine (100 mg/ml)–
Xylazine (20 mg/kg) mixture (1:1) in a volume of 1 ml/kg. Body temperature was maintained at 37 ± 5 °C by using a heating lamp and
pad. The scalp was excised over the skull and the periosteum removed.
A marker was used to identify the sensorimotor cortex 2 mm posterior
and 2 mm lateral to bregma. Rose Bengal (0.1 ml of 10 mg/ml) dissolved
in saline was administered i.p. and 5 min later a cold light source was
placed on the skull at the sensorimotor cortex marker and was left in
place for 20 min [8,15]. A subset of mice was subjected to sham stroke
in which they underwent each step of the described procedure but
with the light source turned off. The CB2 agonist O-1966 (Organix Inc.,
Woburn, MA) was dissolved in a 1:1:18 ethanol:cremophor:saline
solution. Animals were treated with the CB2 agonist O-1966 (5 mg/kg
i.p.) or vehicle 1 h prior to ischemia and again 2 and 5 days post-ischemia. This dosing regimen was based on previous work with the MCAO
model [17] and our pilot studies with the photoinjury model showing
that this combined prophylactic/protective approach was the optimal
dosing regimen to signiﬁcantly decrease infarct size following ischemia.
A total of 62 mice were exposed to sham or photoinjury to determine whether these protective effects of CB2 agonism would extend
to a mouse photoinjury model of permanent ischemia by determining
alterations in cognition and infarct volume. Infarct size: Thirty six
mice (n = 6/group) were treated with the O-1966 or vehicle regimen
and euthanized on day 1, 3 or 7 following photoinjury for assessment
of infarct volume. Mice were perfused with PBS and the brains were
removed and placed in PBS on ice for 20 min. The brain was sliced
into 2 mm coronal sections using a mouse brain matrix (Zivic lab).
The brain slices were then stained with 2% Triphenyltetrazolium Chloride (TTC) (Sigma, Inc.), a redox indicator and marker of cellular respiration, dissolved in saline for 20 min at 37 °C in the dark. Slices were
then imaged for quantiﬁcation using the Image J software as described
in [20]. Cognitive testing: An additional twenty six mice underwent
sham (n = 13) or photoinjury (n = 13), and mice in each group received either the CB2 agonist dosing regimen or cremophor vehicle injections in a randomized design for ﬁnal n's of 6 for Vehicle/Sham, 7
for Vehicle/Stroke, 7 for O-1966/Sham, and 6 for O-1966/Stroke. On
day 5 following induction of photoinjury, mice were singly housed
and food restricted to increase their motivation for a palatable food reward. Novel object testing was performed in the morning on day 6
following induction of photoinjury. Acquisition and retention of a
food-motivated operant task were tested in the afternoon on days 6

73

(acquisition) and 7 (retention). Mice were euthanized immediately following behavioral testing on day 7. Fig. 1 shows a schematic of the experimental design.
Cognitive performance was assessed using a novel object recognition test and a food-motivated operant procedure. All behavioral testing
was done by an experimenter blinded to the treatment of the individual
animals. The novel object recognition task was executed as described
previously by our laboratory [4]. On the morning of day 6, mice were individually placed into the testing cage for a 20-min acclimation period
and then returned to their home cage for 30 min. Each mouse was
then placed in the same testing cage for trial 1 in the presence of two
novel objects. The amount of time spent exploring each object is recorded over a 5-min period. At the end of trial 1, mice were placed back into
the home cage for the duration of the 1-h delay period. Following the 1h delay, each mouse was returned to the same testing cage for trial 2,
which contained one of the previous objects (a familiar object) and a
novel object, placed in the same locations. The amount of time spent exploring each object was recorded over a 5-min period. A preference
score for each mouse is calculated by dividing the total amount of
time the animal spends exploring both objects in trial 2 by the amount
of time the animal spends exploring the novel object, expressed as a
percentage. Total exploration time is also used to impose an inclusion
criterion of 10 s for an animal to be included in the analysis of preference
for the novel object.
The operant procedure used was modiﬁed by our laboratory from
the method previously described for mice by [12] by removing the
non-contingent dipper presentation [14]. On day 6 following the novel
object recognition task, mice were placed in standard mouse operant
testing chambers (MedAssociates, VT) to test for performance in a
food motivated operant task. The vanilla-ﬂavored liquid nutritional
drink Ensure is available under a variable-time schedule signaled by
the presence of 6 s tone. A nose-poke in the center dipper receptacle
is only reinforced in the presence of the tone. Learning of the task is
measured by the acquisition latency, or the amount of time it takes
the mouse to learn the contingency to earn 10 reinforcers. The session
lasts for 2 h or until 20 reinforced nose-pokes are recorded. Two other
variables are measured: non-reinforced head entries into the center
dipper hole, and non-reinforced responses into two additional nosepoke holes located to the left and right of the center hole. Analysis of
these variables allows for determination of overall exploratory behavior
within the testing chamber and helps to rule out potential locomotor
deﬁcits, sedative effects, or amotivational state of animals as a source
of poor performance in the test. During the following afternoon of day
7, recall of the task is measured by the retention latency, which is calculated identically to the acquisition latency. The session again lasts for 2 h
and non-reinforced responses are also recorded in order to assess recall
of the learned task as well as overall exploratory behavior.
All data were analyzed using two-way Analyses of Variance
(ANOVAs) using the GraphPad Prism 6 software. Post-tests were
performed using multiple comparisons tests.
3. Results
3.1. Infarct size
Treatment with O-1966 led to a signiﬁcant decrease in infarct volume. Two-way ANOVA revealed signiﬁcant main effects of treatment
[F(1, 30) = 31.5, p b 0.05] and time [F(2, 30) = 28.6, p b 0.05]. Tukey's multiple comparison revealed signiﬁcant differences between vehicle and
O-1966 treated mice at the 1 day and 7 day post-stroke time points
(p b 0.05; Fig. 2A). Fig. 2B shows the location of the infarct in the coronal
section and its attenuation following O-1966 treatment in two representative mice. The center of the lesion is located in parietal cortex area 1
(primary somatosensory cortex) at approximately −2.0 mm from bregma, and the extent of the infarct can be observed in the coronal slices
from approximately 0.20 mm rostral to bregma to approximately

74

R.D. Ronca et al. / Life Sciences 138 (2015) 72–77

Fig. 1. Experimental design. Arrows above the timeline show the treatment regimen for both the infarct size and cognition studies. Mice are treated with 5.0 mg/kg O-1966 or vehicle i.p.
1 h, 2 days, and 5 days post-photoinjury or sham surgery. Separate groups of mice in the infarct study were sacriﬁced at three time points for TTC staining and quantiﬁcation of infarct size.
Mice in the cognitive study were tested on day 6 post-infarct in the novel object recognition task and on days 6 and 7 in the operant learning and memory task.

−2.80 mm caudal to bregma. The infarct spreads to the border of the
corpus callosum, but is not observed in deeper tissue such as the CA13 ﬁelds of the hippocampus or striatum as measured with the TTC
staining.

O-1966/Sham mice; 5/6 O-1966/Stroke mice). Two-way ANOVA also revealed no signiﬁcant effects of stroke or drug treatment on total exploration time (Fig. 3B).
3.3. Food motivated operant task

3.2. Novel object recognition
Sham animals treated with vehicle showed an average preference
for exploring the novel object of 69.8% during trial 2 (test trial, day 6
post-stroke) (Fig. 3A). Interestingly, sham mice treated with O-1966
failed to show a preference and explored the familiar and novel object
for nearly equal amounts of time (average: 47.1%). Following stroke,
mice treated with vehicle also did not show a preference for the novel
object (average: 55.5%), while exploration time of the novel object in
stroked mice treated with O-1966 was very similar to control levels (average: 72.4%). Two-way ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant interaction between stroke treatment and drug treatment [F(1, 15) = 23.3, p b 0.05],
demonstrating that exploration of the novel object was increased in
stroked mice treated with O-1966 while novel object exploration was
decreased in sham mice treated with O-1966. Multiple comparisons
posttests revealed a signiﬁcant difference between O-1966/Sham mice
vs Vehicle/Sham mice and O-1966/Sham mice vs O-1966 mice/Stroke
mice. There was no main effect of stroke treatment [F(1, 15) b 1.0, n.s.]
or main effect of drug treatment [F(1, 15) = 1.63, n.s.]. Only mice that explored the objects for greater than 10 s during trial 2 were included in
these analyses (4/6 Vehicle/Sham mice; 6/7 Vehicle/Stroke mice; 4/7

Vehicle-treated sham animals took on average approximately 1000 s
to acquire the operant task as measured by latency to earn 10 food reinforcers. Stroked animals treated with vehicle took nearly twice as long
to acquire the task (approx. 1900 s), and this deﬁcit was attenuated in
stroked mice treated with O-1966 (approx. 1300 s). Sham animals treated with O-1966 took three times as long to acquire the operant task as
the sham controls (approx. 2900 s). Two-way ANOVA showed a significant interaction between stroke treatment and drug treatment [F(1,
22) = 6.82, p b 0.05], again demonstrating that acquisition learning
was impaired in sham mice treated with O-1966 but improved in
stroked mice treated with O-1966 (Fig. 4A). There was no main effect
of stroke treatment [F(1, 22) = 0.76, n.s.] or main effect of drug treatment
[F(1, 22) = 1.76, n.s.]. Total head entries into the dipper hole are depicted
in Fig. 4B. There was a signiﬁcant main effect of increased nonreinforced head entries in stroked mice versus shams [F(1, 22) = 5.20,
p b 0.05]. Head entries into two inactive nose poke holes located on
either side of the center dipper hole are depicted in Fig. 4C. There was
also a signiﬁcant main effect of increased non-reinforced responding
in these side holes in stroked mice versus shams [F(1, 22) = 5.12,
p b 0.05], revealing that while stroked animals showed no motor or

Fig. 2. Effect of O-1966 treatment on infarct size in mice. A) O-1966 administration signiﬁcantly decreased infarct volume. Mice sacriﬁced at 24 h received one dose of O-1966 1 h prior to
photoinjury. Those sacriﬁced on day 3 received an additional dose on day 2 and those sacriﬁced at day 7 received another dose on day 5. Two-way ANOVA revealed signiﬁcant effect of
treatment and time, and multiple comparisons showed signiﬁcance at the 1 day and 7 day post-injury time points. B). In representative vehicle- and O-1966 treated subjects sacriﬁced on
day 1 or day 7 post-stroke, the extent of the infarct at approx. −2.80 mm caudal to bregma is shown. In the vehicle-treated mice, the infarct spreads to the border of the corpus callosum
but is not observed in deeper tissue such as the CA1-3 ﬁelds of the hippocampus or striatum. The infarcts of representative O-1966 treated subjects are smaller by comparison. When TTC is
taken up by living cells its metabolite turns the cell red. As a result, viable tissue is stained red while dead tissue is left unstained.

R.D. Ronca et al. / Life Sciences 138 (2015) 72–77

75

Fig. 3. Effect of stroke and/or the CB2 agonist O-1966 on novel object recognition in mice. O-1966 or vehicle was administered 1 h prior to stroke or sham surgery, and again 2 and 5 days
post-stroke. A) The # symbol indicates a signiﬁcant interaction between stroke treatment and drug treatment, p b 0.05. The * symbol indicates that multiple comparisons posttest revealed
a signiﬁcant difference between O-1966/Sham mice vs Vehicle/Sham mice and O-1966/Sham mice vs O-1966 mice/Stroke mice. B) There was no effect of stroke treatment or drug treatment on the total exploration time on the test day. Mice were excluded from the data analysis if they spent less than 10 s exploring both objects.

Fig. 4. Effect of stroke and/or CB2 agonist O-1966 on acquisition and retention of a food-motivated operant task. The # symbol indicates signiﬁcant main effects of stroke or of O-1966
treatment or signiﬁcant interactions between the two using two-way ANOVA. The * symbol indicates that a multiple comparisons posttest revealed signiﬁcance between individual
groups. A, D) There was a signiﬁcant interaction between stroke and O-1966 treatment on acquisition and retention of the task (#p b 0.05). There was also a signiﬁcant main effect of stroke
on retention, p b 0.05. Multiple comparisons posttest revealed that the Vehicle/Stroke group was the only group statistically different from Vehicle/Sham. B, E) There was a signiﬁcant effect
of stroke on head entries into the dipper receptacle on day 6 (B) but not on day 7 (E). C, F) Stroke treatment caused a signiﬁcant increase in responding in the non-reinforced nose poke
holes on day 6 (C) but not on day 7 (F).

76

R.D. Ronca et al. / Life Sciences 138 (2015) 72–77

motivational impairment in their ability to respond in the operant
chambers, their accuracy in responses directed toward the reinforced
manipulandum during the reinforced time period is impaired.
On day 7, sham animals treated with vehicle earned 10 reinforcers in
approximately half the time as it took them on day 6, showing retention
of the food-motivated operant task, and this time the performance was
not altered in the sham mice treated with O-1966 (Fig. 4D). Stroked animals treated with vehicle retained the task, but their day 7 latency was
double that of the sham controls. Stroke mice treated with O-1966 improved performance from day 6 to day 7 and took approximately the
same amount of time to earn 10 reinforcers on day 7 as the sham controls.
Two-way ANOVA showed a signiﬁcant main effect of stroke [F(1, 21) =
17.13, p b 0.05] and signiﬁcant interaction between stroke treatment
and drug treatment [F(1, 21) = 12.81, p b 0.05], demonstrating that stroke
impaired retention of the operant task and that this impairment was attenuated by O-1966 treatment. Multiple comparisons posttests revealed
that Vehicle/Stroke treated mice performed signiﬁcantly poorer on the
retention task compared with Vehicle/Sham controls, while no other
group was statistically different. On day 7 there were no signiﬁcant effects
of stroke or drug treatment on food seeking or non-reinforced behaviors
in the nose poke holes (Fig. 4E, F).
4. Discussion
Despite the high incidence of cognitive impairment in stroke survivors, there is no speciﬁc treatment for this complication. Evaluation of
post-stroke cognitive deﬁcits in animal models and associated preclinical evaluation of candidate drugs have been limited, but in general impairments are seen in executive function, working memory, spatial
memory, and information processing speed. The present set of experiments used the photoinjury model of permanent ischemia to test the efﬁcacy of CB2 agonist treatment in attenuating tissue damage following
stroke as well as associated cognitive deﬁcits. Treatment with the CB2
selective agonist O-1966 resulted in a reduction in infarct size at each
time point observed, supporting our previous ﬁndings with the MCAO
model and demonstrating that activation of the CB2 receptor is protective from tissue damage even in the absence of reperfusion injury. The
present results also demonstrated that the photoinjury model was associated with impaired retention of a food-motivated operant learning
task, and that O-1966 was protective against deﬁcits in retention. In addition, intriguing effects of CB2 receptor agonism on decreasing novel
object recognition and acquisition learning in non-stroked animals
were observed.
We did not observe a signiﬁcant effect of photoinjury on novel object
recognition. Others have reported deﬁcits in this task following other
stroke models but we are unaware of any reports on this task following
photoinjury. Our novel object recognition study may also have been underpowered due to the fact that some animals in each treatment group
had to be excluded because they did not reach the exploration criterion
on the test session. A signiﬁcant interaction was observed however,
meaning that performance in stroked animals was increased following
O-1966 treatment while performance decreased in sham animals treated with O-1966.
The mouse photoinjury model of permanent ischemia was associated with deﬁcits in retention of a food-motivated operant task and in accuracy in responding in this paradigm. We observed a trend toward
impaired acquisition of the task but the effect was not statistically significant. Similarly, a recent report by Diederich et al. [6] demonstrated that
photoinjury was selectively deleterious to recall, and not acquisition
learning, in the Morris water maze in rats. Importantly, as was also reported in the Diederich study, our observed deﬁcits were not associated
with an overall motor impairment. We observed that exploratory behavior and motivation to perform in the operant chamber were not impacted by photoinjury, in that stroked mice explored the center dipper
receptacle and non-reinforced adjacent nose poke holes as frequently
as sham controls during both the acquisition and retention sessions. In

fact, during the acquisition session there was a signiﬁcant main effect
of stroke on increasing head entries into all holes, suggesting that
while the stroked mice responded as much as sham controls, they
were not associating reinforcer delivery to the correct response criterion (center receptacle entries in the presence of the tone), an effect selective to learning deﬁcits and not motor or motivational impairment.
Furthermore, we observed that treatment with O-1966 beginning
1 h prior to stroke induction and again on days 2 and 5 following stroke
signiﬁcantly reversed the retention deﬁcit in the operant responding
task. The operant responding task is an example of instrumental/reinforcement learning and involves frontal cortical and many subcortical
brain regions, including the hippocampus, ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, and amygdala (Cardinal et al. [22]; [4]). These brain regions were not primary sites of damage induced by the stroke, as seen by
their ability to take up the TTC staining. However, the fact that the
stroked animals still showed signiﬁcant impairment of retention of the
operant task suggests that secondary damage caused by inﬂammatory
sequelae impacts the integrity of the circuits involved in this cognitive
task. Future exploration of the extent of inﬂammation stemming from
the primary infarct into neighboring regions relevant to learning and
memory, as well as the impact of infarct on neurobiological processes
such as long term potentiation is warranted.
These results supported our hypothesis that a permanent ischemic
insult to the mouse brain would lead to measurable deﬁcits in cognitive
performance. Furthermore, the selective CB2 agonist O-1966 with already demonstrated anti-inﬂammatory and neuroprotective properties
was capable of attenuating the insult and consequent memory impairment. What was unexpected was the effect of O-1966 administration
on learning and memory performance in the sham-operated mice. In
the novel object recognition task and to an even greater extent in the acquisition of the food motivated task, O-1966 treatment signiﬁcantly impaired performance in sham mice. However, the same treatment
regimen reversed cognitive deﬁcits observed in the stroked animals, especially evident during retention of the food motivated task. These ﬁndings bring up two areas of current interest: 1) what is the localization
and function (if any) of neuronal CB2 receptors (for review on this
topic see [2]) and 2) what is the function of glia (which do express
CB2 receptors) in learning and memory processes (for review see [9]).
The present data suggest that if neurons do express the CB2 receptor
within brain regions involved in learning and memory, that activation
of such receptors may be detrimental to normal neuronal function during these processes. Alternately, it may be that glial CB2 receptor activation suppresses normal functioning of microglia and/or astrocytes,
which are increasingly being recognized for playing important roles in
synaptic events critical to learning and memory, such as synaptic remodeling and neurogenesis (for review see [10,13]).
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, although we and others have previously demonstrated that administration of a selective CB2 agonist decreases infarct size
following ischemia/reperfusion injury, the results of the current investigation demonstrate that administration of a selective CB2 agonist is also
protective not only from tissue damage but from cognitive impairment
as well as a consequence of permanent ischemia. The results of this
study suggest that while activation of CB2 receptors is protective against
CNS injury and associated behavioral deﬁcits, CB2 receptor activation in
the uninjured brain also appears to inﬂuence neuronal and/or glial activity that may negatively impact normal function such as cognition.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIDA T32DA007237 and NIDA
P30DA013429.
The authors declare that there are no conﬂicts of interest.

R.D. Ronca et al. / Life Sciences 138 (2015) 72–77

References
[2] B.K. Atwood, K. Mackie, CB2: a cannabinoid receptor with an identity crisis, Br. J.
Pharmacol. 160 (3) (2010) 467–479.
[3] D. Bingham, S.J. Martin, I.M. Macrae, et al., Watermaze performance after middle cerebral artery occlusion in the rat: the role of sensory motor versus memory impairments, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 32 (2012) 989–999.
[4] E.B. Bisen-Hersh, P.N. Hineline, et al., Effects of early chemotherapeutic treatment on
learning in adolescent mice: implications for cognitive impairment and remediation
in childhood cancer survivors, Clin. Cancer Res. 19 (11) (2013) 3008–3018.
[5] V. Bouet, T. Freret, J. Toutain, et al., Sensorimotor and cognitive deﬁcits after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion in the mouse, Exp. Neurol. 203 (2007)
555–567.
[6] K. Diederich, A. Schmidt, et al., Cortical photothrombotic infarcts impair the recall of
previously acquired memories but spare the formation of new ones, Stroke 45 (2)
(2014) 614–618 2014 Feb.
[7] S.E. Lakhan, A. Kirchgessner, et al., Inﬂammatory mechanisms in ischemic stroke:
therapeutic approaches, J. Transl. Med. 7 (97) (2009).
[8] J.K. Lee, M.S. Park, et al., Photochemically induced cerebral ischemia in a mouse
model, Surg. Neurol. 67 (6) (2007) 620–625 discussion 625.
[9] I. Marin, J. Kipnis, Learning and memory ... and the immune system, Learn. Mem. 20
(10) (2013) 601–606.
[10] R.C. Paolicelli, K. Bisht, et al., Fractalkine regulation of microglial physiology and consequences on the brain and behavior, Front. Cell. Neurosci. 8 (129) (2014).
[11] N. Sakai, K. Yanai, J.H. Ryu, et al., Behavioral studies on rats with transient cerebral
ischemia induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery, Behav. Brain Res. 77
(1996) 181–188.
[12] K.E. Vanover, J.E. Barrett, An automated learning and memory model in mice:
pharmacological and behavioral evaluation of an autoshaped response, Behav.
Pharmacol. 9 (3) (1998) 273–283.

77

[13] H. Wake, A.J. Moorhouse, et al., Microglia: actively surveying and shaping neuronal
circuit structure and function, Trends Neurosci. 36 (4) (2013) 209–217.
[14] E.A. Walker, J.J. Foley, et al., Effects of repeated administration of chemotherapeutic
agents tamoxifen, methotrexate, and 5-ﬂuorouracil on the acquisition and retention
of a learned response in mice, Psychopharmacology 217 (4) (2011) 539–548.
[15] B.D. Watson, W.D. Dietrich, et al., Induction of reproducible brain infarction by photochemically initiated thrombosis, Ann. Neurol. 17 (5) (1985) 497–504.
[16] E. Whyte, E. Skidmore, H. Aizenstein, J. Ricker, M. Butters, Cognitive impairment in
acquired brain injury: a predictor of rehabilitation outcomes and an opportunity
for novel interventions, PM R Jun;3 (6 Suppl 1) (2011) S45–S51.
[17] M. Zhang, M.W. Adler, et al., CB2 receptor activation attenuates microcirculatory
dysfunction during cerebral ischemic/reperfusion injury, Microvasc. Res. (2009).
[18] M. Zhang, A. Mahadevan, et al., Unique effects of compounds active at both cannabinoid and serotonin receptors during stroke, Transl. Stroke. Res. 3 (3) (2012)
348–356.
[19] M. Zhang, B.R. Martin, et al., Modulation of the balance between cannabinoid CB1
and CB2 receptor activation during cerebral ischemic/reperfusion injury, Neuroscience 152 (3) (2008) 753–760.
[20] M. Zhang, B.R. Martin, et al., Cannabinoid CB2 receptor activation decreases cerebral
infarction in a mouse focal ischemia/reperfusion model, J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab.
(2007).
[21] K. Hattori, H. Lee, P.D. Hurn, B.J. Crain, R.J. Traystman, A.C. DeVries, Cognitive deﬁcits
after focal cerebral ischemia in mice, Stroke 31 (8) (2000) 1939–1944.
[22] R.N. Cardinal, J.A. Parkinson, G. Lachenal, K.M. Halkerston, N. Rudarakanchana, J.
Hall, C.H. Morrison, S.R. Howes, T.W. Robbins, B.J. Everitt, Effects of selective
excitotoxic lesions of the nucleus accumbens core, anterior cingulate cortex, and
central nucleus of the amygdala on autoshaping performance in rats, Behav.
Neurosci. 116 (4) (2002) 553–567.

