Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014) 34, 1613–1621
& 2014 ISCBFM All rights reserved 0271-678X/14 $32.00
www.jcbfm.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Neuronal NAMPT is released after cerebral ischemia and protects
against white matter injury
Zheng Jing1,2,5, Juan Xing1,2,5, Xinzhi Chen1,2, Ruth A Stetler2, Zhongfang Weng2, Yu Gan2, Feng Zhang2, Yanqin Gao3, Jun Chen1,2,
Rehana K Leak4 and Guodong Cao1,2
Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) has been implicated in neuroprotection against ischemic brain injury, but the
mechanism underlying its protective effect remains largely unknown. To further examine the protective effect of NAMPT against
ischemic stroke and its potential mechanism of action, we generated a novel neuron-speciﬁc NAMPT transgenic mouse line.
Transgenic mice and wild-type littermates were subjected to transient occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCAO) for
60 minutes. Neuron-speciﬁc NAMPT overexpression signiﬁcantly reduced infarct volume by 65% (P ¼ 0.018) and improved
long-term neurologic outcomes (Pr0.05) compared with littermates. Interestingly, neuronal overexpression of NAMPT increased
the area of myelinated ﬁbers in the striatum and corpus callosum, indicating that NAMPT protects against white matter injury. The
mechanism of protection appeared to be through extracellular release of NAMPT. First, NAMPT was secreted into the extracellular
medium by primary cortical neurons exposed to ischemia-like oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD) in vitro. Second, conditioned
medium from NAMPT-overexpressing neurons exposed to OGD protected cultured oligodendrocytes from OGD. Third, the
protective effects of conditioned medium were abolished by antibody-mediated NAMPT depletion, strongly suggesting that the
protective effect is mediated by the extracellular NAMPT released into in the medium. These data suggest a novel neuroprotective
role for secreted NAMPT in the protection of white matter after ischemic injury.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014) 34, 1613–1621; doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.119; published online 9 July 2014
Keywords: NAMPT; NAMPT secretion; neuroprotection; oligodendrocytes; transient MCAO; white matter injury

INTRODUCTION
Cerebral ischemic injury leads to complex tissue pathology
involving both gray matter and white matter (WM). White matter
in the telencephalon encompasses the corpus callosum, internal
capsule, anterior commissure, and ﬁber bundles in the striatum,
and is mainly involved in sensorimotor signal transduction to and
from the cerebral cortex (CTX). Blood ﬂow within WM is relatively
less than in gray matter and there is little collateral circulation,
especially in deep WM. Oligodendrocytes (OLs) and OL precursor
cells play an essential role in myelin formation in WM and are
highly sensitive to ischemia.1 Furthermore, WM becomes even
more susceptible to ischemia with age.2 Therefore, WM is highly
vulnerable to ischemia and often more severely injured than gray
matter.3 Indeed, WM is affected in most cases of human stroke,
accounting for half of the lesion volume.4 Histologic changes of
WM injury (WMI) range from demyelination, death of OLs, and
axonal damage and loss, to mild reactive gliosis. Owing to the
critical role of WM in neurotransmission, WMI may lead to sensorimotor disruption, neurobehavioral syndromes, and cognitive
impairments.5–7 Despite the essential roles for WM in neural
function and its susceptibility to ischemia, WMI has largely
been overlooked in animal studies as well as in clinical
treatments.8 Thus, complete neuroprotection cannot be truly

attained without WM protection, and complete analyses of WMI
in models of cerebral ischemia and potential WM protectants
are essential.
Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) converts
nicotinamide to nicotinamide mononucleotide, the rate-limiting
step in the salvage pathway of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD) biosynthesis.9,10 Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide is a
major source of ATP production and also acts as the substrate
for several important molecules, such as the DNA repair enzyme
poly-[ADP-ribose]-polymerase 1 (PARP-1) and the transcription
regulatory protein sirtuin 1. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase therefore plays a key role in the regulation of energy
metabolism and stress responses. Previous studies indicated that
lentivirus-mediated NAMPT overexpression is neuroprotective
against ischemic brain injury,11 while genetic deletion of NAMPT
exacerbates ischemic brain injury.12 Speciﬁcally, Wang and colleagues reported that NAMPT upregulation is part of a natural stress
response to ischemic injury and that it protects gray matter
through sirtuin 1-dependent modulation of the adenosine
monophosphate-activated kinase pathway. These ﬁndings show
that NAMPT is an endogenous neuroprotective molecule. However, beyond these observations, little is understood about the
functions of the NAMPT molecule when overexpressed in the

1
Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; 2Department of Neurology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; 3State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China and 4Division of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. Correspondence: Dr G Cao, Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, BST S505,
University of Pittsburgh, 3500 Terrace Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.
E-mail: caog@upmc.edu
This project was supported by National Institutes of Health/NINDS grants NS079345, (to GC), VA Merit Review grants RX000199 and BX002346 (to GC), and Chinese Natural
Science Foundation grants 81371306 (to Yanqin Gao).
5
These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 7 March 2014; accepted 6 June 2014; published online 9 July 2014

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1614
central nervous system (CNS) and the mechanisms underlying its
protective effects, particularly in the context of ischemic injury.
In mammals, NAMPT protein can be found in both the
intracellular (iNAMPT) and extracellular (eNAMPT) spaces. Whereas
the function of iNAMPT as a NAD biosynthetic enzyme has been
fully supported, the signiﬁcance and function of eNAMPT remains
unknown. Extracellular NAMPT does not exhibit classic secretory
signaling. Instead, it can be secreted into the extracellular space
or into the blood via a non-classical secretory mechanism13
by a number of cell types, such as adipocytes, hepatocytes,
macrophages, and leukocytes.14–16 Whether neuronal cells also
secrete eNAMPT and its potential function in the CNS remain
unknown. In the present study, we observed that transgenic mice
overexpressing NAMPT in a neuron-speciﬁc manner were highly
resistant to focal cerebral ischemic brain damage. Interestingly,
WMI was signiﬁcantly reduced in neuronal NAMPT transgenic
(Tg-NAMPT) mice compared with WT littermates. Furthermore, we
detected that ischemic neuronal cells secrete NAMPT into the
extracellular space and that the conditioned medium from
ischemic neurons overexpressing NAMPT is protective against
ischemic injury in primary cultured OLs. Finally, recombinant
NAMPT protein itself was also protective against ischemia-like
insults when added to the medium of primary cultured OLs. These
data support a novel role for eNAMPT in protection against
ischemic WMI.

Measurements of Infarct Volume
At 72 hours after MCAO, brains were removed and the forebrain was sliced
into 1 mm thick coronal sections. Sections were stained with 2% 2,3,5triphenyltetrazolium chloride. Infarct volume was determined using MCID
image analysis (Imaging Research, St. Catherine’s, Canada). The experimenter was masked to genotype during all measurements.

Neurologic Deﬁcits and Behavioral Tests
Three neurobehavioral tests were performed by an observer masked to the
experiments, as previously reported by us.18 First, neurologic deﬁcits were
scored on a 0 to 5 scale as follows: no neurologic deﬁcit (0); failure to
extend the right forepaw fully (1); circling to the right (2); falling to the
right (3); unable to walk spontaneously (4); or dead (5). Second, the corner
test was performed on days 0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, and 14 after ischemia. A mouse
was placed between two angled (301) boards, facing the corner. Rearing
and subsequent turning behavior to either side was recorded. The nonischemic mouse turns either left or right whereas the ischemic mouse turns
preferentially toward the left side. The numbers of left turns were counted
in 10 trials. For the third test, the rotarod, animals were placed on an
accelerating rotating rod (from 4 to 40 r.p.m. over 300 seconds) and their
latency to fall was recorded. Preoperative training was performed for three
trials a day for 3 days and the last trial served as preoperative baseline.
Postoperative testing was performed on day 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, and
14 postinjury. The data are expressed as the mean duration of time on
the rotarod per day as a percentage of the presurgery control value.

Generation of Lentiviral Vectors
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Generation of Brain-Speciﬁc NAMPT Transgenic Mice
Human NAMPT cDNA tagged with hemagglutinin (HA) was PCR-ampliﬁed
and inserted into pcDNA 3.1 vector (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA).
Cytomegalovirus promoter was substituted with a 4.1 kb Thy-1 promoter
(kindly provided by Dr Joshua Sanes, Harvard University). To enhance the
expression of NAMPT, the human b-globin intron was then inserted
between the Thy-1 promoter and NAMPT cDNA. The resulting construct
was linearized and microinjected into zygotes collected from C57BL/6
mice. Microinjected zygotes were implanted into pseudo-pregnant C57BL/
6 recipient mice. The microinjection and implantation procedures were
performed by the University of Pittsburgh Transgenic Core. After birth,
pups were genotyped and backbred with C57BL/6 mice. In all experiments,
WT littermates backbred from the same transgenic colonies were used as
controls. Only adult male mice (25 to 30 g) were used in the study.

Murine Model of Transient Focal Ischemia
All animal experiments were approved by the University of Pittsburgh
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and performed in
accordance with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals. Focal cerebral ischemia was produced by intraluminal occlusion
of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) with a nylon monoﬁlament
suture, as previously described.17 Brieﬂy, 8- to 10-week-old Tg-NAMPT
or WT male littermates were anesthetized with 1.5% isoﬂurane in a 30%
O2/70% N2O mixture under spontaneous breathing conditions. Rectal
temperature was controlled at 37.01C±0.51C with a temperature-regulated
heating pad during surgery and MCA occlusion (MCAO). Mean arterial
blood pressure was monitored during MCAO through a tail cuff,
and arterial blood gas was analyzed 15 minutes after the onset of
ischemia. The animals underwent MCAO for 60 minutes and then
reperfusion for 72 hours for infarct volume measurement or for 2 weeks
for behavioral tests. In all experiments, the experimenter was masked to
genotype.

Regional Cerebral Blood Flow Measurement
Changes in regional cerebral blood ﬂow at the surface of the left CTX were
recorded using laser Doppler ﬂowmetry (PeriFlux system 5000; Jarfalla,
Sweden) with a ﬂexible optical ﬁber probe. The tip of the probe was afﬁxed
with glue on the skull over the core area supplied by the MCA (1 mm
posterior and 5 mm lateral from bregma). Regional cerebral blood ﬂow was
measured 5 minutes before MCAO (baseline), 5 and 55 minutes during
MCAO, and 5 minutes after reperfusion and expressed as a percentage of
baseline values.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

Based on our experience, the phosphoglycerate kinase promoter mediates
better gene expression than the ubiquitin promoter in neurons. Therefore,
we modiﬁed the lentiviral shuttle vector FUEW (kindly provided by
Dr Carlos Lois from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) in which
green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) was driven by the ubiquitin promoter and
generated two lentiviral vectors: lenti-GFP and lenti-NAMPT. Lenti-GFP was
produced by substitution of the ubiquitin promoter in FUEW by the
phosphoglycerate kinase promoter. Lenti-NAMPT was produced by
substitution of GFP in lenti-GFP with NAMPT cDNA containing the HA
tag. Lentiviral vectors were generated by CaPO4 precipitation transfection
in 293 cells, concentrated by sucrose ultracentrifugation, and further
puriﬁed by ion exchange chromatography using Mustang Q Acrodisc Units
(PALL Corporation, Port Washington, NY, USA). The titer of the puriﬁed
lentiviral vector was 1.2  109/transfection units/ml.

Generation of NAMPT Protein
His6-tagged NAMPT cDNA was generated by PCR, inserted into pET-30a
(Novagen, Darmstadt, Germany), and transformed into BL21 Escherichia
coli. Recombinant protein was puriﬁed using superﬂow Ni-NTA agarose
column (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions and dialyzed in 300 NaCl containing 10 mmol/l Tris-HCl
(pH 8.0).

In Vitro Models of Ischemia-Like Insults
Primary cultures of cortical neurons were prepared from 17 day-old
Sprague Dawley rat embryos (Charles River Laboratories, Horsham, PA,
USA), as previously described.17 Experiments were conducted at 8 to 10
days in vitro, when cultures consisted primarily of neurons (97%). Cortical
neurons were pretreated at 8 days in vitro with 1  107 transduction units/
ml lenti-NAMPT or lenti-GFP virus for 72 hours, and then subjected to either
oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD) or N-methyl D-aspartate neurotoxicity.

Primary Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cells/Oligodendrocytes
Culture and In Vitro Models of Ischemia-Like Insults
Primary OL precursor cell cultures were prepared as previously described.19
Brieﬂy, cerebral cortices from postnatal day 1 to 3 Sprague Dawley rats
were dissected and minced. Dissociated cells from 2 to 3 rats were plated
in a tissue culture ﬂask coated with poly-L-lysine (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA).
Cell cultures were maintained in DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen) containing 10%
fetal bovine serum at 371C with 5% CO2. Cultures were maintained for 10
days, with a medium change every 3 days. On day 10, ﬂasks were sealed
and rotated at 200 r.p.m. at 371C for 1 hour to shake off microglia. Flasks
were then rotated again overnight. On the next morning, the medium
containing the detached OL precursor cells was collected and plated on
& 2014 ISCBFM

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1615
tissue culture dishes coated with Poly-DL-ornithine (Sigma) in basal
culture medium containing 10 ng/ml platelet-derived growth factor and
10 ng/ml basic ﬁbroblast growth factor for OL precursor cells. For
differentiation experiments, cells were kept in basal culture medium
containing 15 nmol/l triiodothyronine and 10 ng/ml ciliary neurotrophic
factor for 3 to 7 days.
For the OGD model, OLs were subjected to OGD for 180 minutes,
and returned to normal culture media and conditions. To induce alphaamino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazoleproprionic acid (AMPA) excitotoxicity, OLs were challenged with 50 mmol/L of AMPA for 5 minutes and
then returned to normal culture media and conditions. Puriﬁed
recombinant NAMPT was added (5 mg/ml) to primary oligodendrocytic
cultures before, during, and after insults. Twenty-four hours after insults,
cell death was quantiﬁed by Hoechst 33258 (Invitrogen) nuclear staining
and lactate dehydrogenase release.
In a parallel study, neurons were transduced with lenti-NAMPT or control
lenti-GFP virus and subjected to OGD treatment for 60 minutes.
Conditioned medium was collected 24 hours after OGD, coincubated with
OLs, and then subjected to OGD treatment for 180 minutes. Cells were
incubated for 24 hours with conditioned medium and cell death was
analyzed as above. To deplete NAMPT released into culture medium,
conditioned medium was incubated with NAMPT antibodies (10 mg/ml)
and agarose A/G beads, followed by centrifugation.

Immunoﬂuorescent Staining
After blocking with 5% bovine serum albumin in phosphate-buffered
saline for 1 hour, sections were incubated with primary antibodies at 41C
overnight followed by the appropriate secondary antibodies for 1 hour at
room temperature. The primary antibodies used in this study include:
mouse anti-HA (1:100, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), rabbit antiNAMPT (1:500, Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, USA), or mouse
anti-NAMPT (1:300, Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY, USA), mouse antiNeuN (1:500, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), rabbit anti-GFAP (1:500, Dako,
Carpinteria, CA, USA), rabbit anti-Iba1 (1:2000, Wako, Richmond, VA, USA),
mouse anti-APC (1:400, Millipore), rat anti-CD31 (1:200, Abcam, Cambridge,
MA, USA), and rabbit anti-myelin basic protein (MBP, 1:500, Abcam).

Luxol Fast Blue Stain
Brain sections were deparafﬁnized with xylene and dehydrated with
alcohols, and then immersed in a 0.1% alcoholic solution containing Luxol

fast blue (Sigma) at 561C for 2 hours, followed by washing with distilled
water. Sections were then incubated in 0.05% lithium carbonate,
dehydrated through graded alcohols, mounted with Permount (Sigma),
and examined by light microscopy. The quantitative analysis for
remyelination in Luxol fast blue stained section was performed as
described previously.20 The area of reduced Luxol fast blue staining was
measured and expressed as a percentage of the contralateral hemisphere.

Statistical Analysis
Results are reported as mean±s.e.m. The difference between means
was assessed by the Student’s t-test for single comparisons or by analysis
of variance followed by post hoc Bonferroni–Dunn tests for multiple
comparisons. Pp0.05 was deemed statistically signiﬁcant.

RESULTS
Neuron-Speciﬁc Overexpression of NAMPT is Protective Against
Cerebral Ischemic Injury in a Transgenic Mouse Line
Previous reports indicated that lentiviral-mediated NAMPT overexpression decreases cerebral ischemic infarct size in vivo.11 To
better regulate the overexpression of NAMPT for further study
in vivo, we developed a mouse line overexpressing the NAMPT
transgene. Because NAMPT regulates NAD/ATP production, panorgan overexpression may complicate the interpretation of its role
in the brain. Thus, we decided to overexpress NAMPT speciﬁcally
within neurons by generating a brain-speciﬁc NAMPT transgenic
mouse line. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase cDNA tagged
with HA was placed under control of the neuron-speciﬁc promoter
Thy-1, and an intron was inserted to enhance the expression
of NAMPT (Figure 1A). After extensive breeding on a C57BL/6
background, we successfully generated a transgenic mouse line
that overexpresses NAMPT exclusively in the brain (Figure 1B).
Transgenic NAMPT protein (HA-tagged) was found throughout the
whole brain, but with particularly high expression in pyramidal
cell layers 5 and 6 in the CTX and within striatal ﬁber bundles
(Figure 1C). Furthermore, the majority of HA-positive cells were
colabeled with the neuronal marker NeuN, indicating that the

Figure 1. Generation of neuron-specific nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) transgenic (Tg-NAMPT) mice. (A) Schematic map of
NAMPT transgenic construct. (B) Western blotting using HA antibodies shows that transgenic NAMPT–HA is only expressed in the brain of
Tg-NAMPT mice. (C) Immunofluorescent staining illustrates that NAMPT is predominantly expressed in the cortex and fiber bundles in the
striatum. (D) Immunofluorescent double-labeling for HA tag with the neuronal marker NeuN, the astrocyte marker GFAP, the microglia marker
Iba1, the oligodendrocyte marker APC, and the endothelial marker CD31; HA, hemagglutinin.
& 2014 ISCBFM

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1616
transgene was primarily expressed in neurons (Figure 1D). No
expression of HA–NAMPT was detected in other cell types, such as
astrocytes, microglia, OLs, and endothelial cells (Figure 1D). No
alterations in body weight or blood glucose levels were found in
neuron-targeted Tg-NAMPT mice (data not shown), and endogenous NAMPT remained normally expressed in other tissues at
similar levels as WT mice (data not shown).
Using these novel neuron-speciﬁc Tg-NAMPT mice, we sought
to determine if neuronal overexpression of NAMPT alone would
be adequate to confer protection against focal ischemic injury.
Neuronal Tg-NAMPT mice and WT littermates were subjected to
60 minutes MCAO and infarct volume and neurologic deﬁcits were
assessed 72 hours after reperfusion. Functional outcomes were
evaluated by the corner and rotarod tests for 2 weeks. Neuronal
NAMPT transgenic overexpression signiﬁcantly reduced infarct
volume by 65% compared with WT littermates (P ¼ 0.018, Figures
2A and 2B) at 72 hours after MCAO, suggesting that NAMPT overexpression exerts robust tissue protective effects. Compared
with WT littermates, Tg-NAMPT mice also exhibited signiﬁcantly
lower neurologic deﬁcit scores (Figure 2C, Pr0.05), turned less
frequently to the left side in the corner test (Figure 2D, Pr0.05),
and remained longer on the rotarod test (Figure 2E, Pr0.05).
Importantly, the functional improvements lasted for 2 weeks after
ischemia, indicating that NAMPT transgenic overexpression
provides long-term functional improvement against ischemic
brain injury. Physiologic parameters (blood pressure, blood gases,
and blood glucose; data not shown) and regional cerebral
blood ﬂow (Table 1) were not affected by transgene expression.
Together, these data indicate that neuronal targeting of NAMPT

is sufﬁcient to confer potent neuroprotection against focal
cerebral ischemic injury.
Nicotinamide Phosphoribosyltransferase Transgenic
Overexpression Attenuates White Matter Injury after Ischemia
Previous studies using lentiviral vectors in vivo or NAMPT deletion
have already indicated a neuroprotective role for NAMPT against
ischemic injury.11,12 Thus, the ﬁnding that neuronal overexpression of NAMPT was neuroprotective against cerebral ischemic
injury was not surprising. Even though the preservation of
neurons is beneﬁcial, focal ischemic injury affects both
gray matter and WM and unresolved WMI can result in delayed
axonal or Wallerian degeneration. Thus, in addition to the gross
neural protection afforded by neuronal NAMPT transgenic
expression (Figures 2A and 2B), we also examined the state of
WM. Focal ischemia signiﬁcantly reduced myelin expression in
striatal ﬁbers and corpus callosum in WT mice 72 hours after
reperfusion, as reﬂected by lighter and smaller areas of Luxol fast
blue staining (Figure 3A, top panels and Figure 3B). Notably,
neuronal NAMPT transgenic overexpression signiﬁcantly increased
the area of myelin expression after ischemia compared with WT
littermates (Figure 3A, bottom panels and Figure 3B). This
indicates that WMI was either prevented or repaired in mice
overexpressing neuronal NAMPT. Since the NAMPT transgene was
constructed to be under the control of the neuron-speciﬁc
promoter Thy-1, we hypothesized that neuronally expressed
NAMPT may be functioning in a novel extracellular manner
to protect WM.

Figure 2. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) overexpression protects against ischemic brain injury. (A) Representative
photographs of triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) stained coronal brain sections from NAMPT transgenic (Tg-NAMPT) mice and wild-type
(WT) littermates at 72 hours after 60-minute middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). (B) Quantitative measurements of infarct volume.
(C) Neurologic deficit scores. (D) Corner test. (E) Rotarod test. Data are mean±s.e.m., n ¼ 10/group. *Pp0.05 versus WT littermates; #Pp0.05
versus sham.
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

& 2014 ISCBFM

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1617
Table 1.

Changes of rCBF before, during, and after MCAO in
Tg-NAMPT mice and WT littermates

5 Minutes before MCAO
5 Minutes during MCAO
55 Minutes during MCAO
5 Minutes after reperfusion

WT

Tg-NAMPT

100±6.69
10.95±1.23*
11.6±1.25*
57.6±9.5*

100±6.64
10.4±1.21*
10.5±0.75*
56.5±8.2*

MCAO, middle cerebral artery occlusion; rCBF, regional cerebral blood flow;
Tg-NAMPT, NAMPT transgenic; WT, wild-type. rCBF at the surface of the left
cortex at 5 minutes before MCAO, 5 and 55 minutes during MCAO, and
5 minutes after reperfusion. Data represent mean±s.e.m. n ¼ 10, *Pp0.05
versus before MCAO. There is no significant difference in rCBF changes
between Tg-NAMPT mice and WT littermates.

Figure 3. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) overexpression attenuates white matter injury (WMI). (A) Representative
Luxol fast blue (LFB) staining of contralateral and ipsilateral striatum
and corpus callosum (CC) in NAMPT transgenic (Tg-NAMPT) mice
and wild-type (WT) littermates. (B) Quantitative analysis of LFB
staining. Data are expressed as a percentage of the contralateral
hemisphere. *Pp0.01 versus WT littermates.

Ischemic Injury Induces Nicotinamide Phosphoribosyltransferase
Expression and Secretion from Neurons
Extracellular NAMPT has been found both locally in non-CNS
systems and circulating systemically in the blood. Extracellular
NAMPT can be distinguished from iNAMPT by its larger molecular
weight arising from posttranslational modiﬁcations.13 Whether the
CNS also has eNAMPT and its function in the ischemic brain
remains unknown. Both eNAMPT and iNAMPT protein expression
was detectable with two different NAMPT antibodies in WT C57BL/
6 mice. Although iNAMPT remained unchanged, eNAMPT was
dramatically induced at 24 hours after ischemia, peaking at
& 2014 ISCBFM

72 hours but remaining at high levels even after 168 hours
(Figure 4A). These ﬁndings suggest that eNAMPT is selectively
induced after ischemia, perhaps as part of a long-term stress
response pathway. Interestingly, NAMPT expression was induced
in both neuronal cell bodies and WM regions, including striatal
ﬁber bundles (Figure 4B, top panel) and the corpus callosum
(Figure 4B, bottom panel) in WT mice after ischemia.
To conﬁrm that ischemic neurons are capable of secreting
NAMPT protein into the extracellular space, we subjected neuronal
cultures to OGD and measured NAMPT levels in the medium using
ELISA. Consistent with the in vivo results, we found that the
presence of NAMPT was robustly increased in the culture medium,
peaking at 4 hours after OGD, and then decreasing gradually,
indicating that ischemic neurons are indeed capable of secreting
NAMPT into the extracellular medium (Figure 4C). These novel
ﬁndings suggest that eNAMPT is present in the CNS, and that
ischemic neurons are able to secrete eNAMPT into the extracellular space.
Secretion of NAMPT can be Induced by Forced Overexpression in
Neurons and Confers WM Protection
Given our in vitro observations, transgenically overexpressed
NAMPT may also be secreted into the extracellular space in both
CTX and striatum in vivo. Thus, we hypothesized that NAMPT
overexpression in neurons may lead to protection against WMI via
the heightened secretion of eNAMPT, based on the following
observations: (1) ischemia-induced NAMPT protein expression
appears fairly diffuse in the corpus callosum (a region with
relatively few neuronal cell bodies, Figure 4B), (2) neuronal
overexpression of NAMPT exerts ischemic protection of WM in vivo
(Figure 3), and (3) ischemic neurons possess the ability to secrete
NAMPT in vitro (Figure 4C).
To directly address the extent of NAMPT secretion when
overexpressed in neurons, we measured NAMPT levels in the
culture medium of primary neurons transduced with either lentiNAMPT–HA or a control lenti-GFP vector. Forced NAMPT overexpression in neurons signiﬁcantly increased NAMPT secretion
into the medium even without OGD, as detected by ELISA
(Figure 5A), as well as by western blot (Figure 5B). Notably, the
levels of protein found in the culture medium of transduced
neurons exceeded the levels found from ischemic neurons by
B50-fold. As the endogenous levels of NAMPT secreted by
ischemic neurons appear to be insufﬁcient to confer full protection, exogenously delivered NAMPT protein may be necessary to
effectively protect the brain against ischemic injury. We also
observed that forced overexpression of NAMPT in Tg-NAMPT mice
increased the levels of HA-tagged NAMPT within neuronal cell
bodies as well as in the extracellular space under non-ischemic
conditions (Figure 5C, upper panel). The expression of eNAMPT in
the CTX and striatum of Tg-NAMPT mice was conﬁrmed by
western blot analysis. In contrast, no eNAMPT was detected in the
brain of WT mice (Figure 5C, lower panel).
Because the presence of eNAMPT in transgenic mice was
correlated with WM protection in vivo, we sought to directly assess
if the protective effects of neuronal NAMPT overexpression were
because of neuronal secretions or because of indirect effects
stemming from neuronal protection. In the latter scenario, the WM
protection might be secondary to direct protection of NAMPToverexpressing neurons and independent of NAMPT secretion. To
assess whether NAMPT overexpression in neurons directly leads to
OL protection against ischemia-like insults via extracellular factors,
cultured cortical neurons were transduced with lenti-NAMPT or a
control lenti-GFP vector and subjected to OGD for 60 minutes.
Twenty-four hours after OGD, conditioned medium was collected
from the ischemic neuronal cultures and coincubated with mature
oligodendrocytic cultures that have been subjected to OGD for
3 hours. As expected, conditioned medium from ischemic
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1618

Figure 4. Extracellular nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (eNAMPT) is expressed in the brain and induced after ischemia. (A) Western
blot analysis of NAMPT expression in the ischemic penumbra after middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) in wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice
using two different NAMPT antibodies for the intracellular (iNAMPT) and extracellular forms of NAMPT. (B) Immunofluorescent staining of
brain slices with antibodies against NAMPT and myelin basic protein (MBP) shows that higher NAMPT level in fiber bundles of the striatum
and corpus callosum (CC) in the ipsilateral (Ipsi) hemisphere. CTX: cortex. (C) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for NAMPT release
into extracellular medium from primary neurons subjected to oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD). The ELISA was performed 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and
24 hours after OGD. Data are mean±s.e.m. from three independent experiments. *Pp0.05 versus untreated neurons.

neuronal cultures transduced with lenti-NAMPT, but not lenti-GFP,
signiﬁcantly inhibited OGD-induced OL cell death (Figures 5D
and 5E). However, the protective effects of conditioned medium
were abolished by antibody-mediated NAMPT depletion, strongly
suggesting that the protective effect is mediated speciﬁcally by
NAMPT protein secreted into the medium.
To more directly assess the role of eNAMPT on WM ischemic
protection, we incubated primary oligodendrocytic cultures with
recombinant NAMPT protein (5 mg/ml) before, during, and after
180 minutes of OGD. The addition of recombinant NAMPT protein
signiﬁcantly inhibited ischemic oligodendrocytic cell death at
24 hours after OGD (Figure 6A). Similarly, recombinant NAMPT
protein reduced oligodendrocytic cell death induced by another
ischemia-like insult, AMPA neurotoxicity (Figure 6B), suggesting
that NAMPT delivered into the extracellular compartment—either
via secretion by neurons or via exogenous administration of
recombinant protein—effectively confers oligodendrocytic protection against ischemia-like insults.
Together, these observations indicate that neuronal overexpression of NAMPT leads to secretion of NAMPT into the
extracellular space, which directly protects WM independent of
the presence of neurons. As addition of NAMPT antibodies signiﬁcantly reduced the protective effects of conditioned medium
and the sole addition of recombinant NAMPT to oligodendrocytic
cultures was sufﬁcient to confer protection, we conclude that
eNAMPT is responsible for WM protection against ischemic injury.
DISCUSSION
The role of NAMPT in both non-CNS and neural systems has
focused primarily on its intracellular function in NAD biosynthesis.
Although this function is extremely important in ischemic
contexts, we have discovered a new role for NAMPT in the
present report. We are the ﬁrst group to show that NAMPT confers
protection against ischemic WMI in vivo. Previous reports in stroke
models had only showed protection of gray matter by NAMPT.
The second novel ﬁnding of the present study is that neuronal
overexpression of NAMPT leads to its secretion into the extracellular space after ischemia-like insults. Third, our in vitro data
strongly suggest that secreted, eNAMPT can protect OLs from
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

ischemia-like insults. Fourth, delivery of exogenous NAMPT
protein into the culture medium is sufﬁcient to protect OLs
against ischemia-like insults. The potential for NAMPT to function
in an extracellular manner leads to the exciting possibility of using
the recombinant protein in a therapeutic setting. In considering its
translational value, it is also important to note that NAMPT
can cross the blood–brain barrier (unpublished ﬁndings). Thus,
recombinant proteins such as NAMPT represent a clinically
feasible tool that can be generated and delivered under controlled
settings.
In our transgenic mouse model, NAMPT was driven by the Thy-1
promoter, which has been widely used for neuronal overexpression of transgenes. We did not observe the presence of HA-tagged
NAMPT within non-neuronal cells in the mouse brain (Figure 1D),
although Thy-1 has been reported to be expressed in endothelial
cells and in white blood cells such as T lymphocytes,21,22 two cell
types that are intimately involved in the pathogenesis of ischemic
stroke. However, T-cell inﬁltration into the brain usually occurs 3
days after cerebral ischemia,23 whereas NAMPT already exerted
WM protection effect within this timeframe in our studies.
Therefore, it is unlikely that NAMPT functions through or is
affected by NAMPT expression in T cells, at least not at the early
time points observed in this study.
Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase has been best characterized in terms of its function as the rate-limiting enzyme in the
NAD biosynthetic pathway. As the availability of NAD is a critical
determinant for neuronal ischemic sensitivity, the neuroprotective
function of NAMPT has historically centered on the role of iNAMPT
in NAD production. Consistent with the NAD biosynthetic function
of NAMPT, inhibition of enzymatic activity of NAMPT by
intraperitoneal administration of FK866 signiﬁcantly reduced brain
nicotinamide mononucleotide levels and substantially enlarged
MCAO-induced infarction.11 NAMPT has also been shown to
protect against stroke by increasing the activity of sirtuin 1
through an increase in NAD.11 However, our data suggest that a
novel, extracellular function of NAMPT may also contribute to
ischemic WM protection. On the other hand, NAMPT protection of
WM could be distinct from NAD-dependent protection, especially
given its extracellular localization. The function of NAMPT in the
extracellular milieu could be either via NAD biosynthesis in the
& 2014 ISCBFM

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1619

Figure 5. Secretion of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) from neurons can be induced by forced overexpression and confers
white matter (WM) protection. (A) Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for NAMPT release into medium from primary neurons 72
hours after lentiviral transduction. ***Pp0.001 versus untreated neurons. (B) Western blot analysis of NAMPT from neurons transduced with
lenti-NAMPT. (C) Upper panel: HA staining shows NAMPT secretion into the extracellular space in the cortex (CTX) and striatum (STR) in
NAMPT transgenic (Tg-NAMPT) mice, but not in wild-type (WT) littermates. Yellow arrows showing extracellular HA staining and white arrows
showing HA staining in striatal fiber bundles. Lower panel: Western blot analysis of extracellular NAMPT (eNAMPT) and intracellular NAMPT
(iNAMPT) in both CTX and STR in Tg-NAMPT and WT mice. (D and E) Oligodendrocytic death induced by oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD)
in the presence or absence of conditioned media (CM) from neurons transduced with lenti-NAMPT. Conditioned media from neurons
transfected with lenti-GFP served as a control. Secreted NAMPT in CM was depleted by specific NAMPT antibody. Cell death was analyzed
24 hours later by Hoechst staining, D or LDH release, E. Data are mean±s.e.m. from three independent experiments. *Pp0.05 versus OGD
alone/CM from lenti-GFP. CC, corpus callosum; GFP, green fluorescent protein; HA, hemagglutinin.

extracellular compartment, or via an unknown capacity, such as
binding to a receptor and activating pro-survival signaling
pathways. In line with this, we have found that incubation of
neurons/OLs with recombinant NAMPT protein can activate
several pro-survival signaling pathways, such as PI3K/Akt, ERK1/
2, and Stat5a (unpublished data), indicating that these molecules
might mediate the protective role of NAMPT. In other words, it
seems likely that NAMPT binds to an unrecognized receptor on
cell membranes and then exerts its protective effect via downstream pro-survival signaling pathways. We are currently attempting to identify the potential receptor for NAMPT on neurons/OLs.
Further exploration into the mechanism of NAMPT and its
protection of ischemic WMI may yield novel insights into both
the function of NAMPT and the process of WMI under ischemic
settings.
In addition to its function in NAD synthesis, NAMPT also has
been characterized as a putative cytokine that can promote
inﬂammation in peripheral systems. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, also called pre-B-cell colony-enhancing factor 1,
was ﬁrst isolated from a human peripheral blood lymphocyte
cDNA library and was shown to synergize with the pre-B-cell
& 2014 ISCBFM

colony formation activity of stem cell factor and interleukin 7.21
Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase also regulates the
activity of monocytes and neutrophils in response to inﬂammatory stimuli.22,23 The role of inﬂammation is well established in
cerebral ischemic research and appears to exert a powerful
inﬂuence over brain injury and recovery. As such, the acute
overactivation of inﬂammatory processes likely contributes to the
injured state, whereas a more subdued prolonged inﬂammatory
response appears to assist in neural remodeling and repair, for
which WM is critical. Our ﬁnding that NAMPT is secreted into
the ischemic brain leads us to speculate that eNAMPT inﬂuences
not only OLs, but also cells such as microglia, the resident
inﬂammatory cells in the CNS, and contributes to the regulation of
inﬂammatory processes after ischemia (data not shown). Further
studies examining the role of exogenous NAMPT on inﬂammatory
processes with longer survival periods may yield additional
new insights into the effects of NAMPT on ischemic recovery. In
addition to inﬂammation, oxidative stress has also been shown
to propagate injury after ischemia. A recent study showed
that NAMPT is essential for the beneﬁts of calorie restriction
against oxidative stress,24 indicating that eNAMPT may also exert
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1620
suitable for this study. Further investigation on the role of NAMPT
in diffuse WMI states will be a logical subsequent extension of the
current study.
In conclusion, the present study shows that NAMPT may not
function simply in a restricted intracellular manner during stroke
recovery and that it protects against ischemic injury in both gray
matter and WM. We have presented multiple lines of evidence
supporting the extracellular secretion of NAMPT by neuronal cells
either overexpressing transgenic NAMPT or subjected to ischemic
insults. This secretion is correlated with the protection of OLs from
ischemic injury. Furthermore, the addition of recombinant NAMPT
itself is protective against ischemic WMI. These ﬁndings promote
the concept that NAMPT is an endogenous protective molecule
that may circulate throughout neural tissue and exert beneﬁcial
effects on a variety of cell types, likely via distinct mechanisms.
The increase of NAMPT in ischemic tissue from non-transgenic
mice also supports the notion that NAMPT is part of a
natural stress response, consistent with previous reports.11 Thus,
the preservation and recovery of WM by molecules such as
NAMPT may lead to improvements in axonal repair and function
and promote long-term behavioral recovery after cerebral
ischemia.
Figure 6. Exogenous nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase
(NAMPT) protein reduces oxygen–glucose deprivation (OGD)- and
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazoleproprionic acid (AMPA)induced oligodendrocytic death. Primary oligodendrocytes (OLs)
were pretreated with NAMPT protein (5 mg/ml) and then subjected
to OGD for 180 minutes (A) or AMPA (50 mmol/L) for 5 minutes
(B). Cell death was analyzed by Hoechst staining or lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) release 24 hours later. Data are mean±s.e.m.
from three independent experiments. *Pp0.05 versus OGD/AMPA
alone; #Pp0.05 versus untreated control cells.

antioxidant effects. Thus, future studies to examine whether
eNAMPT protects OLs by inhibiting oxidative stress are highly
warranted.
As mentioned above, the signiﬁcant contribution of WM to
ischemic outcomes has been historically overlooked, and largely
assumed to be secondary to neuronal or axonal injury. However,
recent work underscores a unique role for WM health in
determining ischemic severity. Several drugs that protect against
ischemic injury are now being explored in their effects on WM,
including the only FDA (Food and Drug Administration) approved
therapeutic, tissue plasminogen activator2 as well as delayed
administration of the histone deacetylase inhibitor valproic acid.25
Similar to the novel means (secretion) by which NAMPT appears
to promote WM integrity, tissue plasminogen activator may
also promote WM protection and recovery independent of its
classic proteolytic activity, acting instead as a novel cytokine-like
molecule. Although it is tempting to speculate that NAMPT may
exert WM protection via its NAD biosynthetic activity, the
mechanisms of WMI and recovery after cerebral ischemia are
not well understood and may respond to NAMPT in a novel
manner. Further exploration into both the process by which
WM responds to ischemic injury as well as the mechanism of WM
protection by NAMPT will serve to further the development of
effective therapeutics for stroke recovery.
Several animal models, such as ET-1 injection and chronic
hypoperfusion models,26,27 have been developed to speciﬁcally
examine WMI after stroke and do not involve signiﬁcant gray
matter injury. However, our initial ﬁndings that neuronal NAMPT
confers ischemic WM protection and that neurons readily release
NAMPT in vitro under ischemic contexts led us to hypothesize that
NAMPT is released from damaged neurons and subsequently
protects OLs from ischemic insults. Therefore, the classic tMCAO
model, which involves both gray matter and WM damage, is more
Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

DISCLOSURE/CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Carol Culver for editorial assistance, Pat Strickler for secretarial
support, Dr Joshua Sanes from Harvard University for providing Thy-1 promoter, and
Dr Carlos Lois from Massachusetts Institute of Technology for providing the lentivirus
system.

REFERENCES
1 McDonald JW, Althomsons SP, Hyrc KL, Choi DW, Goldberg MP. Oligodendrocytes
from forebrain are highly vulnerable to AMPA/kainate receptor-mediated excitotoxicity. Nat Med 1998; 4: 291–297.
2 Correa F, Gauberti M, Parcq J, Macrez R, Hommet Y, Obiang P et al. Tissue plasminogen activator prevents white matter damage following stroke. J Exp Med
2011; 208: 1229–1242.
3 Pantoni L, Garcia JH, Gutierrez JA. Cerebral white matter is highly vulnerable to
ischemia. Stroke 1996; 27: 1641–1646, discussion 1647.
4 Ho PW, Reutens DC, Phan TG, Wright PM, Markus R, Indra I et al. Is white matter
involved in patients entered into typical trials of neuroprotection? Stroke 2005; 36:
2742–2744.
5 Desmond DW. Cognition and white matter lesions. Cerebrovasc Dis 2002;
13(Suppl 2): 53–57.
6 Leys D, Englund E, Del Ser T, Inzitari D, Fazekas F, Bornstein N et al. White matter
changes in stroke patients. Relationship with stroke subtype and outcome.
Eur Neurol 1999; 42: 67–75.
7 Pantoni L, Leys D, Fazekas F, Longstreth Jr. WT, Inzitari D, Wallin A et al. Role of
white matter lesions in cognitive impairment of vascular origin. Alzheimer Dis
Assoc Disord 1999; 13(Suppl 3): S49–S54.
8 Arai K, Lo EH. Experimental models for analysis of oligodendrocyte pathophysiology in stroke. Exp Transl Stroke Med 2009; 1: 6.
9 Imai S. The NAD World: a new systemic regulatory network for metabolism and
aging—Sirt1, systemic NAD biosynthesis, and their importance. Cell Biochem
Biophys 2009; 53: 65–74.
10 Magni G, Amici A, Emanuelli M, Raffaelli N, Ruggieri S. Enzymology of NAD þ
synthesis. Adv Enzymol Relat Areas Mol Biol 1999; 73: 135–182xi.
11 Wang P, Xu TY, Guan YF, Tian WW, Viollet B, Rui YC et al. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase protects against ischemic stroke through SIRT1-dependent
adenosine monophosphate-activated kinase pathway. Ann Neurol 2011; 69:
360–374.
12 Zhang W, Xie Y, Wang T, Bi J, Li H, Zhang LQ et al. Neuronal protective role of
PBEF in a mouse model of cerebral ischemia. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2010; 30:
1962–1971.
13 Revollo JR, Korner A, Mills KF, Satoh A, Wang T, Garten A et al. Nampt/PBEF/
Visfatin regulates insulin secretion in beta cells as a systemic NAD biosynthetic
enzyme. Cell Metab 2007; 6: 363–375.

& 2014 ISCBFM

NAMPT protects against ischemic WMI
Z Jing et al

1621
14 Curat CA, Wegner V, Sengenes C, Miranville A, Tonus C, Busse R et al. Macrophages in human visceral adipose tissue: increased accumulation in obesity and a
source of resistin and visfatin. Diabetologia 2006; 49: 744–747.
15 Friebe D, Neef M, Kratzsch J, Erbs S, Dittrich K, Garten A et al. Leucocytes are
a major source of circulating nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT)/
pre-B cell colony (PBEF)/visfatin linking obesity and inﬂammation in humans.
Diabetologia 2011; 54: 1200–1211.
16 Garten A, Petzold S, Barnikol-Oettler A, Korner A, Thasler WE, Kratzsch J et al. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT/PBEF/visfatin) is constitutively released
from human hepatocytes. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 2010; 391: 376–381.
17 Cao G, Pei W, Ge H, Liang Q, Luo Y, Sharp FR et al. In vivo delivery of a Bcl-xL
fusion protein containing the TAT protein transduction domain protects against
ischemic brain injury and neuronal apoptosis. J Neurosci 2002; 22: 5423–5431.
18 Gan Y, Xing J, Jing Z, Stetler RA, Zhang F, Luo Y et al. Mutant erythropoietin
without erythropoietic activity is neuroprotective against ischemic brain injury.
Stroke 2012; 43: 3071–3077.
19 Chen Y, Balasubramaniyan V, Peng J, Hurlock EC, Tallquist M, Li J et al. Isolation
and culture of rat and mouse oligodendrocyte precursor cells. Nat Protoc 2007; 2:
1044–1051.
20 Patani R, Balaratnam M, Vora A, Reynolds R. Remyelination can be extensive in
multiple sclerosis despite a long disease course. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 2007;
33: 277–287.

& 2014 ISCBFM

21 Schubert K, Gutknecht D, Koberle M, Anderegg U, Saalbach A. Melanoma cells use
Thy-1 (CD90) on endothelial cells for metastasis formation. Am J Pathol 2013; 182:
266–276.
22 Ades EW, Zwerner RK, Acton RT, Balch CM. Isolation and partial characterization of
the human homologue of Thy-1. J Exp Med 1980; 151: 400–406.
23 Gelderblom M, Leypoldt F, Steinbach K, Behrens D, Choe CU, Siler DA et al.
Temporal and spatial dynamics of cerebral immune cell accumulation in stroke.
Stroke 2009; 40: 1849–1857.
24 Song J, Ke SF, Zhou CC, Zhang SL, Guan YF, Xu TY et al. Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase is required for the calorie restriction-mediated improvements in oxidative stress, mitochondrial biogenesis, and metabolic adaptation.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 2014; 69: 44–57.
25 Schilling E, Wehrhahn J, Klein C, Raulien N, Ceglarek U, Hauschildt S.
Inhibition of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase modiﬁes LPSinduced inﬂammatory responses of human monocytes. Innate Immun 2012; 18:
518–530.
26 Frost SB, Barbay S, Mumert ML, Stowe AM, Nudo RJ. An animal model of
capsular infarct: endothelin-1 injections in the rat. Behav Brain Res 2006; 169:
206–211.
27 Shibata M, Ohtani R, Ihara M, Tomimoto H. White matter lesions and glial activation in a novel mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion. Stroke 2004;
35: 2598–2603.

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism (2014), 1613 – 1621

