Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

ACIDIC FGF PROMOTES NEURITE OUTGROWTH OF CORTICAL
NEURONS AND IMPROVES NEUROPROTECTIVE EFFECT
IN A CEREBRAL ISCHEMIC RAT MODEL
M. J. TSAI, a,b à S. K. TSAI, c § M. C. HUANG, a,bà
D. Y. LIOU, aà S. L. HUANG, aà W. H. HSIEH, a,dà
W. C. HUANG, a,b,eà S. S. HUANG f,g*– AND
H. CHENG a,b,d,e*–

eﬃcacy of applying aFGF in cerebral ischemia. A recent
report showed that the intranasal aFGF treatment improved
neurological functional recovery; however, it did not significantly reduce the lesion size in ischemic rats. The present
study examines the neuroprotective eﬀect of aFGF on cortical neuron-glial cultures under oxygen glucose deprivation
(OGD)-induced cell damage and investigates whether epidural application of slow-released aFGF could improve beneﬁt
on ischemic stroke injury in conscious rats. We used a topical application of aFGF mixed in ﬁbrin glue, a slow-release
carrier, over the peri-ischemic cortex and examined such
treatment on cerebral infarction and behavioral impairments
of rats subjected to focal cerebral ischemia (FCI). Results
demonstrate that aFGF eﬀectively protected cortical
neuron-glial cultures from OGD-induced neuronal damage.
Neurite extension from cortical neurons was signiﬁcantly
enhanced by aFGF, mediated through activation of AKT
and ERK. In addition, topical application of ﬁbrin gluemixed aFGF dose-dependently reduced ischemia-induced
brain infarction and improved functional restoration in
ischemic stroke rats. Slow-released aFGF not only protected
hippocampal and cortical cell loss but reduced microglial
inﬁltration in FCI rats. Our results suggest that aFGF mixed
in ﬁbrin glue could prolong the protective/regenerative
eﬃcacy of aFGF to the damaged brain tissue and
thus improve the functional restorative eﬀect of aFGF.
Ó 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

a
Neural Regeneration Laboratory, Department of
Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taiwan
b
Center for Neural Regeneration, Department of
Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taiwan
c

Cheng Hsin General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan

d

Department and Institute of Pharmacology, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan
e

School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan

f

Department of Pharmacology and Institute of Medicine, Chung
Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan
g
Department of Pharmacy, Chung Shan Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan

Abstract—Acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor (aFGF) is a
neurotrophic factor which is a powerful neuroprotective
and neuroregenerative factor of the nervous system. Prior
study had shown that levels of FGFs signiﬁcantly increase
following ischemic injury, reﬂecting a physiological protection mechanism. However, few reports demonstrated the
*Correspondence to: S.S. Huang, Department of Pharmacology and
Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University and Department of Pharmacy, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan No. 110, Section 1, Jianguo N. Road, Taichung
City 402, Taiwan. Tel: +886-4-24730022; fax: +886-4-24739030.
H. Cheng, Neural Regeneration Laboratory, Center for Neural
Regeneration, Department of Neurosurgery, Neurological Institute,
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan No. 322, Section 2,
Shih-Pai Road, Beitou District, Taipei City 112, Taiwan. Tel: +886-228757718; fax: +886-2-28757588.
E-mail
addresses:
mjtsai2@vghtpe.gov.tw
(M.
J.
Tsai),
ch9198@chgh.org.tw (S. K. Tsai), mchuang@vghtpe.gov.tw (M. C.
Huang), dragonspruce@gmail.com (D. Y. Liou), cute.shiaoyeh@
gmail.com (S. L. Huang), smallhsing@gmail.com (W. H. Hsieh),
wchuang@vghtpe.gov.tw (W. C. Huang), sshuang@csmu.edu.tw
(S. S. Huang), hc_cheng@vghtpe.gov.tw (H. Cheng).
 
First two authors contribute equally to this work.
à
Tel: +886-2-28757718; fax: +886-2-28757588.
§
Cheng Hsin General Hospital, No. 45, Cheng Hsin Street, Pai-Tou,
Taipei, Taiwan. Tel: +886-2-28264548; fax: +886-2-28267411.
–
Last two authors contributed equally as corresponding authors.
Abbreviations: aFGF, acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor; ANOVA, analysis
of variance; DMEM, Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium; FCI, focal
cerebral ischemia; GDNF, Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor; IR,
immunoreactive; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MCAo, middle cerebral
arterial occlusion; OGD, oxygen glucose deprivation; PI, propidium
iodide; rt-PA, recombinant tissue plasminogen activator; TTC,
2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride.

Key words: aFGF, cortical neuronal cultures, ischemic
stroke, neuroprotection, Akt, ERK.

INTRODUCTION
Ischemic stroke is a sudden loss of circulation on a region
of brain with high mortality and leads to long-term
disability (Shinozuka et al., 2013). The recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (rt-PA) therapy directed at the dissolution of thrombin in adult following acute ischemic
stroke is the only eﬀective treatment approved for use in
patients with either focal cerebral ischemia or global
ischemic stroke (Chen et al., 2013). However, the application of rt-PA for stroke is limited by narrow therapeutic
time window and its serious side eﬀects (e.g., increase
risk of bleeding and hemorrhagic transformation) which
can counteract the beneﬁts provided by reperfusion of
the occluded artery and exacerbate stroke injury
(Dhamija and Donnan, 2007; Wang et al., 2008).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.07.074
0306-4522/Ó 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
238

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

Acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor (aFGF, FGF-1) is one of
23 members in FGF family and is the universal FGF that
can activate all FGF receptors (Olsen et al., 2004). aFGF
is abundant in sensory and motor neurons and is a normal
component of the spinal cord. Importantly, aFGF has
potent neurotrophic activity for many populations of CNS
neurons and could potentially play a signiﬁcant role in nervous system development (Walicke, 1988). aFGF also
promotes axonal growth and improves functional recovery
in spinal cord injury models (Cuevas et al., 1995; Laird
et al., 1995; Lee et al., 2002; Huang et al., 2011).
Several literatures from our and other laboratories have
reportedly shown that aFGF promotes the regeneration
of axotomized spinal cord or dorsal root ganglion neurons
in humans and animals subjected to spinal cord injury
(Teng et al., 1998; Cheng et al., 2004; Tsai et al., 2008;
Huang et al., 2009, 2011). aFGF treatment facilitates the
regeneration of spinal ascending and descending tracts
and also recovery of motor behavior following spinal cord
injury (Lee et al., 2002). In addition, beneﬁcial eﬀects of
aFGF in ischemic-reperfusion injury have been shown in
regions other than brain including retina (Wang et al.,
2010), intestine (Chen et al., 2005; Li et al., 2007), kidney
(Cuevas et al., 1999), liver (Fu et al., 1998) and myocardium (Cuevas et al., 1998a, 2000). However, few reports
demonstrated neuroprotective eﬀect of aFGF in focal cerebral ischemia (FCI) (Xu et al., 2009; Cheng et al., 2011). A
recent report showed a beneﬁcial eﬀect of intranasal aFGF
administration after ischemic stroke. The aFGF treatment
improved neurological functional recovery, but it did not
signiﬁcantly reduce the lesion size in ischemic rats
(Cheng et al., 2011). Our previous work demonstrated that
topical application of Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF) without mixing in ﬁbrin glue did not ameliorate the infarction or motor impairments. However, topical
application of ﬁbrin glue-mixed GDNF is neuroprotective in
chronic cerebral ischemic rats (Cheng et al., 2005). Fibrin
glue, a biocompatible and biodegradable natural product,
was a slowly releasing adhesive agent in the CNS tissue
(Cheng et al., 1995, 1998, 2004). In the study, ﬁbrin glue
could serve as a binding reservoir for GDNF and modulate
release kinetics of GDNF. The medium and route of administration may be an important issue in therapeutic application of neurotrophic factor to the CNS in situ for cerebral
ischemic injury. The aim of this study is designed to investigate whether epidural application of slow-released aFGF
could improve beneﬁt on ischemic stroke injury in conscious rats. When aFGF is linked to the polymer matrix
of the ﬁbrin glue, aFGF can slowly release in physiologically relevant amounts over a long-acting period of time
(Cheng et al., 2005; Spicer and Mikos, 2010). We tested
the neuroprotective eﬀect of topical application of aFGF
mixed in ﬁbrin glue over the peri-infarct cortex on cerebral
infarction and behavioral impairments of conscious rats
subjected to FCI injury.

239

(Carlsbad, CA, USA). Tissue culture plastics were from
BD Bioscience (San Jose, CA, USA). Millicell culture
inserts were from Millipore (Watford, UK). Primary
antibodies were: rabbit and mouse antineuronal class III
beta tubulin (clone TUJ-1, Covance, NJ, USA), rabbit
anti-GFAP (DakoCytomation, Ely, UK), mouse anti-SV2
and goat anti-beta-actin (Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
Texas, USA), mouse anti-ED1 (CD68; Serotec, England),
rabbit anti-pERK, rabbit anti-total ERK and rabbit antipAKT (Cell signaling technology, Danvers, USA). Lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) kit was from Promega (Madison,
Wisconsin, USA). Unless stated otherwise, all other
chemicals were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Co.
Animal surgery and treatment
Adult male Long-Evan rats (250–350 g) were obtained
from the National Laboratory Animal Breeding and
Research Center, Taipei, Taiwan. All eﬀorts were taken
to minimize animal suﬀering during and following
surgery and to reduce the numbers of animals that were
sacriﬁced. Middle cerebral arterial occlusion (MCAo)
was used for creating focal cerebral ischemic injury. The
surgical procedures for MCAo and post-operative animal
care had been reviewed and approved by the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
of Taipei Veterans General Hospital. MCAo was
performed according to the protocols previously
described (Hung et al., 2014; Tsai et al., 2014). Rats were
anesthetized with 1–2% isoﬂurane (Baxter, Guayama,
PR, USA). The body temperature was maintained during
surgery at 37 ± 0.5 °C with a heating pad servocontrolled by a rectal probe. Focal cerebral ischemic
injury was produced in the right lateral cerebral cortex
by permanent ligation of MCA with 10-0 monoﬁlament
nylon. Both common carotid arteries were clamped for
60 min and then reperfusion of ﬂow was conﬁrmed visually during surgery before closure of the wound.
Immediately after ischemic-reperfusion, rats were topically applied with ﬁbrin glue (vehicle) or ﬁbrin gluemixed with aFGF 1 lg or 2 lg. Fibrin glue (Beriplast P,
Germany), a slow-release carrier and an adhesive agent
in the CNS tissue, was prepared before use. Brieﬂy, stock
solutions of ﬁbrinogen (100 mg/ml) and aprotinin
(200 KIU/ml) was prepared and dissolved in HBSS.
Recombinant aFGF (1–2 lg) was added to 20 ll of ﬁbrinogen/aprotinin (80/20; v/v) solution. The resulted solution was then topically applied to the surgical area, on
which calcium chloride (20 ll; 8 mM) was immediately
added. A ﬁbrin glue cast containing aFGF in slowrelease fashion was thus formed. Animals were allowed
to recover from anesthesia and closure of the skin wound.
One week after ischemia and treatment, animals were
sacriﬁced for morphological or biochemical assays.
Behavioral test

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Reagents and antibodies
Cultured medium, fetal bovine serum (FBS), serum-free
supplements and antibiotics were purchased from Gibco

The functional motor deﬁcits in experimental rats were
quantiﬁed before MCAo procedure and at 1, 3, 5 or
7 days post-injury. Neurological deﬁcit score test is an
assessment of motor function with overall observation
(Huang et al., 2013). Each test was scored a discrete

240

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

value from zero to ﬁve according to the following scoring
system: 0, normal motor function or no apparent deﬁcits;
1, contralateral forelimb ﬂexion; 2, decreased grip of contralateral forelimb while the tail was pulled; 3, spontaneous movement in all directions, contralateral circling if
pulled by the tail; 4, spontaneous contralateral circling;
5, no spontaneous motor activity or death. Higher value
represents more severe motor deﬁcits and vice versa.
The global neurological scores were always assessed
by an independent investigator in a blinded fashion.
Motor deﬁcits in the rat forelimbs due to damage of
stroke–aﬀected brain were evaluated using grasping
power test as previously described (Huang et al., 2013;
Tsai et al., 2014). We applied the grasping power test in
rats using a commercial grip-strength meter (Gripstrength-meter 303500, TSE systems, Inc. Midland, MI,
USA) for rats. Both forepaws were tested one by one.
The rats were allowed to grasp the bar while being lifted
by the tail with increasing ﬁrmness until they loosened
their grip, and the grasping power was scored. To ensure
accuracy, we performed at least 10 trials per rat in each of
the grasping power tests, and the three highest grasping
powers were recorded in each case.

Morphological analysis
Measures of brain infarction and histochemical staining
were conducted after 7 days of reperfusion. Animals
were decapitated under anesthesia by intraperitoneal
injection of pentobarbital (60 mg/kg, Health-Tech
Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, Taiwan). Brains were removed
for infarct volume analysis (by 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium
chloride (TTC) staining) and immunohistochemistry
(IHC). For TTC staining, rat brain was sectioned into
standard coronal slices at 2-mm thickness using a brain
matrix
slicer
(Jacobowitz
Systems,
Zivic-Miller
Laboratories Inc., Allison Park, PA, USA). The resulted
slices were stained with 2% TTC for 30 min and ﬁxed in
10% buﬀered formalin solution overnight. TTC-positive
staining, indicating viable tissues, was used to verify
successful stroke and treatment. Infarct volumes
(negative TTC staining area) were analyzed using AIS
imaging research software (Imaging Research Inc., St.
Catharines, Ontario, Canada). Infarct volume was
calculated as the sum of infarct area per slice multiplied
by slice thickness (Tsai et al., 2007a,b, 2014). For ﬂuorescence immunocytochemical staining, rats were anesthetized and transcardially perfused with warm normal
saline, followed by ice-cold 4% paraformaldehyde in
phosphate buﬀer for 30 min. Brains were dissected out
and post-ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 24 h,
then were dehydrated in 15% and then 30% sucrose at
4 °C overnight, embedded in OCT (Tissue Tek,
Gentaur, San Jose, CA, USA) and frozen on powdered
dry ice. Serial coronal sections at 20 lm for the brain
are made with a cryostat, collected on MAS-coated slides
(Matsunami, Kishiwada city, Osaka, Japan) and stored at
70 °C until use. Fluorescent immunohistochemistry on
serial sections was conducted as described in our previously published paper (Tsai et al., 2014). Images of
immunoreactive (IR) cells in brain sections were obtained

with a ﬂuorescent microscope equipped with ﬂuorescence
optics and with a CCD camera.

Cortical neuron-glial cultures
Cortical neuron-glial cultures were prepared from
cerebrocortical regions of embryonic Sprague–Dawley
rats at gestation days 15–17 as previously described
(Tsai et al., 2007a, 2010a). Brieﬂy, fetal cortexes were
enzymatically dissociated with mixtures of papain/protea
se/deoxyribonuclease I (0.1%:0.1%:0.03%) and plated
onto poly-lysine-coated multiwell plates or insert well at
density at 3  105 cells/cm2. Cultures were maintained
in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (DMEM,
Invitrogen) supplemented with N2 (Invitrogen, for serumfree condition) at 37 °C in a water-saturated atmosphere
of 5% CO2 and 95% mixed air. Neuron-glial cultures were
harvested at 4hr or 4 days after aFGF treatment. For protective study, cultures were treated with oxygen glucose
deprivation (OGD) at 3rd days in vitro. Two days after
OGD & aFGF treatment, medium was saved for LDH
assay and cultures were ﬁxed for immunoﬂuorescent
staining. A commercial kit (CellTiter 96 Aqueous;
Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) was used for
determining the extent of cell survival by quantifying the
activity of LDH released from damaged cells.
Measurements were performed based on the manufacturer’s protocol. Neuronal cell injury was also assessed
at 1 day post-OGD using a membrane impermeable ﬂuorescent dye propidium iodide (PI) (1 lg/mL) to label
dead/apoptotic cells. All cells were then counterstained
with permeable ﬂuorescent dye Hoechst 33258 (Zhang
et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2015).

Neurite outgrowth assay
Analysis of axonal outgrowth was performed 4 days after
treatment. We used two methods to measure the neuritepromoting eﬀect of aFGF. First, neuronal cultures were
seeded on 1-lm PET transparent hanging Transwell
inserts inside 24-well plates (Millipore, Watford, UK) at
density 3  105 cells/cm2, and maintained in DMEM
with N2 supplement. At 4 days after treatment, the cells
were ﬁxed and processed for immunostaining against
betaIII tubulin and SV2, a synaptic vesicle protein.
Axons passed through the porous membrane and run
parallel to cell body layer. The cell bodies inside the
transwell were wiped oﬀ, leaving intact the extending
neurite on the other side of the transwell. This lower
chamber neurites were analyzed according to a
modiﬁed method of commercial neurite outgrowth
quantiﬁcation kit (Catalog No. NS200, Chemicon
international, Inc. Temecula, CA, USA). The insert
membrane was cut and transferred to slide preparing for
microscope
observation. The
images
(200
magniﬁcation) of betaIII tubulin-IR or SV2-IR were
quantiﬁed by Image-Pro Plus software. Second,
neuronal cultures were seeded to polylysine-coated
plate at lower density, 5  104 cells/cm2, and treated
with aFGF for 4 days in DMEM/N2 medium. Then, bIII
tubulin-IR neurite length of cultured cells was quantiﬁed

241

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

using AIS imaging research software (Imaging Research
Inc. Canada).
OGD treatment
The culture media were replaced with glucose-free
DMEM and the culture was placed into an air-tight
chamber which is modulated by a ProOx 110 oxygencontroller (BioSpherix, Redﬁeld, NY, USA) to obtain
0.5% O2 with a gas mixture 95% N2/5% CO2. After 3 h
of OGD, reperfusion was simulated by replacing the
exposure medium with normal growth medium. Cultures
were treated with aFGF (100 ng/ml) at 0hr after OGDreperfusion or normoxic treatment. One or two days
after OGD treatment, cultures were harvested for
estimation of cytotoxicity and viability of cortical cells.
BetaIII tubulin-positive neurite density was analyzed
using Image-Pro plus software (NIH systems, Bethesda,
MD, USA).
Western blot analysis
At designated time, cultured cells were solubilized in lysis
buﬀer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS,
40 mM Tris, pH7.5, 1 protease inhibitors (BM,
Germany), 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Na3VO4 and 1 mM DTT.
Protein concentration of the resultant lysate was
determined using the method of Bradford (Bio-Rad
protein assay, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). For western
blot analysis, equal amounts of proteins were loaded and
separated using 8–12% gels (SDS–PAGE) as described
previously (Tsai et al., 2007a; Tsai et al., 2010b).
Statistical analysis
All measurements were performed blind to each group.
Experimental data were expressed as the mean of

independent value ± s.e.m. and were analyzed using a
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by
Bonferroni post hoc test. P values less than 0.05 were
considered statistically signiﬁcant.

RESULTS
Eﬀects of aFGF on cortical neuron-glial cultures after
OGD treatment
We ﬁrst examined the protective eﬃcacy and underlying
mechanism of aFGF in cortical neuron-glial cultures
under normoxia or OGD conditions. OGD, an in vitro
ischemic model, was induced for the investigation of
pharmacological in vitro eﬀects of aFGF. After 3 h of
OGD stress, cultures were put back to normoxic
condition, aFGF was added to the culture medium and
incubated for 2 days. Neurite in aFGF-treated normoxic
culture looks denser than that in the untreated control
but the cell densities between these two groups show
no diﬀerence (Fig. 1E). Release of LDH to the medium
was signiﬁcantly reduced in aFGF-treated normoxic
culture than in untreated control culture (Fig. 1F).
Fig. 1C shows that a total of 3 h OGD and 2 days
reperfusion led to morphological signs of cellular
damage (decreased bIII tubulin-IR; P < 0.05, compared
to Fig. 1A) and increased levels of LDH (a biochemical
marker of cell damage; P < 0.05). aFGF at 100 ng/ml
eﬀectively protected neuronal damage and reduced LDH
release caused by OGD treatment (Fig. 1D–F; P < 0.05
or 0.01 compared to Control). To see the rescue eﬀect
of aFGF, neuronal cell injury was also assessed using
the membrane impermeable and permeable ﬂuorescent
dyes, PI and Hoechst 33258, respectively, at 1 day after
OGD treatment. Representative Hoechst staining and
dead cell counts (PI) in Fig. 1 showing that aFGF
posttreatment reduced cell death (P < 0.01).

Fig. 1. Acidic FGF protects neuron-glial cultures from OGD-induced cell damage. (A) normoxia-control, (B) normoxia-aFGF 100 ng/ml, (C) OGD,
(D) OGD-aFGF 100 ng/ml, (E) quantiﬁcation of bIII tubulin-IR cell density in Control or aFGF-treated cultures, (F) relative LDH release to medium
(compared to Control) in cortical neuron-glial cells. Two days after treatment, cortical cultures were immunostained with anti-bIII-tubulin, a neuronal
marker and medium were collected for LDH assay. Data are presented as mean ± SEM from >4 independent experiments. (a) P < 0.05 aFGF
versus Control; (b) P < 0.05, OGD versus Normoxia by a one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc test.

242

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

Eﬀects of aFGF on neurite outgrowth
Neurite outgrowth was assessed using cell culture inserts
with 1 lm porous membrane (Millicell) according to a
neurite outgrowth quantiﬁcation kit (Catalog No. NS200,
Chemicon international, Inc) with modiﬁcation. Neuronglial cultures were placed on the upper side of the insert
that allowed the neurites but not cell bodies passing
through the porous membrane. The neurite at the
bottom side of insert was immunostained with antibetaIII tubulin and anti-SV2. SV2 proteins are abundant
and present on all synaptic vesicles, independent of
transmitter type. Control cultures readily extended
neurites to the bottom of the insert (Fig. 2A, C).
Cultures treated with aFGF (100 ng/ml) extensively
induced neurite outgrowth in cortical neuron-glial
cultures (Fig. 2B, D). The densities of both tubulin-IR
and SV2-IR in aFGF-treated cultures were signiﬁcantly
higher than those in Control cultures (Fig. 2G; P < 0.01
or 0.05, compared to Control). Neurite outgrowth was
also measured in neuron-glial cultures, seeded at lower
density and treated with aFGF for 4 days. Results

shown in Fig. 2E, F, H, I demonstrate that total or mean
neurite length of aFGF-treated culture was signiﬁcantly
higher than that of the non-treated control culture
(P < 0.01). This indicates a signiﬁcant enhancement of
aFGF in neurite elongation and connection in vitro. We
next wanted to investigate the intracellular signaling
pathways activated by a short period (4 h) of aFGF
treatment in cortical neuron-glial cultures under
normoxia or OGD conditions. Interestingly, many
tubulin-IR neurons exhibited high expression levels of
phosphoERK in aFGF-treated normoxic cultures (arrows
in Fig. 3B, B0 ), but not in normoxic Control cultures
(Fig. 3A, A0 ). Western blot analysis of these cultures
further revealed signiﬁcant increases of phospho AKT
and phospho ERK levels, but not total ERK level by
aFGF treatment in neuron-glial cultures under normoxia
(Fig. 3C, D; P < 0.5, compared to Control). There is
trend of increased pAKT and pERK levels, but does not
reach signiﬁcance, by aFGF after OGD treatment. This
demonstrates that the neurite-promoting eﬀect of aFGF
in cortical cultures is mediated, at least in part, through
AKT and ERK signaling pathways. We thus use pERK

Fig. 2. Analysis for the eﬀect of aFGF on neuronal connection in neuron-glial cultures. (A, C, E) Untreated Control cultures, (B, D, F) aFGF-treated
cultures (aFGF 100 ng/ml for 4 days), (G) Histogram from A to D for quantiﬁcation of neurite or synaptic density (relative density), (H, I) Histogram
from E, F for quantiﬁcation of outgrowing neurites (Total neurite length, H and Mean neurite length, I) after aFGF treatment. A, B, E and F were
stained for anti-bIII tubulin, a neuronal marker; C, D were stained for anti-SV2, a synaptic vesicle protein. Cortical neuron-glial cultures were seeded
onto insert well (with 1-lm porous membrane; A–D).The insert allowed neurites but not cell bodies to pass through the porous membrane. At 4 days
after treatment, neurites in the lower chamber were analyzed using immunostaining with anti-bIII tubulin or anti-SV2. Cultures were also seeded to
poly-lysine-coated plate (E, F) in serum-free condition. bIII tubulin-positive neurite lengths in E, F were quantiﬁed at 4 days after treatment.
* **
, P < 0.05, 0.01 aFGF versus Control by a one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni post hoc test.

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

induction as one activity of aFGF to examine whether
aFGF is still active for one week at 37 °C. Comparing to
newly thawed aFGF, 3 days-37 °C storage-aFGF shows
same eﬀectiveness in inducing pERK level in cultures.
This result is consistent with our previous work which
showed a half-life of around 3 days with 125I-GDNF
decay in the ﬁbrin glue (Cheng et al., 1998).
Eﬀects of aFGF on rat ischemic stroke
This project examines the eﬀect of ﬁbrin glue-mixed
aFGF, topically applied to the ischemic surface, on
cerebral ischemia in vivo. Reproducible brain infarcts
were obtained from a territory of right MCAo in the
Glue-only group, the Glue-aFGF 1-lg group, and the
Glue-aFGF 2-lg group. The results indicated that
epidural applied aFGF mixed with ﬁbrin glue at infarct
brain tissue after FCI injury signiﬁcantly reduced, dosedependent, the total infarcted volume compared to that
of the Glue-only group (Fig. 4A–C). In addition to
cerebral infarction, functional motor deﬁcits were
quantitatively determined to assess ﬁbrin glue-mixed
aFGF eﬀects on the behavioral deﬁcits cause by
ischemic stroke. The functional motor deﬁcits were
performed by the neurological deﬁcit score test and the
grasping power test in experimental rats before MCAo
procedure and at 1, 3, 5 or 7 days post-injury. Results
demonstrate that aFGF at the dose of 2 lg signiﬁcantly
decreased the neurological scores at the third, ﬁfth and

243

seventh days post-treatment, indicating improved
behavioral restoration (Fig. 4D). The Grasping power
test evaluated both forepaws and expressed by the ratio
of contralateral forelimbs (stroke-aﬀected side) to
ipsilateral forelimbs (unaﬀected side). At the end of
7 days post-injury, ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF had a
tendency of improving the grasping power but statistical
signiﬁcance was not achieved (Fig. 4E). Together, the
results of decreased cerebral infarction and improved
functional recovery indicated that epidural application of
ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF exerted neuroprotective eﬀects
in ischemic stroke.
Immunohistochemistry was further conducted in the
ipsilateral cortex and hippocampus of experimental rats
to examine the stages of cell injury or protection
between the experimental groups at 7 days after FCI
injury. Fig. 5A–C shows the NeuN (+) neurons in the
operated sites of cortex at 1 week after injury. Severe
neuronal damage was found in Glue-only-treated rats
after FCI injury. Topical application of ﬁbrin glue-mixed
aFGF 1 or 2 lg decreased cortical cell loss (Fig. 5B, C,
P < 0.05, aFGF 1 lg versus Glue, Fig. 5D). Fig. 5E–G
shows the active caspase-3 (+) cells, apoptotic cells, in
the ipsilateral cortex. aFGF at 1 lg signiﬁcantly reduced
caspase-3 (+) cells, compared to Glue-only-treated rats
(P < 0.05,
Fig.
5H).
Fig.
5I–K
shows
the
immunoreactivity of ED-1, an activated macrophage
marker, in the ipsilateral cortex at 1 week after injury.
The level of ED-1 was signiﬁcantly higher in glue-only

Fig. 3. Eﬀects of aFGF on the expression levels of phospho-ERK, phospho-AKT in cortical neuron-glial cultures. (A, A0 ) untreated Control for bIII
tubulin and pERK respectively. (B, B0 ) aFGF (100 ng/ml; 4 h)-treated cultures for bIII tubulin and pERK respectively. Arrow shows colocalization of
bIII tubulin and pERK by double-immunostaining. (C) Representative western blots of cell homogenates from Normoxia and OGD-treated cultures
after control or aFGF 4-h treatment. (D) Histogram from (C) for quantiﬁcation of indicated protein level bands (relative intensity normalized to Actin).
Data are presented as mean ± SEM from 3 to 6 separate cultures. *P < 0.05 aFGF versus Control by a one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni
post hoc test. Signiﬁcant diﬀerence was observed in the expression of protein pERK and p-AKT between control and aFGF-treated cultures.

244

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

Fig. 4. Topical application of slow-released aFGF-protected ischemia-induced brain injury. (A) Representative images of TTC staining of ischemic
brain tissues. Infarct volumes assessed in rats after 1 h of MCAo and 1 week of reperfusion by vital TTC staining. (B, C) Infarct volumes assessed in
ischemic brain tissues after 1 week of reperfusion. Glue-only or Glue mixed with aFGF (1 or 2 lg) was applied to the rat cortical surface acutely after
1 h of MCAo. Infarct size/brain size (%) indicates the ratio of lesion volume to whole brain using MCAo + glue as 100%. (D) Neurological deﬁcit
scores in MCAo rats. The extent of neurological deﬁciency was evaluated using 5-point score test. (E) Grasping power, evaluated by grip test on
right forelimbs (unaﬀected side) and left forelimbs (stroke- aﬀected side), of MCAo rats. Data were expressed as mean ± SEM from n rats as
indicated. ⁄P < 0.05 Glued aFGF versus Glue-only by a one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni t-test.

cortex than in glue-aFGF (1or 2 lg)-treated cortex,
indicating reduced microglial activation or inﬁltration by
aFGF treatment (P < 0.05, aFGF 1or 2 lg versus Glue,
Fig. 5L). Fig. 5M–O further shows the NeuN (+)
neurons in the operated site of the hippocampus.
Consistent with the observation in the ipsilateral cortex,
severe neuronal damage was found in Glue-only FCI
(Fig. 5M). Micrographs of NeuN (+) cells at 7 days after
injury showed more intact and regenerated neurons in
Glue-aFGF (1 or 2 lg)-treated rats than that in Glueonly-treated rats (Fig. 5M–O). However, this eﬀect
doesn’t reach signiﬁcance.

DISCUSSION
This project examines the eﬀect of ﬁbrin glue-mixed
aFGF, topically applied to the ischemic surface, on
cerebral ischemia in vivo. Before conducting in vivo
experiment, we ﬁrst examined the protective eﬃcacy
and underlying mechanism of aFGF in cortical neuronglial cultures. The main ﬁndings of the present study are
as follows (1) Acidic FGF eﬀectively protected cortical
neuron-glial cultures from OGD-induced neuronal
damage. (2) Axonal outgrowth from cortical neurons

was signiﬁcantly enhanced by aFGF mediated through
activation of AKT and ERK. (3) Topical application of
aFGF mixed with ﬁbrin glue eﬀectively reduced
ischemia-induced brain infarction and improved
functional restoration in FCI injury rats. (4) Topical
application of ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF protected
hippocampal cell loss in FCI injury rats. (5) Topical
application of ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF protected cortical
cell loss and reduced microglial inﬁltration in FCI injury
rats.
In this study, we investigated the protective eﬃcacy of
aFGF in cortical neuron-glial cultures after OGD, an
in vitro ischemic injury model. In normoxia condition,
neuronal densities of aFGF-treated or Control cultures
shows no diﬀerence although neurite in aFGF-treated
culture looks denser (Fig. 1A, B). Release of LDH to the
medium was signiﬁcantly reduced by aFGF treatment
(Fig. 1F), indicating a beneﬁcial eﬀect of aFGF. We
found that aFGF signiﬁcantly decreased neuronal
damage-caused by OGD, as evidenced by neuronal
density, LDH release and cell damage (%) results in
Fig. 1. In addition, we demonstrated that aFGF
signiﬁcantly enhances neurite outgrowth and modulates
ERK and AKT pathways in cortical neuron-glial cultures.

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

245

Fig. 5. Topical application of slow-release-aFGF protected cortical and hippocampal cell loss and reduced microglial inﬁltration in MCAo rats at one
week postinjury. (A, E, I, M) MCAo + Glue only, (B, F, J, N) MCAo + Glue-aFGF 1 lg, (C, G, K, O) MCAo + Glue-aFGF 2 lg. Glue only or Glue
mixed with aFGF (1 or 2 lg) was applied to the rat cortical surface acutely after 1 h of MCAo. Immunohistochemical staining was conducted in one
2-mm brain slice near the ischemic core area. (A–C), (E–G) and (I–K) stains for NeuN, active caspase-3 & ED-1, respectively, and their
quantiﬁcation data were shown in (D), (H), (L), respectively, in the ipsilateral cortex. (M–O) Stains for NeuN and their quantiﬁcation data shown in P,
in the ipsilateral hippocampus. NeuN (+) cells denotes neuronal cells; ED-1 is an activated microglial marker; active caspase 3 (+) cell denote
apoptotic cells. Data were taken as mean ± SEM of four repetitions. *P < 0.05 Glue-aFGF versus Glue only by a one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni
t-test.

These agree with the notion that neurotrophins induce
directional outgrowth through the PI3K/Akt and
MAPK/ERK pathways (Zhou and Snider, 2006) and consistent with our previous observation (Yang et al., 2012)
and other studies showing that aFGF protects neurons
from excitoxicity via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT kinase signaling pathway and that
MEK-ERK1/2 is required for aFGF-induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 (Lin et al., 2009). Here our cortical
neuron-glial culture study shows that aFGF plays
neuroprotective and neuroregenerative roles, involving
both the MAPK and AKT pathways.
We further examined the eﬀects of ﬁbrin glue mixedaFGF on rat subjected to ischemic stroke. In vivo data
showed that ﬁbrin glue mixed-aFGF reduced the
ischemic lesion. Recently, the beneﬁcial eﬀect of
intranasal aFGF administration after ischemic stroke has
been demonstrated (Cheng et al., 2011). The intranasal
aFGF treatment improved neurological functional
recovery, but it did not signiﬁcantly reduce the lesion size
in ischemic rats. In this study, we used a customary
preparation of ﬁbrin glue for sustained delivery of the

neurotrophic factor, aFGF, on the ischemic cortex to form
a glue cast in conscious rats subjected to FCI injury.
Evaluation of neurological function revealed that the
improvement of aFGF-treated rats was prominent. Our
results showed that epidural application of glue-mixed
aFGF in ischemic brain not only eﬀectively decreased
the infarct volume, protected cortical/hippocampal neurons but also signiﬁcantly improved functional recovery
in rats after FCI injury. In Cheng and coworkers’ study,
a total of 60 lg aFGF (6 consecutive intranasal aFGF
administration, 10 lg aFGF once per day) was required
to obtain behavioral improvement in ischemic rats
(Cheng et al., 2011). In the present study, ﬁbrin glue
mixed with as low as 1–2 lg aFGF eﬃciently reduced
brain infarct and improved functional recovery in FCI rats.
The dose of ﬁbrin glue mixed-aFGF applied on the
ischemic cortex is much less than that used through the
nasal route of administration. In addition, the neuroprotective eﬀect is better achieved by epidural application. In
this study, ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF could facilitate and prolong delivery of aFGF to the damaged brain tissue. This
potential eﬀect of ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF may beneﬁt in

246

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247

the treatment of ischemic brain disease, such as ischemic
stroke.
There are several literatures up to date to report aFGF
infusion reduces ischemic CA1 hippocampal damage in
gerbil (MacMillan et al., 1993; Cuevas et al., 1998a,b).
Intracerebralventricular (ICV) infusions of aFGF given
2 days prior to 5 min of bilateral carotid occlusion and continued for 5 days post-ischemia showed a signiﬁcant
reduction of CA1 neuronal damage in the gerbil hippocampus (MacMillan et al., 1993). In addition, venous injection
of aFGF after a 5-min transient forebrain ischemia followed by 7 days of brain reperfusion in gerbil signiﬁcantly
reduced the occurrence of apoptotic cell death in CA1 of
the hippocampus (Cuevas et al., 1998a,b). In this study,
we also found that epidual application of ﬁbrin gluemixed aFGF protected hippocampal cell loss, and what
is more, decreased cortical cell loss and reduced microglial inﬁltration (Fig. 5) in rats subjected to FCI by MCAo.
In summary, the present study demonstrates that beneﬁcial eﬀect of aFGF on neuronal survival and axonal regeneration may foster injured rats to recover from cerebral
ischemia. Low-dose and slow-released aFGF is neuroprotective. Fibrin glue provides a potential material for
eﬃcient factor delivery in the treatment of cerebral ischemia. Factor casted in a slow-release carrier may represent
a more eﬀective approach for neuroprotection and could
be a clinically feasible therapeutic approach for patients
after nervous system injuries.

CONCLUSION
This study demonstrates the beneﬁcial eﬀects of aFGF in
culture and in cerebral ischemia. In culture, aFGF not only
increased neuronal connection, through activation of AKT
and ERK, but also eﬀectively protected OGD-induced
neuronal damage. In vivo, ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF
reduced ischemic brain damage and microglial
inﬁltration. In addition, ﬁbrin glue-mixed aFGF improved
functional restoration in MCAo rats. Our results suggest
that aFGF mixed in ﬁbrin glue could prolong the
protective/regenerative eﬃcacy of aFGF to the damaged
brain tissue and thus improve the functional restorative
eﬀect of aFGF.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.

Acknowledgments—This work was supported ﬁnancially by
research grants from Cheng Hsin General Hospital
(102F218C01) and from Chung Shan Medical University
(CSMU-INT102-06, S.S. Huang), by Grants (V102D-002-1,
V102D-002-2 & V104E6-001) from the Taipei Veterans
General Hospital in Taiwan, and by Grants (NSC102-2314-B350-001, MOST 103-2320-B-040-001-MY3 & MOST 103-2314B-010-029 to S.K. Tsai, S.S. Huang and H. Cheng, respectively)
from the Ministry of Science and Technology in Taiwan. The
authors thank Eusol Biotech Co, Ltd for providing aFGF and
thank Ching-Jung Chen and Yan-Ru Lin for their excellent
assistance.

REFERENCES
Chen C, Wang Y, Yang GY (2013) Stem cell-mediated gene
delivering for the treatment of cerebral ischemia: progress and
prospectives. Curr Drug Targets 14:81–89.
Chen W, Fu XB, Ge SL, Sun TZ, Li WJ, Sheng ZY (2005) Acid
ﬁbroblast growth factor reduces rat intestinal mucosal damage
caused by ischemia-reperfusion insult. World J Gastroenterol
11:6477–6482.
Cheng H, Almstrom S, Olson L (1995) Fibrin glue used as an
adhesive agent in CNS tissues. J Neural Transplant Plast
5:233–243.
Cheng H, Fraidakis M, Blomback B, Lapchak P, Hoﬀer B, Olson L
(1998) Characterization of a ﬁbrin glue-GDNF slow-release
preparation. Cell Transplant 7:53–61.
Cheng H, Huang SS, Lin SM, Lin MJ, Chu YC, Chih CL, Tsai MJ, Lin
HC, Huang WC, Tsai SK (2005) The neuroprotective eﬀect of glial
cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in ﬁbrin glue against chronic
focal cerebral ischemia in conscious rats. Brain Res 1033:28–33.
Cheng H, Liao KK, Liao SF, Chuang TY, Shih YH (2004) Spinal cord
repair with acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor as a treatment for a
patient with chronic paraplegia. Spine (Phila Pa 1976)
29:E284–E288.
Cheng X, Wang Z, Yang J, Ma M, Lu T, Xu G, Liu X (2011) Acidic
ﬁbroblast growth factor delivered intranasally induces
neurogenesis and angiogenesis in rats after ischemic stroke.
Neurol Res 33:675–680.
Cuevas P, Carceller F, Gimenez-Gallego G (1995) Acidic ﬁbroblast
growth factor prevents death of spinal cord motoneurons in
newborn rats after nerve section. Neurol Res 17:396–399.
Cuevas P, Carceller F, Martinez-Coso V, Asin-Cardiel E, GimenezGallego G (2000) Fibroblast growth factor cardioprotection
against ischemia-reperfusion injury may involve K+ ATP
channels. Eur J Med Res 5:145–149.
Cuevas P, Carceller F, Munoz-Willery I, Gimenez-Gallego G (1998a)
Intravenous ﬁbroblast growth factor penetrates the blood–brain
barrier and protects hippocampal neurons against ischemiareperfusion injury. Surg Neurol 49:77–84.
Cuevas P, Carceller F, Reimers D, Saenz de Tejada I, GimenezGallego G (1998b) Acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor rescues gerbil
hippocampal neurons from ischemic apoptotic death. Neurol Res
20:271–274.
Cuevas P, Martinez-Coso V, Fu X, Orte L, Reimers D, GimenezGallego G, Forssmann WG, Saenz De Tejada I (1999) Fibroblast
growth factor protects the kidney against ischemia-reperfusion
injury. Eur J Med Res 4:403–410.
Dhamija RK, Donnan GA (2007) Time is brain-acute stroke
management. Aust Fam Physician 36:892–895.
Fu X, Cuevas P, Gimenez-Gallego G, Wang Y, Sheng Z (1998) The
eﬀects of ﬁbroblast growth factors on ischemic kidney, liver and
gut injuries. Chin Med J (Engl) 111:398–403.
Huang MC, Lo MJ, Lin YL, Chang SE, Huang WC, Kuo WC, Tsai MJ,
Kuo HS, Shih YH, Cheng H (2009) Functional recovery after the
repair of transected cervical roots in the chronic stage of injury. J
Neurotrauma 26:1795–1804.
Huang SS, Cheng H, Tang CM, Nien MW, Huang YS, Lee IH, Yin JH,
Kuo TB, Yang CC, Tsai SK, Yang DI (2013) Anti-oxidative, antiapoptotic, and pro-angiogenic eﬀects mediate functional
improvement by sonic hedgehog against focal cerebral ischemia
in rats. Exp Neurol 247:680–688.
Huang WC, Kuo HS, Tsai MJ, Ma H, Chiu CW, Huang MC, Yang LH,
Chang PT, Lin YL, Kuo WC, Lee MJ, Liu JC, Cheng H (2011)
Adeno-associated virus-mediated human acidic ﬁbroblast growth
factor expression promotes functional recovery of spinal cordcontused rats. J Gene Med 13:283–289.
Hung LM, Huang JP, Liao JM, Yang MH, Li DE, Day YJ, Huang SS
(2014) Insulin renders diabetic rats resistant to acute ischemic
stroke by arresting nitric oxide reaction with superoxide to form
peroxynitrite. J Biomed Sci 21:92.
Laird JM, Mason GS, Thomas KA, Hargreaves RJ, Hill RG (1995)
Acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor stimulates motor and sensory axon

M. J. Tsai et al. / Neuroscience 305 (2015) 238–247
regeneration after sciatic nerve crush in the rat. Neuroscience
65:209–216.
Lee YS, Hsiao I, Lin VW (2002) Peripheral nerve grafts and aFGF
restore partial hindlimb function in adult paraplegic rats. J
Neurotrauma 19:1203–1216.
Li HH, Fu XB, Sun TZ, Cai CL, Zhou G, Chen W, Sheng ZY (2007)
Non-mitogenic acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor reduces intestinal
dysfunction induced by ischemia and reperfusion injury in rats. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 22:363–370.
Lin WF, Chen CJ, Chang YJ, Chen SL, Chiu IM, Chen L (2009)
SH2B1beta enhances ﬁbroblast growth factor 1 (FGF1)-induced
neurite outgrowth through MEK-ERK1/2-STAT3-Egr1 pathway.
Cell Signal 21:1060–1072.
MacMillan V, Walton-Roche K, Davis J (1993) Acidic ﬁbroblast growth
factor infusion reduces ischemic CA1 hippocampal damage in the
gerbil. Can J Neurol Sci 20:37–40.
Olsen SK, Ibrahimi OA, Raucci A, Zhang F, Eliseenkova AV, Yayon
A, Basilico C, Linhardt RJ, Schlessinger J, Mohammadi M (2004)
Insights into the molecular basis for ﬁbroblast growth factor
receptor autoinhibition and ligand-binding promiscuity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 101:935–940.
Shinozuka K, Dailey T, Tajiri N, Ishikawa H, Kim DW, Pabon M,
Acosta S, Kaneko Y, Borlongan CV (2013) Stem Cells for
Neurovascular Repair in Stroke. J Stem Cell Res Ther 4:12912.
Spicer PP, Mikos AG (2010) Fibrin glue as a drug delivery system. J
Control Release 148:49–55.
Teng YD, Mocchetti I, Wrathall JR (1998) Basic and acidic ﬁbroblast
growth factors protect spinal motor neurones in vivo after
experimental spinal cord injury. Eur J Neurosci 10:798–802.
Tsai MC, Shen LF, Kuo HS, Cheng H, Chak KF (2008) Involvement of
acidic ﬁbroblast growth factor in spinal cord injury repair
processes revealed by a proteomics approach. Mol Cell
Proteomics 7:1668–1687.
Tsai MJ, Liao JF, Lin DY, Huang MC, Liou DY, Yang HC, Lee HJ,
Chen YT, Chi CW, Huang WC, Cheng H (2010a) Silymarin
protects spinal cord and cortical cells against oxidative stress and
lipopolysaccharide stimulation. Neurochem Int 57:867–875.
Tsai MJ, Pan HA, Liou DY, Weng CF, Hoﬀer BJ, Cheng H (2010b)
Adenoviral gene transfer of bone morphogenetic protein-7
enhances functional recovery after sciatic nerve injury in rats.
Gene Ther 17:1214–1224.
Tsai MJ, Tsai SK, Hu BR, Liou DY, Huang SL, Huang MC, Huang
WC, Cheng H, Huang SS (2014) Recovery of neurological

247

function of ischemic stroke by application of conditioned
medium of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells derived from
normal and cerebral ischemia rats. J Biomed Sci 21:5 [1–12].
Tsai MJ, Weng CF, Shyue SK, Liou DY, Chen CH, Chiu CW, Yang
TH, Pan HA, Liao RI, Kuo HS, Huang MC, Huang WC, Hoﬀer BJ,
Cheng H (2007a) Dual eﬀect of adenovirus-mediated transfer of
BMP7 in mixed neuron-glial cultures: neuroprotection and cellular
diﬀerentiation. J Neurosci Res 85:2950–2959.
Tsai SK, Hung LM, Fu YT, Cheng H, Nien MW, Liu HY, Zhang FB,
Huang SS (2007b) Resveratrol neuroprotective eﬀects during
focal cerebral ischemia injury via nitric oxide mechanism in rats. J
Vasc Surg 46:346–353.
Walicke PA (1988) Basic and acidic ﬁbroblast growth factors have
trophic eﬀects on neurons from multiple CNS regions. J Neurosci
8:2618–2627.
Wang X, Rosell A, Lo EH (2008) Targeting extracellular matrix
proteolysis for hemorrhagic complications of tPA stroke therapy.
CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 7:235–242.
Wang Y, Lin H, Lin S, Qu J, Xiao J, Huang Y, Xiao Y, Fu X, Yang Y, Li
X (2010) Cell-penetrating peptide TAT-mediated delivery of acidic
FGF to retina and protection against ischemia-reperfusion injury
in rats. J Cell Mol Med 14:1998–2005.
Xu H, Li XK, Zheng Q, Huang YD, Yao CC, Su ZJ, Zhao W, Zhao ZY
(2009) Protective eﬀects of mutant of acidic ﬁbroblast growth
factor against cerebral ischaemia-reperfusion injury in rats. Injury
40:963–967.
Yang L, Tsai MJ, Chen YT, Hsieh NN, Cheng H (2012) The protective
eﬀects of aFGF on cultured neuron in H2O2 environment involves
both anti-apoptotic cell death and promoting neuronal
regeneration. Handb Oxidative Stress: New Res 18:457–468.
Zhou FQ, Snider WD (2006) Intracellular control of developmental
and regenerative axon growth. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
361:1575–1592.
Wu JX, Zhang LY, Chen YL, Yu SS, Zhao Y, Zhao J (2015) Curcumin
pretreatment and post-treatment both improve the antioxidative
ability of neurons with oxygen-glucose deprivation. Neural Regen
Res 10(3):481–489.
Zhang M, Wang S, Mao L, Leak RK, Shi Y, Zhang W, Hu X, Sun B,
Cao G, Gao Y, Xu Y, Chen J, Zhang F (2014) Omega-3 fatty acids
protect the brain against ischemic injury by activating Nrf2 and
upregulating heme oxygenase 1. J Neurosci 34(5):1903–1915.

(Accepted 16 July 2015)
(Available online 1 August 2015)

