ORIGINALRESEARCH
BRAIN
ANovelTechniquefortheMeasurementofCBFandCBVwith
Robot-Arm-MountedFlatPanelCTinaLarge-AnimalModel
O. Beuing, A. Boese, Y. Kyriakou, Y. Deuerling-Zengh, B. Jo ¨llenbeck, C. Scherlach, A. Lenz, S. Serowy, S. Gugel, G. Rose, and M. Skalej
ABSTRACT
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Endovascular therapy is an emerging treatment option in patients with acute ischemic stroke and
especiallyincasespresentinglateaftersymptomonset.Informationaboutremainingviabletissueasmeasuredwithperfusionimagingis
crucialforproperpatientselection.TheaimofthisstudywastoinvestigatewhetherperfusionimagingwithC-armCTintheangiography
suite is feasible and provides measurements comparable with ones made by CTP.
MATERIALSANDMETHODS: TheMCAwasoccludedsurgicallyin6sheep.Perfusionstudieswereperformedbeforesurgery,immediately
after,andat3hoursafterMCAocclusionbyusingaroboticflatpaneldetectorC-armangiographicsystem.Forcomparison,conventional
CTPwasperformedatthesametimepoints.TwodifferentprotocolswiththeC-armCTweretested.Imageswereanalyzedby2readers
with regard to the presence and size of perfusion abnormalities.
RESULTS: With C-arm CT, perfusion abnormalities were detected with a high sensitivity and specificity when vessel occlusion was
confirmed by criterion standard DSA. No difference was found between lesions sizes measured with the 2 C-arm CT protocols and CTP.
Growth of the CBV lesions with time was captured with C-arm CT and CTP.
CONCLUSIONS: Inthissmallstudy,itwasfeasibletoqualitativelymeasureCBVandCBFbyusingaflatpaneldetectorangiographicsystem.
Stroke is a major cause of death and disability throughout the
world. IV thrombolysis within 4.5 hours of symptom onset
remains the only therapy with benefit for patients so far, as proved
by randomized trials.1-3 However, the results of studies investigating
endovascular approaches indicate that the outcome of patients
with large-artery occlusions may be improved in comparison
with IV thrombolysis.4-8
Perfusion measurements are useful in selecting patients most
likely to benefit from revascularization because they provide information
about the ratio of infarct core to penumbra. This is
especially true for those patients presenting outside the therapeutic
time window for IV thrombolysis.
Despite the potential value of MR imaging or CTP measurements
, these studies are often not performed because there is no
solid evidence that they improve outcome, there is a significant
time cost in obtaining the measurements, and they only provide a
snapshot of a dynamic process.9The ability to obtain these measurements
in the angiography suite would eliminate the last 2 objections.
Several experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated that
measurement of CBV is feasible by using C-arm CT.10-12 More recently
, CBF was measured in healthy swine and canines with such a
system.13,14 We report our experience using a modified C-arm system
to measure steady-state CBV and also to make dynamic measurements
of CBF in an experimental sheep stroke model.
MATERIALSANDMETHODS
CreationofStroke
The experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines
and with written consent of the local ethics authorities.
Stroke was successfully created surgically in 6 of 7 German Blackheaded
sheep (1 animal died during surgery from ventricular fibrillation
). For surgery, the animals were placed in a supine position
on the angiography table. General anesthesia was inducted
with propofol; isoflurane was used for maintenance. Vital parameters
were monitored continuously. Surgery was necessary because
in sheep, the ICA develops from a rete mirabile, which is
Received February 20, 2013; accepted after revision December 19.
From the Institute of Neuroradiology (O.B., C.S., A.L., S.S., M.S.), Department of
Neurosurgery (B.J.), and Healthcare Telematics and Medical Engineering (A.B., S.G.,
G.R.), Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany; and Siemens AG (Y.K.,
Y.D.-Z.), Healthcare Sector, Erlangen, Germany.
This work was supported by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research under
grant FKZ 03IP710, and by Siemens AG, Healthcare Sector.
Please address correspondence to Oliver Beuing, MD, Institute of Neuroradiology,
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Leipziger Str 44, Magdeburg, 39120, Germany
; e-mail: oliver.beuing@med.ovgu.de
Indicates open access to non-subscribers at www.ajnr.org
http://dx.doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A3973
1740 Beuing Sep 2014 www.ajnr.org
( 8.0.0.2542.409640534 PDF Extractor SDK EVALUATION)
formed by extracranial arteries at the skull base (Fig 1A). The
vertebral arteries also join the rete. The intracranial vessels of both
sides are connected via communicating arteries. Despite the anatomy
, which does not allow direct access to the middle cerebral
artery by catheterization, we chose sheep because of their gyrencephalic
brain, which is larger than that in other animals used for
experimental stroke studies.
The technique for surgical MCA occlusion has been described
elsewhere in detail.15 In short, trepanation of the skull was followed
by incision of the dura mater near where the MCA surfaces.
The artery was then occluded by electrocoagulation. Due to anatomic
variations in branching of the MCA, the M1 segment could
not always be occluded. In 2 cases, only a large M2 branch was
occluded. Intra-arterial DSA was performed before surgery to
document the vascular anatomy and patency of the intracranial
arteries and afterward to confirm artery occlusion (Fig 1B).
DataAcquisition
CBV and CBF perfusion measurements were performed with C-
arm CT and with a conventional CT scanner. The C-arm of the
flat panel angiography system is mounted on a robot arm (Artis
zeego; Siemens, Erlangen, Germany), which, due to modifications
of the software configuration, allows very fast serial forward and
backward rotations, with data acquisition in both directions.
With C-arm CT, 2 different protocols were tested. Each comprised
7 rotations (sweeps) of the C-arm before and after contrast
administration (baseline and fill runs). The main differences betweenthe2protocolslieinthedurationofsweepsandthenumberof
projections per rotation. The parameters for the first protocol (slow
scan) were as follows: 7 sweeps with a duration of 4.43 seconds each;
a 1.57-second pause between 2 sweeps; rotation angle, 200°; rotation
speed, 60° per second; 248 projections per rotation; angulation step,
0.8°/frame. The second protocol (fast scan) also comprised 7 sweeps,
but with a duration of 2.83 seconds each; a 1.57-second pause between
rotations; rotation angle, 200°; rotation speed, 100° per second
; 133 projections per rotation; angulation step, 1.5°/frame. The
x-ray tube voltage was 90 kV in both protocols.
For CTP, a Somatom Emotion 6 (Siemens) was used. The
animals were placed on the CT table in a supine position. The
head was tilted so that axial images oriented
at the frontal skull base by using the
topogram could be acquired. To minimize
lateral tilting, we adjusted the head
by using the laser guide. After contrast injection
, the scan was started and the contrast
bolus was followed for 60 seconds
with 1 acquisition every second.
Identical injection parameters were
used for C-arm CT and CTP: IV administration
of 42-mL iomeprol (Iomeron 400;
Bracco Imaging, Konstanz, Germany)
with a power injector (Tennessee; Ulrich
Medical, Ulm, Germany) with a flow rate
of 6 mL/s and an x-ray delay of 12 seconds.
The injection parameters were determined
by testing different injection
protocols with varying amounts of contrast
media, flow rates, and delays in 2 animals
not included in this study. Total scan duration from the
start of baseline runs to the end of the measurement amounted to
approximately 100 seconds for the slow scan and 75 seconds for
the fast scan and CTP, respectively. The radiation dose for the
C-arm system was 1.2Gy per projection based on the availability
of the hardware and software at that time. Dose-length product
was 1047 mGy-cm for CTP.
Because surgery was performed on the angiography table, imaging
with C-arm CT was started immediately after postsurgical DSA.
CTP was performed in the adjacent room within 15 minutes after
perfusion measurement with C-arm CT. The animal was left in the
CT scanner for 3 hours for the second postsurgical measurement and
then transported back to the angiography suite. In addition, perfusion
imaging with both modalities was performed before vessel occlusion.
After completion of the protocols, the animals were
euthanized.
NumberofDatasets
Of 84 possible datasets in 7 sheep, only 60 (22 before and 38 after
surgery) were evaluated (Table 1). Reasons for exclusion of data
were death from cardiac failure during surgery (n 12), failed
vessel occlusion (n 8), failed contrast injection (n 2), and
inability to open the datasets (n 2). Because reconstruction of
the data with the prototype software was time-consuming and
performed after completion of the protocol, the failed contrast
injection and the corruption of datasets were not observed during
the course of the procedure. In the case of failed vessel occlusion,
DSA could not confirm the success of the surgery. The reason was
formation of a blood clot around a catheter that was left in the
arteries feeding the rete mirabile for postsurgical DSA. As a result,
ipsilateral DSA did not show intracranial vessels and contralateral
DSA was not sufficient to depict the vessels on the operated side.
Perfusion studies were performed nevertheless because the neurosurgeon
was confident that the MCA was occluded.
PostprocessingandDataAnalysis
The CTP data were calculated by using commercially available
software (VPCT; Siemens) and also with prototype software
FIG 1. Intracranial vessels before (A) and after (B) vessel occlusion (black arrow). Contrast
material was injected near the rete mirabile (whitearrowinA). The MCA surfaces shortly after
branchingofftheICA(blackasteriskinA),whichalsogivesrisetotheposteriorcerebralartery.
Due to early branching, the complete MCA territory was not affected.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 35:1740–45 Sep 2014 www.ajnr.org 1741
(TRIAL VER. PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542.1599324499)
developed and provided by Siemens.16 This calculation was performed
to find out whether the different software implementations
would yield similar results with the same data and also to
avoid a bias of one algorithm over the other. The data acquired
with the C-arm CT were only compatible with the prototype software.
So, at every time point (before surgery, immediately and 3
hours after surgery) 4 datasets, each consisting of 1 CBV and 1
CBF color map, were acquired per animal (Fig 2). MTT and TTP
were not calculated because the prototype software was not optimized
for these parameters.
The arterial input function was chosen manually at the ICA
close to the site where it originates from the rete mirabile or the
MCA on the side opposite the MCA occlusion (Fig 3). Both the
time-attenuation curves and the arterial input functions are undersampled
because of the limited temporal resolution (slow rotation
) of the C-arm. Specifically, there is only 1 measurement
time point per sweep. The intermediate values for all 1-second
steps were determined by a bicubic spline interpolation.
Positioning of the head of the animals in the angiographic
system was different from that in the CT scanner to allow uninhibited
rotation of the C-arm. This required reformatting to generate
comparable images concerning section orientation and
thickness. Anatomic detail in the perfusion maps acquired was
not sufficient to allow automatic registration, so matching of the
CT and C-arm images had to be performed on a syngo workstation
(Siemens) on a visual basis by an experienced neuroradiologist
who did not take part in the evaluation. The volume datasets
acquired with the C-arm system were displayed on the workstation
and adjusted by using reference lines, so that the final axial
images paralleled the frontal lobe as it did in the CT images. The
result of this procedure was directly compared with the timely
matching CTP images of the same animal and was further corrected
, if necessary, to achieve the best possible agreement.
After anonymization, the color maps were transferred to a
certified OsiriX PRO workstation (aycan Digitalsysteme, Wu ¨rzburg
, Germany). They were randomly presented with regard to
the time of acquisition and animal subject and were evaluated by
2 experienced neuroradiologists who were blinded to the surgical
status. Each neuroradiologist was asked to decide whether perfusion
abnormalities were present, and if present, to measure the
size in the section exhibiting the largest lesion on a visual basis.
StatisticalAnalysis
Interobserver reliability was calculated by using the Cohenvalue
and was classified according to the Landis and Koch17scale. Sensitivity
and specificity for the detection of perfusion deficits, with
DSA-proved vessel occlusion serving as the criterion standard,
were determined for each protocol and for both readers. For comparison
of the measured sizes of the perfusion lesion, a 2-tailed
Studentt test was applied to search for differences between the 2
readers. A pair-wise testing was performed to compare the different
protocols.
RESULTS
Interobserver agreement was “substantial” for the fast scan (
0.72), “almost perfect” for the slow scan (0.86), and “perfect”
for CTP (1.00). Sensitivity and specificity for the detection of
perfusion lesions with the different protocols for both readers are
outlined in Table 2. With regard to the C-arm protocols, specificity
was higher and sensitivity was lower for the fast rather than the
slow scans for both readers. For the data obtained with CTP and
Table1:Overviewovertheacquisitionofdatasets
C-Arm3
Seconds
C-Arm5
Seconds
CTP
Prototypea
CTP
VPCTb
Sheep 1
Pre v v v v
0 Hours v v v v
3 Hours v v v v
Sheep 2
Pre v v v v
0 Hours v v v v
3 Hours v v v v
Sheep 3
Pre v v v x
0 Hours x x v v
3 Hours v v v v
Sheep 4
Pre x v v v
0 Hours x x x x
3 Hours x x x x
Sheep 5 x x x x
x x  x x 
x x  x x 
Sheep 6
Pre v v v v
0 Hours v v v v
3 Hours v v v v
Sheep 7
Pre v v v v
0 Hours v v v v
3 Hours v v v v
Total 14 15 16 15
Note:—Preindicatesdataacquiredbeforesurgery;v,setsthatwereacquiredasthe
protocol demanded and that were included in the evaluation; x, excluded datasets
(The reasons are explained in the text) .
aDatasets acquired with CTP and calculated with the prototype software.
bDatasets acquired with CTP and calculated with the commercial software VPCT
(Siemens).
FIG 2. Color maps of CBF and CBV for all protocols 3 hours after
vessel occlusion on the left side. Perfusion deficits are clearly visible,
butimagequalityisimpairedbystreakartifacts,especiallyinthefast
scan. The prototype is CTP data processed with the prototype software.
VPCT is CTP data processed with commercial software.
1742 Beuing Sep 2014 www.ajnr.org
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-1831208782)
calculated with the commercial and the prototype software, sensitivity
and specificity were 100%.
The average size of the CBF lesions as measured with CTP was
8.33.0 cm2; and for CBV, 7.12.7 cm2. Compared with CTP,
the sizes of those lesions that were correctly identified by both
readers in the C-arm protocols did not differ significantly in pairwise
testing. Reader 2 tended to measure smaller sizes than reader
1, but this difference was significant only for CBV immediately
after surgery (P .039). CBF lesions were significantly larger
than CBV lesions in all protocols (P .006 for the slow scan,
for the other protocols P .001). No significant changes of
CBF lesion sizes were noted with time (P .33). In contrast,
CBV lesions were significantly larger 3 hours after vessel occlusion
than immediately after surgery (P .034). Reader 1 correctly
identified perfusion deficits in 3 datasets that were not
detected by reader 2. Reader 2 did not detect a lesion that was
overlooked by reader 1.
DISCUSSION
In ischemic stroke, several factors influence
patient outcome. These comprise,
among others, time from symptom onset
to recanalization, collateral flow, thrombus
size, and location of the vessel occlusion.
IV thrombolysis is the standard
therapy for patients without contraindications
and presenting within 4.5 hours
after symptom onset, but endovascular
therapy may be more effective in patients
with occlusion of major cerebral arteries.
Additionally, several works indicate that
interventional recanalization might be
beneficial in patients presenting outside
the therapeutic window accepted for IV
thrombolysis.18,19 However, this relatively
new treatment option has drawbacks as well. One is the
invasive nature of the procedure with the risk of severe or fatal
complications. Consequently, interventional treatment should
only be performed in cases with a reasonable chance for improvement
of outcome. This alone requires more detailed information
regarding the ratio of ischemic core to penumbra than is necessary
for initiation of IV thrombolysis. There is evidence that perfusion
imaging, though not generally recommended for treatment decisions
, serves the purpose of proper patient selection.20-22It might
help not only in deciding whether to treat patients but also in
refraining from therapy even if the patient presents early after
symptom onset. Another drawback of endovascular recanalization
is that the time from imaging to treatment start is substantially
longer than that for IV thrombolysis. Perfusion imaging is
only a snapshot of a dynamic process that cannot predict the
speed at which ischemia becomes final infarction. Therefore, saving
time is also an essential requirement in optimizing both the
efficacy and safety of interventional therapy.
Because performing imaging in the angiographic suite by using
the novel C-arm CT addresses both issues, this small study was
performed to evaluate whether it is possible, with the described
technique, to gain relevant information about brain perfusion
with the same device used for therapy, and, consequently, to save
time.
The results are encouraging because perfusion lesions were
detected in a high or very high percentage with the tested C-arm
CT protocols in animals with DSA-proved vessel occlusion. Compared
with CTP, the sensitivity was lower for most C-arm CT
protocols, but on the other hand, all lesions were small, with the
largest matching the size of the human basal ganglia.
The sizes of the perfusion deficits varied considerably among
the animals. These differences were due to anatomic variations
of the MCA. In some animals, early branching of the MCA was
observed and not all branches could be visualized after surfacing.
This finding resulted in partial MCA infarction. In other cases,
electrocoagulation apparently led to occlusion of the ICA with
infarction of the whole anterior circulation territory. Nevertheless
, pair-wise testing revealed comparable results with regard to
size for the C-arm protocols and CTP. The smallest correctly
identified lesion had an area of only approximately 2.5 cm2. That
FIG3. ManuallychosenarterialinputfunctionintheICAneartheskullbaseandcorresponding
time-attenuation curve.
Table2:Sensitivityandspecificityforlesiondetectionshown
separatelyforeachreaderandprotocol
Reader1 Reader2
Occl. NoOccl. Occl. NoOccl.
Fast
Positive 8 0 6 0
Negative 1 5 3 5
Sensitivity 88.9% 66.7%
Specificity 100% 100%
Slow
Positive 9 1 8 1
Negative 0 5 1 5
Sensitivity 100% 88.9%
Specificity 83.3% 83.3%
Prototype
Positive 10 0 10 0
Negative 0 6 0 6
Sensitivity 100% 100%
Specificity 100% 100%
VPCT
Positive 10 0 10 0
Negative 0 5 0 5
Sensitivity 100% 100%
Specificity 100% 100%
Note:—Occl. indicates occlusion.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 35:1740–45 Sep 2014 www.ajnr.org 1743
(8.0.0.2542.334765455 PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSIOn)
reader 2 tended to measure a smaller size for all lesions might be
the effect of evaluating datasets of the whole brain. Different sections
might have been chosen. However, a more conservative approach
to measurement might be taken into account as well.
Size differences between CBF and CBV lesions were measured
atbothtimepoints,andCBVlesionswerelargerafter3hoursthan
immediately after surgery. These size differences of the CBV lesions
were significant with all protocols. This finding probably
reflects growth of the infarct core with time. That enlargement of
CBV lesions found in all protocols and not only in CTP suggests
that C-arm CT might be capable of depicting changes of brain
perfusion, even if small. This possibility might have an impact on
treatment decisions. Perfusion measurement with C-arm CT can
be performed not only before therapy but at any time during
endovascular stroke intervention. There are thus scenarios in
which this information might influence treatment decisions. One
such situation could be a difficult intervention with partial recanalization.
If no improvement of functional outcome can be expected
, the intervention might as well be terminated so that the
patient is not exposed to unnecessary risk of complications due to
the intervention. In addition, stent placement in the acute phase
with all its negative consequences such as dual-antiplatelet therapy
might be avoided if perfusion maps indicate a large infarct
with little viable parenchyma. Of course, the presented data cannot
serve as a basis for validating the use of this technique for such
decisions. However, the encouraging results support further effort
to reach the goal of making stroke imaging in the angiography
suite feasible. C-arm CT already allows the exclusion of intracranial
hemorrhage in many cases, and intracranial vessels can be
well-depicted.23-26Also, measurement of CBV was feasible by using
a C-arm CT.10-12 The described technique may additionally
provide information about dynamic perfusion parameters.
There are several limitations in this study. First, only a small
number of animals were examined. Therefore, the results should
be interpreted with caution concerning statistical significance.
Nevertheless, a positive trend with regard to lesion detection
seems to exist. The complete and irreversible occlusion of a major
intracranial artery led to large CBV lesions already in the early
phase. Therefore, their enlargement was only slight, and significance
might have occurred by chance. Therefore, whether progression
of the core infarct can be depicted with C-arm CT remains
unclear with this small sample number.
Second, we did not quantify perfusion changes. One reason
was that the slow temporal sampling rate leads to an underestimation
of the arterial input function; consequently, because CBF
values are inversely proportional to the area under the arterial
input function, CBF would have been overestimated.27Moreover,
our focus was to find out whether assessment of dynamic perfusion
parameters was feasible in a new large-animal model. However
, quantification is possible as was demonstrated by Ganguly et
al.13 They stated that CBF measured with C-arm cone beam CT
correlated well with that from CTP, but in this work, multiple
injections and multiple acquisitions were performed to overcome
the temporal resolution limits of the C-arm system, whereas we
chose a protocol with a single injection and only 1 fill run.
Third, we chose sheep for our experiments because the technique
of surgical occlusion was described and sheep have a larger,
gyrencephalic brain, as opposed to that in most other animal
stroke models. However, we were not aware that the attenuated
bony anatomy of the sheep skull would cause such marked streak
artifacts compared with humans. We did not appreciate this
drawback during the experiments because postprocessing was
performed after having completed the protocol for the animal.
When we realized the occurrence of these artifacts, we initially
tried to eliminate other possible causes like movement induced by
the ventilation tube, exact centering of the brain, or minimizing
overlying material needed for anesthesia. The artifacts were more
pronounced in the fast scans. Although image quality was not
assessed systematically, these artifacts might explain the lower
sensitivity compared with the other protocols.
Finally, to ensure the best possible image quality, we chose a
high-system x-ray dose. It is likely that new system hardware and
advanced software will provide further dose reduction in the future.
A dose measurement with an Alderson phantom is being
planned.
CONCLUSIONS
With the described technique, we demonstrated that measurement
of CBV and, additionally, CBF as a dynamic perfusion parameter
is feasible by using the novel C-arm system. Information
about brain perfusion considered helpful in modern concepts of
diagnosis and treatment of acute ischemic stroke may be derived
with the same device. This small study supports the effort of further
development of a technique that may have the potential to
improve management of patients with acute severe stroke by saving
time from diagnosis to treatment and by adding information
for proper patient selection.
Disclosures: Oliver Beuing—RELATED:Grant: Siemens AG Healthcare Sector,* Federal
Ministry of Education and Research,* Comments: The money was used for
purchase of the sheep; the facility in which the perfusion studies were performed
was supported by the Federal Ministry for Education and Research. Axel Boese—
RELATED:Grant: BMBF FKZ 03IP710 INKA,*Provision of Writing Assistance, Medicines
,Equipment,orAdministrativeSupport:SiemensAG,HealthcareSector,Erlangen
,Germany,*Comments:Themanufacturerprovidedsponsoredresearchfunding
through channels approved by Otto-von-Guericke University; the manufacturer
providedequipmentforthisstudyanddonatedallcostsassociatedwiththeanimal
study.CordulaScherlach,AnjaLenz,SteffenSerowy,GeorgRose—RELATED:Grant:
Siemens AG, Healthcare Sector,* Federal Ministry of Education and Research.* Sebastien
Gugel—RELATED:Support for Travel to Meetings for the Study or Other
Purposes:Siemens,*Provision of Writing Assistance, Medicines, Equipment, or Administrative
Support: Siemens.* Martin Skalej—RELATED:Grant: Siemens Erlangen,
Germany,*Comments: The grant was to pay service costs of a professional animal
lab. *Money paid to the institution.
REFERENCES
1. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute ischemic stroke: the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke rt-PA Stroke
Study Group.N Engl J Med1995;333:1581–87
2. Lees KR, Bluhmki E, von Kummer R, et al. Time to treatment with
intravenous alteplase and outcome in stroke: an updated pooled
analysisofECASS,ATLANTIS,NINDS,andEPITHETtrials.Lancet
2010;375:1695–703
3. Sandercock P, Wardlaw JM, Lindley RI, et al.The benefits and harms
ofintravenousthrombolysiswithrecombinanttissueplasminogen
activator within6hofacute ischaemic stroke (the third International
Stroke Trial [IST-3]): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet
2012;379:2352–63
4. Mattle HP, Arnold M, Georgiadis D, et al.Comparison of intraarte-
1744 Beuing Sep 2014 www.ajnr.org
(BY PDF Extractor SDK TRIAL VERSION)
rial and intravenous thrombolysis for ischemic stroke with hyperdense
middle cerebral artery sign.Stroke2008;39:379–83
5. Penumbra Pivotal Stroke Trial Investigators.The Penumbra Pivotal
Stroke Trial: safety and effectiveness of a new generation of mechanical
devices for clot removal in intracranial large vessel occlusive
disease.Stroke2009;40:2761–68
6. Da ´valos A, Pereira VM, Chapot R, et al. Retrospective multicenter
study of Solitaire FR for revascularization in the treatment of acute
ischemic stroke.Stroke2012;43:2699–705
7. Nogueira RG, Lutsep HL, Gupta R, et al.Trevo versus Merci retrievers
for thrombectomy revascularisation of large vessel occlusions
in acute ischaemic stroke (TREVO 2): a randomised trial. Lancet
2012;380:1231–40
8. Saver JL, Jahan R, Levy EI, et al. Solitaire flow restoration device
versus the Merci retriever in patients with acute ischaemic stroke
(SWIFT): a randomised, parallel-group, non-inferiority trial.Lancet2012;380:1241–49
9. Lev MH.Perfusion imaging of acute stroke: its role in current and
future clinical practice.Radiology2013;266:22–27
10. Struffert T, Deuerling-Zheng Y, Engelhorn T, et al.Feasibility of cerebral
blood volume mapping by flat panel detector CT in the angiography
suite: first experience in patients with acute middle cerebral
artery occlusions.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2012;33:618–25
11. Struffert T, Deuerling-Zheng Y, Kloska S, et al. Cerebral blood volumeimagingbyflatdetectorcomputedtomographyincomparison
toconventionalmultisliceperfusionCT.EurRadiol2011;21:882–89
12. Bley T, Strother CM, Pulfer K, et al. C-arm CT measurement of cerebral
blood volume in ischemic stroke: an experimental study in
canines.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2010;31:536–40
13. Ganguly A, Fieselmann A, Marks M, et al. Cerebral CT perfusion
using an interventional C-arm imaging system: cerebral blood flow
measurements.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2011;32:1525–31
14. Royalty K, Manhart M, Pulfer K, et al. C-arm CT measurement of
cerebral blood volume and cerebral blood flow using a novel highspeedacquisitionandasingleintravenouscontrastinjection.AJNR
Am J Neuroradiol2013;34:2131–38
15. Boltze J, Forschler A, Nitzsche B, et al. Permanent middle cerebral
artery occlusion in sheep: a novel large animal model of focal cerebral
ischemia.J Cereb Blood Flow Metab2008;28:1951–64
16. Fieselmann A, Dennerlein F, Deuerling-Zheng Y, et al. A model for
filtered backprojection reconstruction artifacts due to time-varying
attenuation values in perfusion C-arm CT. Phys Med Biol
2011;56:3701–17
17. Landis JR, Koch GG. The measurement of observer agreement for
categorical data.Biometrics1977;33:159–74
18. Abou-Chebl A. Endovascular treatment of acute ischemic stroke
may be safely performed with no time window limit in appropriately
selected patients.Stroke2010;41:1996–2000
19. Turk A, Magarik JA, Chaudry I, et al. CT perfusion-guided patient
selectionforendovasculartreatmentofacuteischemicstrokeissafe
and effective.J Neurointerv Surg2012;4:261–65
20. Bivard A, McElduff P, Spratt N, et al.Defining the extent of irreversible
brain ischemia using perfusion computed tomography. Cerebrovasc
Dis2011;31:238–45
21. Davis S, Campbell B, Christensen S, et al. Perfusion/diffusion mismatch
is valid and should be used for selecting delayed interventions.Transl Stroke Res2012;3:188–97
22. Kamalian S, Maas MB, Goldmacher GV, et al.CT cerebral blood flow
mapsoptimallycorrelatewithadmissiondiffusion-weightedimaging
in acute stroke but thresholds vary by postprocessing platform.
Stroke2011;42:1923–28
23. Struffert T, Eyupoglu IY, Huttner HB, et al. Clinical evaluation of
flat-panel detector compared with multislice computed tomography
in 65 patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: initial
results: clinical article.J Neurosurg2010;113:901–07
24. Blanc R, Pistocchi S, Babic D, et al. Intravenous flat-detector CT
angiography in acute ischemic stroke management.Neuroradiology
2012;54:383–91
25. Jeon JS, Sheen SH, Hwang GJ, et al. Feasibility of intravenous flat
panel detector CT angiography for intracranial arterial stenosis.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2013;34:129–34
26. Doelken M, Struffert T, Richter G, et al.Flat-panel detector volumetric
CT for visualization of subarachnoid hemorrhage and
ventricles: preliminary results compared to conventional CT.Neuroradiology2008;50:517–23
27. Konstas AA, Goldmakher GV, Lee TY, et al.Theoreticbasisandtechnical
implementations of CT perfusion in acute ischemic stroke.
Part 1. Theoretic basis.AJNR Am J Neuroradiol2009;30:662–68
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 35:1740–45 Sep 2014 www.ajnr.org 1745
(EVAL PDF Extractor SDK 8.0.0.2542-2011389603)
