Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Neuroscience Methods
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jneumeth

Basic Neuroscience

A novel atherothrombotic model of ischemic stroke induced by
injection of collagen into the cerebral vasculature
Kathryn J. Schunke a , Thomas K. Toung a , Jian Zhang a , Arvind P. Pathak b , Jiadi Xu c ,
Jiangyang Zhang b , Raymond C. Koehler a , Nauder Faraday a,∗
a

Department of Anesthesiology/Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology & Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
c
F. M. Kirby Functional Imaging Center, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA
b

h i g h l i g h t s
•
•
•
•
•

We developed a stroke model similar in pathophysiology to atherothrombotic stroke.
Collagen was injected directly into the cerebral circulation of mice and rats.
Cerebral blood ﬂow remained depressed for at least 1 h after collagen injection.
Platelet and ﬁbrin rich thrombi formed in macro- and microvascular cerebral arteries.
Cerebral infarcts and neurobehavioral deﬁcits were observed after 48 h.

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 30 June 2014
Received in revised form 2 October 2014
Accepted 3 October 2014
Available online 12 October 2014
Keywords:
Atherothrombosis
Collagen
Ischemic stroke
Platelet
Mouse
Rat

a b s t r a c t
Background: Most ischemic strokes in humans are caused by ruptured arterial atheroma, which activate
platelets and produce thrombi that occlude cerebral vessels.
Methods: To simulate these events, we threaded a catheter through the internal carotid artery toward the
middle cerebral artery (MCA) oriﬁce and injected collagen directly into the cerebral circulation of male
C57Bl/6 mice and Wistar rats.
Results: Laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry demonstrated reductions in cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) of ∼80% in mice
and ∼60% in rats. CBF spontaneously increased but remained depressed after catheter withdrawal. Magnetic resonance imaging showed that ipsilateral CBF was reduced at 3 h after collagen injection and
markedly improved at 48 h. Micro-computed tomography revealed reduced blood vessel density in the
ipsilateral MCA territory at 3 h. Gross examination of excised brains revealed thrombi within ipsilateral
cerebral arteries at 3 h, but not 24 h, after collagen injection. Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy conﬁrmed
that platelets and ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin were major components of these thrombi at both macrovascular and
microvascular levels. Cerebral infarcts comprising ∼30% of hemispheric volume and neurobehavioral
deﬁcits were observed 48 h after ischemic injury in both mice and rats.
Comparison with existing methods: Collagen injection caused brain injury that was similar in magnitude
and variability to mechanical MCA occlusion or injection of a pre-formed clot; however, alterations in
CBF and the mechanism of vascular occlusion were more consistent with clinical ischemic stroke.
Conclusion: This novel rodent model of ischemic stroke has pathophysiologic characteristics consistent
with clinical atherothrombotic stroke, is technically feasible, and creates reproducible brain injury.
© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

∗ Corresponding author at: Department of Anesthesiology/Critical Care Medicine,
297 Meyer Building, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 600 N. Wolfe St., Baltimore, MD 21287,
USA. Tel.: +1 410 502 7085; fax: +1 410 955 8978.
E-mail address: nfaraday@jhmi.edu (N. Faraday).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2014.10.001
0165-0270/© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Stroke is now the second leading worldwide cause of death and
the third leading cause of disability-adjusted life-years (Murray
and Lopez, 2013). More than 85% of human strokes are ischemic
in nature, and of these, the majority are atherothrombotic (noncardioembolic) in origin (Roger et al., 2012). Anti-platelet agents,
such as aspirin and clopidogrel, are standard of care for primary

66

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

and secondary prevention of atherothrombotic stroke, whereas
anticoagulant drugs, such as warfarin, provide protection against
cardioembolic stroke (Warden et al., 2012; Lansberg et al., 2012).
Thrombolytic therapy is standard of care for treatment of acute
ischemic stroke that has either an atherothrombotic or cardioembolic origin, but it requires administration within a few hours of
symptom onset (Lansberg et al., 2012). Unfortunately, none of the
currently available therapies is completely effective at reducing
brain injury. Despite decades of intensive research and successful
intervention in animal stroke models, novel laboratory therapies
have not translated to the clinical environment. This failure can
be attributed in part to shortcomings in animal stroke models,
which do not faithfully recapitulate the pathophysiologic events
that occur in most human strokes (Macrae, 2011; Fisher et al., 2009).
Most ischemic strokes in humans are caused by the rupture
of unstable atherosclerotic plaque present in large extracranial
and intracranial arterial vessels, with the carotid artery being a
particularly common site (Nieswandt et al., 2011; Badimon and
Vilahur, 2007; Warden et al., 2012; Hennerici, 2004). Components
of plaques that remain on the arterial surface and that embolize
distally activate platelets and produce thrombi that occlude large
cerebral vessels and distal microvessels, causing ischemic injury,
the magnitude of which depends on the size of the vessel and
duration of occlusion (Davi and Patrono, 2007; Hennerici, 2004).
The spectrum of clinical events, from transient ischemic attack
to hemispheric stroke, reﬂects these pathologic events, which
commonly include spontaneous or therapeutic recanalization of
the occluded vessel and subsequent reperfusion injury. Much of
the experimental stroke literature has focused on searching for
neuroprotective strategies using models that include mechanical
occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) and intra-arterial
injection of a preformed blood clot, or on repair strategies with
a permanent photothrombotic occlusion model of the distal MCA
or its branches. However, these models do not lend themselves
well for the study of atherothrombotic mechanisms, which involve
platelet activation and thrombus formation in situ in cerebral
macro- and microvessels. To more closely mimic human events,
we modiﬁed the standard transient ﬁlament occlusion model of
ischemia/reperfusion injury. Rather than threading a ﬁlament to
mechanically occlude the MCA or injecting a preformed clot, we
thread a narrow catheter near the MCA origin but do not occlude
blood ﬂow. Instead, we perform a series of intra-arterial injections of collagen, a potent platelet activator and component of
ruptured atherosclerotic plaque (Fuster et al., 1990). The collagen induces platelet-rich clot formation and consequent vascular
occlusion.

2. Materials and methods
2.1. Rodent model of ischemic stroke
The investigational protocol was approved by the Johns Hopkins University Animal Care and Use Committee. Male C57Bl/6
mice (26–28 g; 3–4 months) were anesthetized with 1–2%
isoﬂurane/30% O2 in a temperature-controlled environment that
maintained body temperature at 37.0 ± 0.5 ◦ C. The right neck and
carotid bifurcation were dissected. The external carotid artery was
ligated and used as a stump for passage of a PE8 catheter (SAI Infusion Technologies, Lake Villa, IL), and the right common carotid
artery was temporarily ligated. The PE8 catheter was advanced
into the internal carotid artery (ICA) approximately 5 mm past its
bifurcation with the external carotid. A 10-␮l Hamilton syringe was
used to inject 1 ␮g of collagen (1 ␮g/␮l, Chrono-Log Corp., Havertown, PA) through the catheter six times at 5-min intervals (N = 10).
In additional experiments, a single injection of collagen (5 ␮g or

1 ␮g) was used (N = 5 each dose). Cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF) was
measured with a laser-Doppler ﬂow (LDF) (Moor Instruments Ltd.,
Wilmington, DE) apparatus ﬁxed on a cranial window that was
lateral and slightly posterior to the bregma and devoid of large vessels, as previously described (Alkayed et al., 1998). Carotid artery
reperfusion was initiated 60 min after the ﬁrst collagen injection
by withdrawing the catheter and releasing the temporary carotid
ligature. After necks were sutured, animals were placed into a
humidity- and temperature-controlled chamber for the ﬁrst 2 h of
recovery.
The model was modiﬁed for use in male Wistar rats (300–400 g)
(N = 12). We catheterized the right femoral artery to monitor blood
pressure. In addition, with rats in the lateral position, we temporarily occluded both the left and right common carotid arteries with
microvascular clips. The PE8 catheter was threaded through the
ICA to the aperture of the MCA, as determined by a slight decrement (∼10%) of LDF signal. Collagen was injected six times (10 ␮l
per injection) at 5-min intervals. Carotid reperfusion was achieved
60 min after the ﬁrst injection by removal of the catheter and
removal of the microvascular clips placed on the common carotid
arteries.
In additional experiments, we induced ischemia in mice by
mechanical occlusion of the MCA (N = 7), and in rats by intra-arterial
injection of a clot (N = 12). Brieﬂy, we performed the ﬁlament occlusion model in the mouse as previously described (Eliasson et al.,
1997) using a 6-0 nylon monoﬁlament to mechanically occlude
the MCA for 60 min. Occlusion was followed by 60 min of monitored reperfusion. We performed the embolic clot model in the rat
by injecting a single preformed 25-mm-long blood clot into the
MCA, as previously described by us and others (Zhang et al., 1997;
Papangelou et al., 2013).

2.2. Measurement of cerebral perfusion in vivo by magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)
Three hours after collagen injection, we assessed cerebral perfusion and brain injury in mice by MRI using T2, diffusion, and
perfusion-weighted images (N = 3). MRI was carried out on a horizontal bore 11.7 Tesla Bruker AVANCE 3 system equipped with
a triple-axis gradient unit (maximum strength 740 mT/m) with
modiﬁcations of protocols previously described by us and others (Wu et al., 2013; Duhamel et al., 2012). Brieﬂy, the animal’s
respiration rate was kept at ∼60 breaths/min by adjusting the
dose of anesthesia (approximately 1–1.5% isoﬂurane with air and
oxygen mixed at a 3:1 ratio). Body temperature was kept at
approximately 35–37 ◦ C by circulating warm water through the
animal holder and was monitored constantly via a thermocouple placed under the body. Imaging acquisition was synchronized
by respiratory gating signals. We used a fast spin echo sequence
for T2 MRI and a diffusion-weighted echo planar imaging (EPI)
sequence for diffusion tensor imaging (DTI). We acquired T2 weighted images with echo times (TEs) of 40 ms and a repetition
time (TR) of 3000 ms, two signal averages, 0.4 mm slice thickness, and an in-plane resolution of 0.08 mm × 0.08 mm. For DTI, we
used TE/TR = 30/3000 ms, 4 shots with navigator correction, two
signal averages, 30 diffusion-weighted images with a maximum
b value of 1000 s/mm2 , 0.4 mm slice thickness, and an in-plane
resolution of 0.16 mm × 0.16 mm. Un-inverted ﬂow-sensitive alternating inversion recovery (UNFAIR) arterial spin labeling was
used with 1 mm slice thickness, 5 slices, and an in-plane resolution of 0.25 mm × 0.25 mm. Diffusion tensor was calculated
using a log-linear ﬁtting method implemented in DTIstudio
(www.mristudio.org), and maps of apparent diffusion coefﬁcient
(ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA) were also obtained (Basser
et al., 1994; Basser and Pierpaoli, 1996). Maps of cerebral blood

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

ﬂow (CBF) were calculated as previously described (Tanabe et al.,
1999).
2.3. Assessment of cerebrovascular architecture ex vivo by
micro-computerized tomography (CT)
In mice, we assessed gross cerebrovascular architecture and
cerebral blood vessel density by micro-CT ex vivo using methods
previously described (Pathak et al., 2011) (N = 3). Brieﬂy, 3 h after
collagen injection, mice were deeply anesthetized with isoﬂurane
and then perfused through the left ventricle with phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) and 10% buffered formalin, followed by
silicone rubber Microﬁl (FlowTech Inc., Carver, MA). Samples were
sent to Numira Biosciences (Salt Lake City, UT) for imaging on
a high-resolution, volumetric micro-CT scanner (␮CT40, ScanCo
Medical, Brüttisellen, Switzerland). All images were acquired with
the following parameters: 8 ␮m isotropic resolution at 55 kVp,
300 ms exposure time, 2000 views, and 5 frames per view. We
segmented and characterized the neurovasculature as we have
described previously (Cebulla et al., 2014).
2.4. Histologic assessment of thrombus formation in the cerebral
vasculature
Three or 24 h after collagen injection, animals were deeply
anesthetized with 5% isoﬂurane and transcardially perfused
with heparinized saline and 4% paraformaldehyde. Brains were
removed, and gross images were taken of the dorsal and ventral aspects for macrovascular clot visualization. Whole brains
were then coronally cryosectioned (10- and 80-␮m slices), or the
ICA/MCA segment was removed, embedded in parafﬁn or gelatin,
and sectioned transversely (10- and 80-␮m slices) for further
processing (N = 6). For microvascular assessment, brain sections
were incubated in blocking buffer (PBS, 10% horse serum, 0.1%
Triton X) for 2 h at room temperature followed by primary antibodies diluted in incubation buffer (PBS, 1% horse serum, 0.1%
Triton X). The antibodies used were anti-CD41 (a platelet marker,
cat# ab11024 for mouse and rat, 1:400; Abcam, Cambridge, MA),
anti-ﬁbrinogen (ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin, cat# ab119948 for mouse, cat#
ab74057 for rat, 1:200; Abcam), and anti-laminin (for architecture
of blood vessels, cat# L9393 for rat, 1:25; Sigma, St. Louis, MO;
anti-laminin for mouse tissue was a generous gift from Dr. Sorokin,
1:500; (Münster University, Germany)). Sections were incubated
overnight at 4 ◦ C, rinsed with PBS, and incubated with Alexa Fluorochrome (−488 or −555, 1:200; Invitrogen, Eugene, OR)-linked
secondary antibodies in incubation buffer for 2 h at room temperature. The slices were mounted by using Prolong Anti-Fade Gold
with DAPI (Invitrogen). Images were acquired on an inverted Zeiss
LSM780 confocal microscope with Zen 2009 Light Edition software.
2.5. Assessment of platelet activation in vivo by
neutrophil-platelet conjugate formation
Quantiﬁcation of neutrophil-platelet conjugates in the blood is
a sensitive measure of platelet activation in vivo because activated
platelets bind rapidly (via P-selectin) to neutrophils (via P-selectin
glycoprotein ligand-1) (Faraday et al., 2004; Michelson et al.,
2001). We assessed neutrophil-platelet conjugate formation by
ﬂow cytometry in mouse blood as previously described with modiﬁcation (Faraday et al., 2013) (N = 4). Blood was obtained from the
ipsilateral jugular vein of anesthetized mice before and 90 min after
collagen injection. Collected blood was diluted in Tyrode’s buffer
(137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2 , 1.8 mM CaCl2 , 0.2 mM
Na2 HPO4 , 12 mM NaHCO3 , 5.5 mM d-glucose; pH to 7.40) and
incubated with anti-neutrophil-FITC (clone 7/4, 1 ␮g/ml; Abcam),
anti-CD41-APC (clone MWReg30, 1 ␮g/ml; eBioscience, San Diego,

67

CA;), IgG-APC (1 ␮g/ml; eBioscience), and IgG-FITC (1 ␮g/ml; eBioscience) isotype control antibodies. Neutrophils were identiﬁed by
their characteristic scatter and FITC-ﬂuorescence on a FACScan ﬂow
cytometer. Neutrophil-platelet conjugate formation is expressed
as the proportion of neutrophils displaying platelet CD41-APCﬂuorescence compared to the total neutrophil population.
2.6. Histologic assessment of anatomical brain injury ex vivo
As previously described (Takahashi et al., 1996), we anesthetized animals deeply at 48 h after stroke induction and collected
the brains (N = 8 for mice; N = 12 for rats). Brains were perfused,
ﬁxed, sliced coronally, and stained with 1% triphenyltetrazolium
chloride (TTC; Sigma) in saline at 37 ◦ C for 30 min. The area of
infarcted brain, identiﬁed by the lack of TTC staining, was measured
on the rostral and caudal surfaces of each slice and numerically
integrated across the thickness of the slice to obtain an estimate of
infarct volume in each slice (SigmaScan Pro, SPSS Inc., San Jose, CA).
The infarct volumes were derived for the cortex, caudoputamenal
complex, and entire hemisphere and expressed as a percent of the
contralateral uninjured structure. Infarct volume was corrected for
swelling by comparing the volumes in the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheres. The corrected infarct volume was calculated as:
volume of contralateral hemisphere − (volume of ipsilateral hemisphere − volume of infarct) (Swanson et al., 1990; Lin et al., 1993).
2.7. Neurobehavioral deﬁcit score
At 48 h after stroke induction, neurologic deﬁcit score in mice
was graded as follows: 0 = no deﬁcit; 1 = forelimb weakness and
torso turning to the ipsilateral side when held by tail; 2 = circling to
affected side; 3 = unable to bear weight on affected side; and 4 = no
spontaneous locomotor activity or barrel rolling (Faraday et al.,
2013) (N = 8). In rats, a modiﬁed system published by Bederson et al.
(1986) was used at 48 h. Brieﬂy, animals received a score of 0–4
as follows: 0 = no deﬁcit, 1 = forelimb ﬂexion, 2 = forelimb ﬂexion
plus decreased resistance to lateral push, 3 = unidirectional circling,
4 = unidirectional circling plus decreased level of consciousness
(N = 12).
2.8. Statistics
Data are expressed as mean ± SD and were analyzed by Student’s t-test or Mann–Whitney U (for comparison of behavioral
data). Leukocyte-platelet conjugate formation was analyzed by
paired t-test. All testing was two-tailed, and results were considered signiﬁcant at P < 0.05.
3. Results
3.1. Mouse model
3.1.1. Collagen injection into the distal ICA disrupts ipsilateral CBF
LDF was used to monitor CBF during collagen injection and for
90 min thereafter. LDF decreased to ∼40% of baseline after the 4th
injection of collagen and remained depressed to ∼20–30% of baseline after the 6th injection (Fig. 1). Blood ﬂow slowly increased
during the carotid reperfusion phase, but it remained depressed
(∼40% of baseline) at 60 min. In control experiments, injection
of saline instead of collagen into the cerebral circulation had no
impact on LDF (data not shown). The pattern of CBF disruption
observed after transient occlusion of the MCA differed from that
observed after collagen injection (Fig. 1). Both models achieved
a reduction in CBF to approximately 20% of baseline; however,
ﬁlament occlusion of the MCA was characterized by an abrupt cessation of blood ﬂow upon insertion of the ﬁlament and abrupt

68

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

CBF (% of Baseline)

140

filament occlusion
collagen injection

120

after collagen injection than in samples collected before injection
(35.4 ± 16% vs. 17.6 ± 12%; P = 0.018; n = 4).

100
80
60
40
20
50 min

60 min

40 min

20 min

30 min

10 min

60 min

Reperf

50 min

30 min

40 min

25 min

15 min

20 min

10 min

Start

5 min

Base

0

Fig. 1. Injection of collagen into the cerebral vasculature reduces cerebral blood
ﬂow (CBF) in the mouse. Laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry was used to monitor CBF in the
territory of the middle cerebral artery before, during, and after transient occlusion of
the MCA with a nylon ﬁlament or injection of collagen through a catheter threaded
into the distal internal carotid artery. “Base” represents stabilized CBF at baseline
expressed as percent; “start” represents insertion of the ﬁlament or ﬁrst collagen
injection (total of 6 injections every 5 min); “reperfusion” represents removal of the
ﬁlament or catheter and release of the ipsilateral common carotid ligature. N = 7
ﬁlament occlusion; N = 10 collagen injection.

return to baseline upon its withdrawal. In contrast, interruption
of blood ﬂow was more gradual with collagen injection, and CBF
slowly increased, but remained depressed, for at least 60 min after
catheter withdrawal.
Using in vivo MRI, we examined the effects of collagen injection
on microvascular CBF and brain injury after 3 and 48 h (Fig. 2). T2weighted images and ADC maps demonstrated ischemic lesions in
the cortex, thalamus, and hippocampus, and maps of CBF showed
marked reductions in microvascular ﬂow ipsilateral to collagen
injection at the 3 h time point. MRI-visible lesions remained in the
thalamus and hippocampus at 48 h, but were smaller; hemispheric
differences in blood ﬂow were much less, although some regional
differences remained (Fig. 2).
We also examined the effect of intra-arterial collagen injection on cerebrovascular architecture by micro-CT of brain tissue
ex vivo at the 3 h time point. Three-dimensional reconstruction of
micro-CT images revealed disruption of the vascular network in
the MCA territory ipsilateral to collagen injection and markedly
reduced vascular density in that territory compared to that seen in
the contralateral hemisphere (Fig. 2).
3.1.2. Collagen injection induces thrombus formation and platelet
activation within the cerebral vasculature
Three hours after collagen injection, thrombus was grossly visualized in the ipsilateral MCA (and/or branches) in 100% (6/6) of mice
and in the ipsilateral ICA in 83% (5/6) of mice (Fig. 3); thrombus was
visualized in the posterior cerebral artery (and/or branches) in 33%
(2/6) of mice and in the anterior cerebral artery (and/or branches)
in 17% (1/6) of mice. Immunoﬂuorescent images obtained through
cross sections of these macrovessels conﬁrmed that platelets and
ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin were major components of these thrombi. Images
of coronal brain slices also revealed platelet and ﬁbrin deposition
within microvessels of the cortex and striatum ipsilateral to collagen injection. These thrombi were present in vessels ranging in
size from 30 ␮m down to the capillary level (Fig. 3). Microvascular
thrombi were not observed in the contralateral hemisphere.
The accumulation of platelets within cerebral vessels ipsilateral to collagen injection was consistent with collagen-dependent
platelet activation in vivo. To conﬁrm platelet activation, we examined leukocyte-platelet conjugate formation, a sensitive measure
of platelet activation in vivo (Michelson et al., 2001; Faraday
et al., 2004), in jugular venous blood samples obtained before and
after intra-arterial collagen injection. The proportion of leukocyteplatelet conjugates in jugular blood was signiﬁcantly greater

3.1.3. Infarct size and behavioral deﬁcits after ischemic stroke
We collected mouse brains 48 h after collagen injection or
ﬁlament occlusion of the MCA to assess infarct size. Corrected
infarct volumes after collagen injection were 41 ± 11%, 49 ± 10%,
and 33 ± 9% in the cortex, striatum, and hemisphere, respectively.
These volumes were similar in magnitude to those of infarcts produced by mechanical occlusion of the MCA (Fig. 4). The coefﬁcients
of variation of infarct volume were as follows: 27% in the cortex,
20% in the striatum, and 27% in the hemisphere. These values represent precision that was at least as good as the corresponding values
of 54%, 26%, and 50%, respectively, observed in the ﬁlament model.
Behavioral deﬁcits of mice 48 h after stroke were also similar in
collagen injection and ﬁlament occlusion models (Fig. 4).
In additional experiments, we examined the impact of a single
injection of 5 ␮g of collagen on neurologic outcomes and compared them to those we observed after six serial injections of 1 ␮g.
Results from both experimental sets were very similar, with similar
but more rapid reductions in CBF during the ﬁrst 1.5 h after collagen injection and histologic and behavioral injuries that were not
signiﬁcantly different at 48 h (Fig. 5). A smaller single dose of collagen (1 ␮g) caused signiﬁcantly less hemispheric injury (21 ± 4%
vs. 34 ± 6%, P < 0.05) and a trend toward lesser behavioral deﬁcit
(0.6 ± 0.5 vs. 1.4 ± 0.5, P = 0.12) compared to the 5 ␮g dose.
3.2. Rat model
3.2.1. Collagen injection into the MCA disrupts CBF
LDF fell to ∼40% of baseline after the 4th injection of collagen and
remained depressed at this level for the next 30 min (Fig. 6). During
carotid reperfusion, LDF returned to ∼60% of baseline by 30 min.
By way of comparison, CBF reduction was much more abrupt and
severe (∼20% of baseline) after injection of a pre-formed clot, but
CBF returned to similar levels by 30 min of carotid reperfusion in
both models (Fig. 6).
3.2.2. Collagen injection induces thrombus formation in the
cerebral vasculature
Three hours after collagen injection, rat brains were perfusionﬁxed and inspected for thrombus formation. Gross examination
of the ventral surface revealed thrombus within the MCA and its
branches in all rats (Fig. 7). Immunoﬂuorescent images of cross
sections through the MCA revealed intra-luminal thrombi that
were rich in platelets and ﬁbrin/ﬁbrinogen. Platelet- and ﬁbrin-rich
thrombi were also present within the ipsilateral microvasculature 3 h after collagen injection (Fig. 7), whereas thrombi were
not present on the contralateral side. Brains were also harvested
at 24 h after collagen injection. Gross examination and cross
sectional immunoﬂuorescent images of the MCA showed that
thrombus was no longer present in the macrovasculature. However, microvascular platelet thrombi remained within the cortex
and striatum ipsilateral to collagen injection at the 24 h time point
(Fig. 7)
3.2.3. Infarct size and behavioral deﬁcits after stroke
We collected rat brains at 48 h after collagen injection or clot
injection to assess infarct size. Corrected infarct volumes after
collagen injection were 27 ± 16%, 50 ± 30%, and 27 ± 17% in the cortex, striatum, and hemisphere, respectively (Fig. 8). These volumes
were comparable in size to brain injury after clot injection. The
coefﬁcients of variation for infarct volume were 59% in the cortex,
60% in the striatum, and 63% in the hemisphere, indicating that
precision was at least as good as that after clot injection, as the

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

69

Fig. 2. Cerebral perfusion and architecture are disrupted after injection of collagen in the mouse. Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by injecting six 1-␮g boluses of collagen
into the distal internal carotid artery of the mouse. (A) An 11.7 T magnetic resonance scanner was used to acquire T2-weighted (T2), apparent diffusion coefﬁcient (ADC), and
perfusion images on live mice 3 and 48 h after collagen injection. Regions with hyperintense T2 signals and hypointense ADC values were detected in the ipsilateral cortex
(red arrow), hippocampus (yellow arrow), and thalamus (white arrow) at 3 h, accompanied by marked reductions in regional cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF). At 48 h, T2 signals,
ADC hypointensities, and CBF were improved, but abnormalities remained. (B) Micro-CT was performed on brains excised from mice 3 h after collagen injection. A coronal
brain section shows disruption of vascular network in the middle cerebral artery territory and reduced vascular density ipsilateral to collagen injection (red arrow) compared
to that in the contralateral hemisphere (blue arrow). (C) Micro-CT was used to construct cerebral heat maps that display average vessel density in the ischemic (red square)
and contralateral brain (yellow square). Lighter colors represent higher vessel densities. (D) Right sagittal view from a micro-CT scan of the neurovasculature shows a poorly
deﬁned vascular network ipsilateral to collagen injection. (E) Left sagittal view of the neurovasculature contralateral to collagen injection. Images are representative of three
separate experiments.

corresponding values were 77%, 63%, and 73%, respectively. Behavioral deﬁcit scores 48 h after stroke were similar in the two stroke
models (Fig. 8).
4. Discussion
We describe a new model of atherothrombotic stroke in rodents
in which regional CBF is interrupted by injection of collagen directly
into the cerebral vasculature. Disruption of the cerebral circulation was conﬁrmed by LDF, MRI diffusion-perfusion imaging, and

micro-CT. Histologic studies showed that thrombi were present
within cerebral macro- and microvessels up until at least 3 h after
collagen injection (and perhaps until 24 h in microvessels) and
that they were composed largely of platelets and ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin.
Improvements in CBF at 48 h (in mice) and the absence of thrombi in
the macrovasculature at 24 h (in rats) suggested that these thrombi
resolve spontaneously over time. The magnitude of anatomic brain
injury and behavioral damage from collagen injection was comparable to that created after transient ﬁlament occlusion of the
MCA in mice or intra-arterial injection of a preformed clot in rats.

70

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

Fig. 3. Collagen injection causes formation of platelet- and ﬁbrin-rich thrombi in cerebral macro- and microvessels. Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by injecting six 1-␮g
boluses of collagen into the distal right internal carotid artery (ICA) of the mouse. Three hours after collagen injection, brains were excised for histologic and immunoﬂuorescent
examination of cerebral vasculature. (A) Ventral (top panel) and dorsal (bottom panel) gross images show thrombus in internal carotid, middle cerebral, and anterior cerebral
arteries and their branches. Black box in ventral view is magniﬁed in (B) top panel. (B) Middle and lower panels show platelet- and ﬁbrin-rich thrombi in cross sections of the
ICA. Middle panel is labeled with anti-laminin antibody (red), anti-CD41 platelet antibody (green), and anti-nuclear stain (blue). Bottom panel is labeled with anti-laminin
antibody (red), anti-ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin antibody (Fbn; green), and anti-nuclear stain (blue). (C) Top panel: triphenyltetrazolium chloride-stained coronal brain section of brain
excised 3 h after collagen injection. Black box denotes area from which the images in the two lower panels were taken. Middle panel labeled with anti-laminin antibody (red),
anti-CD41 platelet antibody (green), and anti-nuclear stain (blue). Bottom panel labeled with anti-laminin antibody (red), anti-ﬁbrinogen antibody (green), and anti-nuclear
stain (blue). Images are representative of six separate experiments.

Fig. 4. Injection of collagen into the cerebral vasculature causes anatomic brain injury and behavioral deﬁcits in the mouse. Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by transient
ﬁlament-occlusion of the middle cerebral artery or by injecting six 1-␮g boluses of collagen into the distal right internal carotid artery of the mouse. After 48 h, cerebral
infarct volume was quantiﬁed by staining brain slices with triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) and neurobehavioral deﬁcit score was assessed. (A) Representative TTCstained coronal brain sections from the mouse ﬁlament-occlusion model (top) and collagen injection model (bottom). (B) Cerebral infarct volumes for the ﬁlament-occlusion
(solid bar) and collagen injection (open bar) models. (C) Neurobehavioral deﬁcit scores for the ﬁlament-occlusion (solid bar) and collagen injection (open bar) models. N = 5
ﬁlament occlusion; N = 8 collagen injection.

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

CBF (% of Baseline)

A

140

71

6 x 1 µg collagen
5 µg collage
en

120
100
80
60
40
20

10
00

60
6
4
40
2
20
0

corte
ex

stria
atum

hem
misphere

60 min

50 min

40 min

30 min
i

20 min

10 min

60 min

5 µg collagen

8
80

Reperf

50 min

30 min

40 min

20 min

15 min

10 min

Start

25 min

C

en
6 x 1 µg collage

Neuro-Deficit Score

Infarct Volume (%)

B

5 min

Base

0

7

6 x 1 µg collagen

6

5 µg collage
en

5
4
3
2
1
0

Fig. 5. Effect of serial vs. single injection of collagen on cerebral blood ﬂow (CBF), anatomic brain injury and behavioral deﬁcit in the mouse. (A) Laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry
was used to monitor CBF in the territory of the MCA before, during, and after serial injections of collagen (6× 1 ␮g collagen) or a single injection of collagen (5 ␮g collagen)
through a catheter threaded into the distal internal carotid artery. “Base” represents stabilized CBF at baseline expressed as percent; “start” represents ﬁrst collagen injection;
“reperfusion” represents removal of the catheter and release of the the ipsilateral common carotid ligature. After 48 h, cerebral infarct volume was quantiﬁed by staining
brain slices with triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) and neurobehavioral deﬁcit score was assessed. (B) Cerebral infarct volumes after serial injections of collagen (6× 1 ␮g;
solid bar) or single injection of collagen (1× 5 ␮g; open bar). (C) Neurobehavioral deﬁcit scores after serial collagen injection (6× 1 ␮g; solid bar) or single collagen injection
(1× 5 ␮g; open bar). N = 5 for 5 ␮g group; N = 10 for 6× 1 ␮g group.

However, the pattern of disruption in CBF and the pathophysiologic
mechanisms underlying vascular occlusion after collagen injection
more closely simulate human atherothrombotic stroke, which constitutes the majority of human stroke events.
Interruption of brain blood ﬂow by atheroemboli in cerebral
blood vessels is the predominant cause of ischemic stroke in
humans (Nieswandt et al., 2011; Badimon and Vilahur, 2007).
We simulated atheroembolism by direct intra-arterial injection
of collagen, a potent platelet activator and component of ruptured atherosclerotic plaque (Fuster et al., 1990). Using LDF, we
observed successive decreases in CBF after serial collagen (1 ␮g)
injections. CBF became maximally depressed by the 4th or 5th

CBF (% of Baseline)

140

embolic clot
collagen injection

120
100
80
60
40
20

30 min

10 min

20 min

Reperf

60 min

50 min

40 min

30 min

25 min

20 min

15 min

5 min

10 min

Start

Base

0

Fig. 6. Injection of collagen into the middle cerebral artery (MCA) reduces cerebral
blood ﬂow (CBF) in the rat. Laser-Doppler ﬂowmetry was used to monitor CBF in
the territory of the MCA before, during, and after occlusion of the MCA by injection
of collagen or a preformed clot through a catheter threaded to the MCA oriﬁce.
“Base” represents stabilized CBF at baseline expressed as percent; “start” represents
insertion of the clot or ﬁrst collagen injection (total of 6 injections every 5 min);
“reperfusion” represents removal of the catheter and release of the bilateral common
carotid ligatures. N = 12 each group.

injection. Depression of CBF persisted throughout the monitoring
period, for at least 1.5 h after the ﬁrst collagen injection in our
protocols, and gradually increased to 50–60% of baseline within
30–60 min after withdrawal of the catheter. A single 5 ␮g injection of collagen caused a rapid reduction in CBF to levels similar
to those observed after serial 1 ␮g injections, followed by a similar pattern of blood ﬂow recovery. This pattern of initial disruption
followed by gradual restoration of CBF, whether spontaneous or
therapeutic, resembles clinical ischemic stroke (Hossmann, 2012).
Progressive reduction in CBF after serial injections of collagen presented a pattern that was different from the abrupt decrease in
ﬂow seen with ﬁlament occlusion or clot injection models and was
reminiscent of repeated transient ischemic attacks or “stuttering
stroke” in humans. Indeed, the early presence and partial resolution of ADC abnormalities that we observed on MRI by 48 h in
mice was reported to occur in a human case of stuttering stroke
(Peters et al., 2010). Gradual restoration of CBF during reperfusion
was common to the collagen injection and clot injection models but
differed from the abrupt increase in CBF seen after withdrawal of an
occluding ﬁlament. The time-dependent return of CBF to baseline
after initial vascular occlusion is thought to play an important role
in expansion of ischemic injury into the penumbra in both human
stroke and animal stroke models, and the nonphysiologic restoration of CBF in the ﬁlament occlusion model is understood to present
limitations for its use in preclinical stroke studies (Hossmann,
2012).
The rupture of unstable atherosclerotic plaques, present primarily in the aorta and large extracranial vessels (e.g. carotid artery),
causes cerebrovascular occlusion in humans by inducing platelet
activation and thrombus formation in situ (Warden et al., 2012;
Badimon and Vilahur, 2007; Nieswandt et al., 2011; Hennerici,
2004). Plaque instability can persist for days to weeks, during which

72

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

Fig. 7. Injection of collagen into the middle cerebral artery (MCA) causes formation
of platelet- and ﬁbrin-rich thrombi in cerebral macro- and microvessels. Focal
cerebral ischemia was induced by administering six 10-␮l boluses of collagen near
the right MCA oriﬁce of the rat. At 3 and 24 h after collagen injection, brains were
excised for histologic and immunoﬂuorescent examinations of cerebral vasculature.
(A) Ventral (upper panel) and dorsal (lower panel) gross images show thrombus in
the MCA and its branches at 3 h (left panel) but not at 24 h (right panel) after collagen
injection. (B) Immunoﬂuorescent images show platelet- and ﬁbrin-rich thrombi in
cross sections of the MCA at 3 h (left panel) but not 24 h (right panel) after collagen
injection. Upper panels are labeled with anti-laminin antibody (red), anti-CD41
platelet antibody (green), and anti-nuclear stain (blue). Lower panels are labeled
with anti-ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin antibody (Fbn; red), anti-CD41 platelet antibody (green),

time an individual is at high risk for repeated thromboembolic
ischemic events, which may manifest as crescendo TIAs or separate strokes (Redgrave et al., 2006; Lovett et al., 2004; Marnane
et al., 2014). We attempted to simulate these pathophysiologic
events in rodents by administering repeated injections of collagen
distal to the ICA. Gross anatomic studies conﬁrmed the presence
of thrombus in the MCA territory of all rodents. Immunohistochemistry conﬁrmed that these thrombi were largely composed
of platelets and ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin. These thrombi were present in
vessels as large as the ICA and as small as capillaries 3 h after collagen injection, but they were absent from the macrovasculature by
24 h, consistent with the improvements in CBF seen by diffusionperfusion MRI at 48 h. Intra-arterial activation of platelets in vivo
was conﬁrmed after collagen injection by increased numbers of
leukocyte-platelet conjugates in jugular venous blood. Increased
numbers of these conjugates have also been observed in blood
obtained from patients suffering from atherothrombotic stroke
(Ishikawa et al., 2012). Although platelet activation is known to
occur in ﬁlament occlusion, clot injection, and photothrombotic
models (Nieswandt et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2001; Kleinschnitz
et al., 2008), it is not a primary mechanism for cerebrovascular occlusion in any of these models. Thus, these models are
limited in their utility for investigating the cellular and molecular
events that incite cerebrovascular occlusion in most human strokes.
Intravascular injection of thrombin has also been used to induce
cerebrovascular thrombus formation in situ. Although thrombin is
a platelet activator, this methodology produces cerebral thrombi
that contain few platelets; instead, thrombi are composed primarily
of polymerized ﬁbrin (Orset et al., 2007).
Despite producing vascular occlusion by a different mechanism,
collagen injection produced anatomic brain injury and behavioral
deﬁcits that were comparable in magnitude to those produced by
ﬁlament occlusion in mice and clot-injection in rats. In experiments
using a single collagen injection in mice, we found that the magnitude of anatomic and behavioral injury could be modiﬁed by
altering the dose of collagen administered. From a catheter position
just caudal to the MCA, collagen injection consistently produced
thrombi in the MCA and/or its branches in all mice and in the ICA
in the majority; a minority of mice also developed thrombi in the
anterior or posterior cerebral arterial territories. The magnitudes of
cerebral injury and behavioral deﬁcit in mice were consistent, with
coefﬁcients of variation for infarct volumes suggesting that precision was at least as good as that obtained by ﬁlament occlusion.
Injection of collagen into the cerebrovasculature of rats produced
thrombi that were localized to the MCA and its branches, ischemic
brain injury that was consistent in size and location, and consistent
behavioral deﬁcits. Historically, reliable reproduction of infarct size
has been challenging in the embolic clot model owing to obstacles
in clot delivery and placement (Marinescu et al., 2014). We note
that the model of stroke is multifocal and its utility in the mouse
may be limited in experiments where variability in the anatomic
location of stroke cannot be tolerated. Nevertheless, the coefﬁcient
of variation of infarct volume in the mouse and rat models will permit investigators to perform hypothesis testing experiments with
reasonable sample sizes and statistical power.
We believe that the described ischemic stroke model has potential for use in preclinical studies that test the effectiveness of
therapeutic interventions. Similar to the clot injection model, the

and anti-nuclear stain (blue). (C) Coronal brain slices display platelet and ﬁbrin
deposition in cortical cerebral microvessels at 3 h (left panel) and 24 h (right panel)
after collagen injection. Upper panels are labeled with anti-laminin antibody (red),
anti-CD41 platelet antibody (green), and anti-nuclear stain (blue). Lower panels
are labeled with anti-ﬁbrinogen/ﬁbrin antibody (red), anti-CD41 platelet antibody
(green), and anti-nuclear stain (blue). Images are representative of four separate
experiments.

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

73

Fig. 8. Injection of collagen into the middle cerebral artery (MCA) causes anatomic brain injury and behavioral deﬁcits in the rat. Focal cerebral ischemia was induced by
injection of a preformed clot into the MCA or by injection of six 10-␮l boluses of collagen near the MCA oriﬁce of the rat. After 48 h, cerebral infarct volume was quantiﬁed
by staining brain slices with triphenyltetrazolium chloride and neurobehavioral deﬁcit score was assessed. (A) Cerebral infarct volumes for the embolic clot (solid bar) and
collagen injection (open bar) models. (B) Neurobehavioral deﬁcit scores for the embolic clot (solid bar) and collagen injection (open bar) models. N = 12 each group.

collagen injection model could be used to examine the impact of
therapies designed to accelerate recovery of CBF by dissolution of a
vascular thrombus (e.g. tPA). The model could also be used to evaluate possible mechanisms for the failure of such therapies when
thrombosis is caused by atheroembolism instead of cardioembolism. Furthermore, because this is the only model to simulate
ischemic brain injury from unstable atherosclerotic plaque, the
model provides investigators a unique opportunity to test the
effectiveness of therapies designed to prevent the formation of
cerebrovascular thrombi caused by plaque rupture – the putative
mechanism for the clinical beneﬁts derived from aspirin and clopidogrel (Warden et al., 2012). In addition, we demonstrate that
the model can be used in both mice and rats, which should allow
investigators the ﬂexibility to adapt the model to address a variety
of research questions in multiple laboratory environments.
In summary, we describe a novel rodent model of ischemic
stroke induced by direct injection of collagen distal to the ICA.
The model is compatible with the pathophysiology of clinical
atherothrombotic stroke, is technically feasible, and creates reproducible injury. This model may be useful in determining the
pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying ischemic brain injury
from atherothrombic causes, which may provide greater opportunities for the development of therapies to prevent and treat human
stroke.

Disclosures
The funding sources had no involvement in study design, collection or analysis of data, writing of the manuscript, or in the decision
to submit the article for publication. The authors have no conﬂicts
of interest to disclose.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (USA)
RC1 HL099677-01 (NF), NS038684 (RCK), and NS0677525 (RCK).
We thank Claire Levine, MS, ELS, for editing this manuscript during
its preparation.

References
Alkayed NJ, Harukuni I, Kimes AS, London ED, Traystman RJ, Hurn PD. Gender-linked
brain injury in experimental stroke. Stroke 1998;29:159–65 [discussion 166].
Badimon L, Vilahur G. Platelets, arterial thrombosis and cerebral ischemia. Cerebrovasc Dis 2007;24(Suppl. 1):30–9.
Basser PJ, Mattiello J, LeBihan D. Estimation of the effective self-diffusion tensor from
the NMR spin echo. J Magn Reson B 1994;103:247–54.

Basser PJ, Pierpaoli C. Microstructural and physiological features of tissues elucidated by quantitative-diffusion-tensor MRI. J Magn Reson B 1996;111:209–19.
Bederson JB, Pitts LH, Tsuji M, Nishimura MC, Davis RL, Bartkowski H. Rat middle cerebral artery occlusion: evaluation of the model and development of a
neurologic examination. Stroke 1986;17:472–6.
Cebulla J, Kim E, Rhie K, Zhang J, Pathak AP. Multiscale and multi-modality
visualization of angiogenesis in a human breast cancer model. Angiogenesis
2014;17(3):695–709.
Davi G, Patrono C. Platelet activation and atherothrombosis. N Engl J Med
2007;357:2482–94.
Duhamel G, Callot V, Tachrount M, Alsop DC, Cozzone PJ. Pseudo-continuous arterial
spin labeling at very high magnetic ﬁeld (11.75 T) for high-resolution mouse
brain perfusion imaging. Magn Reson Med 2012;67:1225–36.
Eliasson MJ, Sampei K, Mandir AS, Hurn PD, Traystman RJ, Bao J, et al. Poly(ADPribose) polymerase gene disruption renders mice resistant to cerebral ischemia.
Nat Med 1997;3:1089–95.
Faraday N, Braunstein JB, Heldman AW, Bolton ED, Chiles KA, Gerstenblith G, et al.
Prospective evaluation of the relationship between platelet-leukocyte conjugate
formation and recurrent myocardial ischemia in patients with acute coronary
syndromes. Platelets 2004;15:9–14.
Faraday N, Schunke K, Saleem S, Fu J, Wang B, Zhang J, et al. Cathepsin G-dependent
modulation of platelet thrombus formation in vivo by blood neutrophils. PLoS
ONE 2013;8:e71447.
Fisher M, Feuerstein G, Howells DW, Hurn PD, Kent TA, Savitz SI, et al. Update of
the stroke therapy academic industry roundtable preclinical recommendations.
Stroke 2009;40:2244–50.
Fuster V, Stein B, Ambrose JA, Badimon L, Badimon JJ, Chesebro JH. Atherosclerotic
plaque rupture and thrombosis. Evolving concepts. Circulation 1990;82:II47–59.
Hennerici MG. The unstable plaque. Cerebrovasc Dis 2004;17(Suppl. 3):17–22.
Hossmann KA. The two pathophysiologies of focal brain ischemia: implications for
translational stroke research. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2012;32:1310–6.
Ishikawa T, Shimizu M, Kohara S, Takizawa S, Kitagawa Y, Takagi S. Appearance of
WBC-platelet complex in acute ischemic stroke, predominantly in atherothrombotic infarction. J Atheroscler Thromb 2012;19:494–501.
Kleinschnitz C, Braeuninger S, Pham M, Austinat M, Nolte I, Renne T, et al. Blocking of
platelets or intrinsic coagulation pathway-driven thrombosis does not prevent
cerebral infarctions induced by photothrombosis. Stroke 2008;39:1262–8.
Lansberg MG, O’Donnell MJ, Khatri P, Lang ES, Nguyen-Huynh MN, Schwartz NE, et al.
, American College of Chest Physicians. Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for ischemic stroke: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of thrombosis,
9th ed: American college of chest physicians evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines. Chest 2012;141:e601S–36S.
Lin TN, He YY, Wu G, Khan M, Hsu CY. Effect of brain edema on infarct volume in a
focal cerebral ischemia model in rats. Stroke 1993;24:117–21.
Lovett JK, Coull AJ, Rothwell PM. Early risk of recurrence by subtype of ischemic
stroke in population-based incidence studies. Neurology 2004;62:569–73.
Macrae IM. Preclinical stroke research – advantages and disadvantages of the most
common rodent models of focal ischaemia. Br J Pharmacol 2011;164:1062–78.
Marinescu M, Bouley J, Chueh J, Fisher M, Henninger N. Clot injection technique
affects thrombolytic efﬁcacy in a rat embolic stroke model: implications for
translaboratory collaborations. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2014;34:677–82.
Marnane M, Prendeville S, McDonnell C, Noone I, Barry M, Crowe M, et al. Plaque
inﬂammation and unstable morphology are associated with early stroke recurrence in symptomatic carotid stenosis. Stroke 2014;45:801–6.
Michelson AD, Barnard MR, Krueger LA, Valeri CR, Furman MI. Circulating monocyteplatelet aggregates are a more sensitive marker of in vivo platelet activation than
platelet surface P-selectin: studies in baboons, human coronary intervention,
and human acute myocardial infarction. Circulation 2001;104:1533–7.
Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Measuring the global burden of disease. N Engl J Med
2013;369:448–57.
Nieswandt B, Pleines I, Bender M. Platelet adhesion and activation mechanisms
in arterial thrombosis and ischaemic stroke. J Thromb Haemost 2011;9(Suppl.
1):92–104.

74

K.J. Schunke et al. / Journal of Neuroscience Methods 239 (2015) 65–74

Orset C, Macrez R, Young AR, Panthou D, Angles-Cano E, Maubert E, et al.
Mouse model of in situ thromboembolic stroke and reperfusion. Stroke
2007;38:2771–8.
Papangelou A, Toung TJ, Gottschalk A, Mirski MA, Koehler RC. Infarct volume after
hyperacute infusion of hypertonic saline in a rat model of acute embolic stroke.
Neurocrit Care 2013;18:106–14.
Pathak AP, Kim E, Zhang J, Jones MV. Three-dimensional imaging of the mouse
neurovasculature with magnetic resonance microscopy. PLoS ONE 2011;6:
e22643.
Peters JM, Maclean AV, Young GS. Rapid resolution of diffusion weighted MRI
abnormality in a patient with a stuttering stroke. BMJ Case Rep 2010;2010.,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bcr.07.2009.2063 [Epub 2010 February 8].
Redgrave JN, Lovett JK, Gallagher PJ, Rothwell PM. Histological assessment
of 526 symptomatic carotid plaques in relation to the nature and timing of ischemic symptoms: the Oxford plaque study. Circulation 2006;113:
2320–8.
Roger VL, Go AS, Lloyd-Jones DM, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB, et al. , American Heart Association Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee.
Heart disease and stroke statistics – 2012 update: a report from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 2012;125:e2–220.

Swanson RA, Morton MT, Tsao-Wu G, Savalos RA, Davidson C, Sharp FR. A semiautomated method for measuring brain infarct volume. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
1990;10:290–3.
Takahashi H, Kirsch JR, Hashimoto K, London ED, Koehler RC, Traystman RJ. PPBP
[4-phenyl-1-(4-phenylbutyl) piperidine] decreases brain injury after transient
focal ischemia in rats. Stroke 1996;27:2120–3.
Tanabe JL, Yongbi M, Branch C, Hrabe J, Johnson G, Helpern JA. MR perfusion imaging in human brain using the UNFAIR technique. Un-inverted ﬂow-sensitive
alternating inversion recovery. J Magn Reson Imaging 1999;9:761–7.
Warden BA, Willman AM, Williams CD. Antithrombotics for secondary prevention
of noncardioembolic ischaemic stroke. Nat Rev Neurol 2012;8:223–35.
Wu D, Xu J, McMahon MT, van Zijl PC, Mori S, Northington FJ, et al. In vivo
high-resolution diffusion tensor imaging of the mouse brain. Neuroimage
2013;83:18–26.
Zhang RL, Chopp M, Zhang ZG, Jiang Q, Ewing JR. A rat model of focal embolic cerebral
ischemia. Brain Res 1997;766:83–92.
Zhang ZG, Zhang L, Tsang W, Goussev A, Powers C, Ho KL, et al. Dynamic platelet accumulation at the site of the occluded middle cerebral artery and in downstream
microvessels is associated with loss of microvascular integrity after embolic
middle cerebral artery occlusion. Brain Res 2001;912:181–94.

